Orthogonal
tRNA-aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase pairs are widely used for the site-specific incorporation
of nearly 80 unnatural amino acids (unAAs) in , , plant, and
mammalian cells in response to unique nonsense (e.g., amber) and frameshift (e.g., quadruplet) codons. This methodology
enables site-specific introductions of unique chemical or physical
probes into proteins, which could facilitate the study of protein
structure and function as well as the investigation of biological
processes. Recently, nonsense codon
suppression-mediated regulation of biological events were also explored
in synthetic biology applications. Although unAAs are typically
incorporated into proteins in response to nonsense codon with good
efficiency and excellent fidelity, further system optimization to
increase the incorporation efficiency is still highly desirable. This
is because inefficient incorporation not only results in a low yield
of the desired unAA-containing protein but also leads to an increased
accumulation of truncated protein products that may negatively affect
the fitness of host cells. An engineered  amber
suppressor tyrosyl-tRNA (MjtRNA) and tyrosyl-tRNA-synthetase (MjTyrRS) pair
is the most extensively used system for the evolution of aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase (aaRS) variants that incorporate unAAs with aromatic functional
groups in . In a previous effort, optimization
of the interaction between MjtRNA and the  native
translational machinery, such as EF-Tu, was explored in order to improve the incorporation efficiency. Here,
we report an approach that focuses on fine-tuning anticodon recognition
of MjtRNA by MjTyrRS variants, which led to additional improvement in unAA
incorporation efficiency beyond the EF-Tu strategy. The observed improvement
likely resulted from more efficient aminoacylation of MjtRNA by the evolved
MjTyrRS mutants. The evolved MjTyrRS variant catalyzes the aminoacylation
reaction
of MjtRNA with a tyrosine analogue (an unAA) at the expense of an ATP. The
catalytic efficiency of this reaction, which contributes to the overall
efficiency of unAA incorporation, is dictated by the substrates (MjtRNA and unAA)
recognition of the enzyme. Previous work successfully altered the
specificity of MjTyrRS toward unAAs by focusing on changing the enzyme’s
amino acid recognition pocket. While the anticodon of the tRNA was
changed from GUA (Figure ) into CUA (MjtRNA to MjtRNA) to enable
amber suppression with unAA, the substrate promiscuity of the MjTyrRS
allowed reasonable recognition of MjtRNA without adjusting the tRNA recognition
elements of MjTyrRS to such change. In light of the crystal structure
of MjtRNA-MjTyrRS complex, the anticodon region
of MjtRNA is a major recognition element of MjTyrRS (Figure ). Therefore, the G34C change in the tRNA would render the
interaction between MjTyrRS and the resulting MjtRNA less optimal. Previous rational
design work showed that a single mutation in the anticodon recognition
pocket of MjTyrRS improved the aminoacylation rate and the amber suppression efficiency. However, no systematic effort was devoted to study or to
optimize the recognition of the mutated MjtRNA by MjTyrRS. In this work,
we report a systematic effort to improve the unAA incorporation efficiency
through fine-tuning the recognition of the mutated MjtRNA by MjTyrRS
variants. We used a directed evolution approach to identify MjTyrRS
mutants that led to significantly higher amber suppression efficiency
than both the parent MjTyrRS variants and the reported MjTyrRS mutant. While other beneficial factors may be picked up as well in our cell
growth-based selection process, the major contributor to the observed
improvement is likely due to better recognition of MjtRNA by MjTyrRS
mutants. Our results also showed that the mutations for each unAA-specific
MjTyrRS variant are different, which further strikes the notion that
the catalytic efficiency of MjTyrRS is determined by recognitions
of both substrates, the tRNA and the amino acid. We finally demonstrated
that the MjTyrRS mutants obtained in this study, when paired with
a previously evolved MjtRNA (MjtRNA-Nap1) that has optimized interaction with  EF-Tu, further improved
amber suppression efficiency. Examining the X-ray crystal structure of the MjtRNA-MjTyrRS complex reveals that the anticodon of MjtRNA is recognized
by the C-terminal domain of MjTyrRS (Figure ). Residues Phe261 and His283 engage in stacking interaction with
the base of G34 in MjtRNA. Residue Asp286 forms two hydrogen bonds
with N1 and N2 of G34. Asp286 is well conserved among the archaeal
and eukaryotic TyrRSs. It was reported that mutation of Asp286 into
alanine led to a 10-fold reduction of the aminoacylation rate of MjtRNA by MjTyrRS. On the other hand, the Asp286Arg mutation resulted
in a more efficient aminoacylation of MjtRNA (an amber suppressor tRNA with G34C
mutation). In addition to Phe261, His283,
and Asp286, residue Met285 is in the close proximity to G34 and may
provide additional interaction to fine-tune the anticodon recognition
by MjTyrRS. We envisaged that a directed evolution approach involving
mutagenesis of above residues within the anticodon recognition pocket
of MjTyrRS could optimize the interaction between MjTyrRS and MjtRNA, and therefore
improve the overall efficiency of unAA incorporation in response to
amber nonsense codon. Supporting Information
Figure S3 Supporting Information Figure S4A To test the hypothesis, we first examined
an MjTyrRS variant, AcPheRS
(referred as AcPheRS-wt hereafter), that
was evolved previously for the incorporation of -acetyl--phenylalanine (AcPhe, Figure A) in response to amber nonsense codon. We created an AcPheRS
library in which residues Phe261, His283, Met285, and Asp286 were
completely randomized. Overlapping polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
was performed with synthetic oligonucleotide primers in which the
randomized residues were encoded as NNK (N = A, C, T, or G; K = T
or G) to generate a library with a theoretical diversity of 1.05 ×
10. The quality of the library (>99% coverage) was
validated
by DNA sequencing. The resulting AcPheRS library was subjected to
a positive selection to identify functional AcPheRS variants followed
by a negative selection to remove AcPheRS variants that could charge
MjtRNA with natural amino acid as previously described. Briefly, the positive selection is based on resistance
to chloramphenicol (), which is conferred by the
suppression of an amber mutation at a permissive site (Asp112) in
the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase-encoding gene in the presence
of MjtRNA, AcPhe, and functional AcPheRS mutants. The negative selection uses
the toxic barnase gene with amber mutations at permissive sites (Gln2TAG
and Asp44TAG) and was carried out in the absence of AcPhe. The surviving
AcPheRS variants from two positive and one negative rounds of selection
were subsequently screened for chloramphenicol resistance level in
the presence and absence of AcPhe. A few clones that survived on 150
μg/mL chloramphenicol in the presence of AcPhe and did not grow
on 75 μg/mL chloramphenicol in the absence of AcPhe were identified.
Among these clones, AcPheRS-8G and AcPheRS-12B displayed the fastest
growth rate in the presence of chloramphenicol and the brightest GFP
fluorescence (The selection plasmid, pREP, contains a T7 RNA polymerase gene with amber mutation at permissive
site. The synthesis of full-length T7 RNA polymerase with amber suppression
drives the expression of a green fluorescent protein). Another clone,
AcPheRS-2B, showed higher amber suppression efficiency than that of
AcPheRS-wt, but the efficiency is lower than that of AcPheRS-8G and
AcPheRS-12B. We next examined the relative protein expression level
of AcPheRS-wt and AcPheRS-8G () by Western blot. We did not detect any notable difference
between the two, suggesting that the observed improvement in AcPhe
incorporation was not a result of higher expression level of the evolved
AcPheRS-8G mutant. We also conducted cell growth experiments and observed
similar growth rates of strains harboring different AcPheRS variants
(). It
is therefore unlikely that the observed improvement was due to lower
toxicity of the evolved AcPheRS mutants. DNA sequencing results
revealed mutation convergence at positions
Phe261 and Asp286 of all three hits (Figure B). The Asp286 residue was mutated into neutral residues (Asn, Gln,
and Leu) that have similar side chain size to that of the Asp residue
in AcPheRS-wt. Residue Phe261 in all three hits was mutated into nonaromatic
amino acids, which apparently reduce the stacking interaction between
the synthetase and the pyrimidine base of C34 in MjtRNA. This observation
indicates that the favorable stacking interaction in MjTyrRS-MjtRNA may not be
essential for AcPheRS-MjtRNA when the G34C mutation leads to the replacement
of a purine base with a pyrimidine base in MjtRNA. In addition to mutations
at positions Phe261 and Asp286, Met285 was mutated to smaller amino
acids (Figure B), which is inconsistent with
the notion that cytosine is a smaller base than guanine and a larger
amino acid may be needed to restore the lost interaction. The possible explanation is that the amino acid residue at position
285 does not directly interact with the nucleotide but rather affect
anticodon recognition through fine-tuning the local conformation of
the anticodon recognition region of AcPheRS. To determine the efficiency and the fidelity of AcPhe incorporation
into proteins in , an amber mutation (TAG)
was introduced at position Asp149 in a C-terminal His-tagged GFP variant
(GFP149TAG). Protein expression experiments using the two most promising
hits (AcPheRS-8G and AcPheRS-12B) as well as two controls (AcPheRS-wt
and AcPheRS-D286R) were carried out in LB medium supplemented with
and without 1 mM AcPhe. Fluorescence analysis of  cultures showed that significant amount of full-length GFP protein
was produced only in the presence of AcPhe for the two evolved AcPheRS
variants (Figure C). This result indicates
that the evolved AcPheRS mutants are not cross-active with any endogenous
amino acids in . The incorporation fidelity
of the evolved AcPheRS mutants is comparable to that of the AcPheRS-wt.
Fluorescence intensities of GFP also showed that the evolved AcPheRS-8G
and AcPheRS-12B mutants had significantly higher amber suppression
efficiency (Figure C) than that of AcPheRS-wt
and AcPheRS-D286R, an AcPheRS variant with the previously reported
beneficial mutation (Asp286Arg). Comparing
to the rational designed AcPheRS-D286R mutant, better recognition
of MjtRNA by AcPheRS-8G and AcPheRS-12B was likely achieved by exploiting
a much larger conformational space using the directed evolution approach.
Between the two best hits, AcPheRS-8G displayed better reproducibility
and lower background in AcPhe incorporation (Figure C). We, therefore, focused on the AcPheRS-8G hit in following
studies. Supporting Information
Figure S1 We next investigated if the beneficial mutations in
the evolved
AcPheRS-8G could be functionally transferred to other unAA-specific
MjTyrRS variants to achieve general improvements in the incorporation
efficiency. We reasoned that the beneficial mutations within the anticodon
recognition region are away from the amino acid-binding pocket of
MjTyrRS variants and might not affect the unAA recognition by MjTyrRSs.
To this end, we focused on two other MjTyrRS variants, BpaRS and sTyrRS, which
were evolved previously to recognize -benzoyl--phenylalanine (Bpa, Figure A) and
sulfotyrosine (sTyr, Figure A), respectively.
The Bpa is a useful cross-linking amino acid for the study of protein–protein
interactions. The sTyr, which is a product of post-translational modification, is found in many secreted and membrane-bound
proteins. The direct and more efficient incorporation of sTyr into
proteins is useful for the investigation of its biological functions. Side chain structures of these two unAAs are
significantly different from that of AcPhe. We constructed BpaRS-8G
and sTyrRS-8G, each of which contained beneficial mutations (Phe261Gly,
His283Leu, Met285Val, and Asp286Gln) from AcPheRS-8G. Based on the
expression of GFP149TAG (), no expected improvements were observed. Two possible
explanations could be proposed from the above result: (1) the observed
improvement of unAA incorporation via the optimization of anticodon
recognition by MjTyrRS is an isolated case for AcPheRS, and (2) the
anticodon and unAA recognition by MjTyrRS are mutually dependent. To investigate above possibilities, we examined if BpaRS
and sTyrRS
variants with improved incorporation efficiency can be obtained through
the evolution of anticodon recognition pocket. Using the same approach
in AcPheRS evolution, we created a BpaRS library and a sTyrRS library,
where residues Phe261, His283, Met285, and Asp286 were randomized
in each library. After consecutive rounds of positive and negative
selections, three BpaRS hits (BpaRS-8E, BpaRS-11D, and BpaRS-11H)
and two sTyrRS hits (sTyrRS-2A and sTyrRS-5A) were identified to display
higher amber suppression efficiency over their parents (Figures  and ). Among these, BpaRS-8E
and sTyrRS-5A are the best ones for the incorporation of Bpa and sTyr,
respectively. It is worth of noticing that the degree of chloramphenicol
resistance (amber suppression at position 112 of chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase) does not correlate very well with the intensity of GFP
fluorescence (amber suppression at position 149 of GFP). While cells
containing BpaRS hits can survive much higher concentrations of chloramphenicol
(>250 μg/mL) than sTyrRS hits (75 μg/mL), greater fluorescence
intensities were observed for sTyrRS hits (∼6000–8000
au/OD; Figure C) relative
to those of the BpaRS hits (∼1200–1600 au/OD; Figure C). In addition, the fold improvement
of sTyrRS hits over the sTyrRS-wt is apparently greater when the chloramphenicol
resistance level was used to evaluate the improvement. The observation
may be due to the structure/function changes of reporter proteins
caused by the incorporation of a given unAA with unique physical and
chemical properties. Nevertheless, the general trend of improvement
is obvious regardless which data set is used for evaluation. As shown in Figure B, BpaRS-11D and BpaRS-11H
have converged protein sequence, which is different from that of BpaRS-8E.
The two sTyrRS hits, sTyrRS-2A and sTyrRS-5A, have different sequences
(Figures B). None of the BpaRS and sTyrRS
hits has the same mutation combinations as the AcPheRS hits. The most
significant difference was observed at position 286 of BpaRS hits.
While all the AcPheRS and sTyrRS hits contain a neutral amino acid
residue at position 286, the BpaRS hits either retained a negatively
charged Asp residue or changed into a positively charged Arg residue.
On the other hand, all the evolved BpaRS, sTyrRS, and AcPheRS variants
have mutations at either positions 261 or 283 or both, which apparently
led to reduced stacking interactions with the C34 of MjtRNA. In addition,
the Met285 residues in all evolved mutants were mutated into amino
acids with shorter side chains. These analyses implicate that MjTyrRS
variants (i.e., AcPheRS, BpaRS, and sTyrRS) interact with the anticodon
of MjtRNA in a similar fashion but with subtle differences. The aminoacylation
of MjtRNA by MjTyrRS is likely collaboratively affected by both MjTyrRS-unAA
and MjTyrRS-anticodon interactions, which leads to unAA-specific beneficial
mutations in the anticodon recognition region of different MjTyrRS
variants. Supporting
Information Figure S2 To further investigate above conclusion, we examined
the substrate
specificity of the evolved AcPheRS-8G toward different unAAs. We found
that the AcPheRS-8G showed significantly improved recognition toward -azido--phenylalanine (AzPhe), a close analogue of AcPhe (). The results further confirm the theory
that the MjTyrRS-anticodon interaction and the MjTyrRS-unAA interaction
mutually affect each other. In order to further improve unAA incorporation efficiency,
we next
examined if a previously reported MjtRNA variant (MjtRNA-Nap1) with beneficial T-stem mutations can be efficiently recognized
by the evolved MjTyrRS variants from the present work. The T-stem
mutations in MjtRNA-Nap1 (the “general” hit that gave the best
overall yield improvements with all unAAs tested) was predicted to increase its binding energy with EF-Tu,
which compensates for weaker binding of unAA in the EF-Tu binding
pocket. Since the T-stem of MjtRNA-Nap1 does not interact with MjTyrRS, we
envisaged that MjtRNA-Nap1 could still be recognized by the evolved MjTyrRS variants.
To test this hypothesis, amber suppression efficiency was examined
using GFP-149TAG. As shown in Figure A, both
AcPheRS-8G and AcPheRS-12B worked very well with MjtRNA-Nap1 and resulted
in significantly improved amber suppression efficiency relative to
that when MjtRNA was used. We also verified the fluorescence readings by
conducting large-scale protein expression, partial purification, and
SDS-PAGE analysis (Figure B). In conclusion,
by using a directed evolution approach, we were
able to identify MjTyrRS variants with significantly enhanced efficiency
for the incorporation of unAA into proteins in response to amber nonsense
codon. We also found that the optimal efficiencies of MjTyrRS variants-MjtRNA pairs are
unAA-specific. In addition, the apparent improvement in anticodon
recognition (or other unknown beneficial factors picked up during
the selection) can be combined with previous improvement in tRNA-EF-Tu
interaction to achieve further increase in unAA incorporation efficiency.
Therefore, the evolved MjTyrRS variants from this work will facilitate
the creation of an optimized and standardized system for the genetic
incorporation of unAA into proteins in . The
same strategy should be generally applicable to the evolution of other
orthogonal tRNA–aaRS pairs for highly efficient unAA incorporations
in living cells. Recognition of G34 of MjtRNA by MjTyrRS (PDB, 1J1U). Evolution of anticodon
recognition region of AcPheRS. (A) The structure
of -acetyl--phenylalanine (AcPhe). (B)
Mutations in the anticodon recognition region of the evolved AcPheRS
variants. (C) GFP fluorescence assays of cells expressing AcPheRS
variants. Fluorescence readings of  GeneHogs
cells expressing wild type (AcPheRS-wt) or the evolved mutants, each
coexpressed with MjtRNA, in the presence (blue column) or the absence
(red column) of 1 mM AcPhe. Fluorescence intensity was normalized
to cell growth. Each data point is the average of duplicate measurements
with standard deviation. Evolution
of anticodon recognition region of BpaRS. (A) The structure
of -benzoyl--phenylalanine (Bpa). (B)
Mutations in the anticodon recognition region of the evolved BpaRS
mutants. (C) GFP fluorescence assays of cells expressing BpaRS variants.
Fluorescence readings of  GeneHogs cells expressing
wild type (BpaRS-wt) or the evolved mutants, each coexpressed with
MjtRNA, in the presence (blue column) or the absence (red column) of 1
mM Bpa. Fluorescence intensity was normalized to cell growth. Each
data point is the average of duplicate measurements with standard
deviation. Evolution of anticodon recognition region of
sTyrRS. (A) The structure
of sulfotyrosine (sTyr). (B) Mutations in the anticodon recognition
region of evolved sTyrRS mutants. (C) GFP fluorescence assays of cells
expressing sTyrRS variants. Fluorescence readings of  GeneHogs cells expressing wild type (sTyrRS-wt) or the evolved mutants,
each coexpressed with MjtRNA, in the presence (blue column) or the absence
(red column) of 1 mM sTyr. Fluorescence intensity was normalized to
cell growth. Each data point is the average of duplicate measurements
with standard deviation. GFP expression with AcPheRS and MjtRNA variants.
(A) GFP fluorescence assays
of AcPhe incorporation by using different combinations of AcPheRS
and MjtRNA variants. Fluorescence intensity was normalized to cell growth;
(B) GFP expression yield and SDS-PAGE analysis. Bpa and AzPhe were purchased
from Bachem. The synthesis of AcPhe and
sTyr followed previously reported procedures.
Restriction enzymes, antarctic phosphatase (AP), and T4 DNA ligase
were purchased from New England Biolabs. KOD hot start DNA polymerase
was purchased from EMD Millipore. Primers were ordered from Eurofins
MWG Operon. Standard molecular biology techniques were used throughout. Site-directed mutagenesis was carried out using
either overlapping PCR or the QuikChange II site-directed mutagenesis
kit by following the manufacturer’s protocol.  DH5α and GeneHogs were used for routine cloning and DNA propagation.
All solutions were prepared in deionized water further treated by
Barnstead Nanopure ultrapure water purification system. Antibiotics
were added where appropriate to following final concentrations: ampicillin,
100 μg/mL; kanamycin, 50 μg/mL; tetracycline, 12.5 μg/mL,
and chloramphenicol (varied from 34 to 250 μg/mL). Mutants of MjTyrRS were obtained by
overlapping PCR using AcPheRS, BpaRS, or sTyrRS as template.
Digestion of PCR products with I and I followed by ligation between I and I sites of pBK vector resulted
in MjTyrRS libraries. Primers that
were used for library construction are listed in the . Library DNAs were transformed into
GeneHogs electrocompetent cells containing plasmid pREP that harbors MjtRNA and a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase-encoding
gene with an amber mutation at position Asp112. Transformants were
cultivated in LB media containing kanamycin and tetracycline. After
12 h of cultivation, cells were harvested. Based on calculation, a
certain number of cells (>4.6× the size of the library) were
plated on LB agar containing kanamycin (to maintain the pBK-MjTyrRS
plasmid), tetracycline (to maintain the pREP plasmid), 1 mM unAA (e.g.,
AcPhe), and chloramphenicol (varied from 50 to 250 μg/mL). The
selection plates were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. Survived cells
were pooled and the pBK-MjTyrRS plasmids were isolated. GeneHogs
was cotransformed with plasmids pNEG (containing
MjtRNA and a barnase-encoding gene with
two amber mutations at permissive sites, Gln2 and Asp44) and pBK-MjTyrRS
plasmids isolated from the positive selection. Transformants were
plated on LB agar containing ampicillin (to maintain the pNEG plasmid),
kanamycin, and 0.2% -arabinose (to activate the transcription
of mutant barnase gene). The selection plates were incubated at 37
°C for 12 h. Survived cells were then pooled and the pBK-MjTyrRS
plasmids were isolated. Selected numbers
of single colonies
from the last round of positive selection were screened by replication
onto plates with varied concentrations of chloramphenicol (34, 50,
75, 100, 150, or 250 μg/mL) in the presence and the absence
of the appropriate unAA. Only the ones that grew in the presence of
unAA and did not grow in the absence of unAA were selected for further
evaluation. Fluorescence Analysis of Bacterial Culture GeneHogs strain harboring plasmids pBK-MjTyrRS
variant
and pLei-GFP-N149TAG was cultured in
5 mL LB media containing kanamycin and chloramphenicol at 37 °C.
The protein expression was induced at the OD of 0.6 by additions of IPTG (0.1 mM) and appropriate unAA (1 mM).
Following cultivation at 37 °C for an additional 16 h, 1 mL of
cell culture were collected, washed, resuspended in 1 mL of potassium
phosphate buffer (50 mM, pH 7.4). The processed cell suspensions were
directly used for fluorescence and cell density measurements using
a Synergy H1 Hybrid plate reader (BioTek Instruments). The fluorescence
of GFP (GFP) was monitored at λ =
390 nm and λ = 510 nm. The cell density was estimated
by measuring the absorbance at 600 nm. Values of fluorescence intensity
were normalized to cell growth. Reported data are the average of two
or more measurements with standard deviations. Protein Expression and
Purification Similar cell cultivation
procedure for fluorescence analysis was applied to preparing 25 mL
of  culture for protein purification. Cells
were collected by centrifugation at 5000 and 4 °C
for 15 min. Harvested cells were resuspended in lysis buffer containing
potassium phosphate (20 mM, pH 7.4), NaCl (300 mM), and imidazole
(10 mM). Cells were subsequently disrupted by sonication. Cellular
debris was removed by centrifugation (21 000, 30 min, 4 °C). The cell-free lysate was applied to Ni Sepharose
6 Fast Flow resin (GE Healthcare). Protein purification followed manufacture’s
instructions. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assay
(Bio-Rad). Purified proteins were analyzed by SDS-PAGE..