Cellular immunotherapy has shown
promising clinical results in the treatment of cancer. Several clinical
trials have demonstrated its efficacy in treating patients with B
cell malignancies, and positive responses have been observed in the
treatment of other cancers, such as metastatic melanoma, colorectal
cancer, and multiple myeloma. While encouraging, T cell overactivity leading to cytokine release
syndrome (CRS) is still a major issue to contend with in clinical
practice. In severe cases of CRS, the uncontrolled immune response can lead
to patient deaths. To improve safety, various genetic switches have been developed
for controlling T cell activity, including ON or OFF switches. While such technologies can be effective, there are still challenges
that need to be addressed. Kill switches are an example of such an
OFF switch, and are effective at eliminating overactive T cells by
inducing apoptosis, but they also destroy the valuable therapeutic
agents. This can have drawbacks if the patient requires the use of
the engineered cells later during treatment. Furthermore, cells may
lose expression of the suicide gene due to silencing, or develop a
resistance to the gene by upregulating antiapoptotic genes. Additionally, many switches have been designed
to be compatible with chimeric antigen receptors (CARs), which are
synthetic receptors that use an antibody-derived domain for cell targeting.
However, these switches are often incorporated into the CAR design
directly and would thus not work for cells employing endogenous or
engineered T cell receptors (TCRs). Current switch technologies are
also often regulated by a single drug that can only turn ON or OFF
T cell activity. To reverse the T cell activity would require the
drug inducer to be degraded, which can be time-consuming. In the event
of CRS, symptoms can begin 1 h after infusion, indicating how quickly
the effect can manifest and highlighting the need for rapid control. As such, a dual gated switch that can be regulated
by two small molecules, one for ON and one for OFF function, could
be more advantageous for tighter temporal control. Zeta-chain-associated
protein kinase 70 (ZAP70) is a critical cytoplasmic protein tyrosine
kinase that is involved in the signal transduction of T cell activation. During T cell activation, the SH2 domains of ZAP70 bind to phosphorylated
CD3 immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs), positioning
the kinase to phosphorylate and activate downstream proteins, such
as linker of activated T cells (LAT) and lymphocyte cytosolic protein
2 (SLP76). Studies have shown that ZAP70-deficient T cells display defective
TCR-mediated T cell activation. Its early involvement in the activation pathway also
suggests ZAP70 has extensive control over the various signaling cascades
that stem from its activation, making it a suitable target for regulating
T cell activity. Despite the essential role that ZAP70 plays
in T cell activation, few technologies have been developed for controlling
its activity. Previous work on ZAP70 has included regulatable expression
of ZAP70 in an effort to control TCR activity, as well as the creation
of an analogue-sensitive version of ZAP70 that can be inhibited by
a small molecule. While these methods of control are effective, regulation
on a transcriptional or translational level requires time for these
processes to occur. Furthermore, tighter control over ZAP70 activity
would enable more precise regulation of T cell activity. Here,
we describe a dual-gated ZAP70 protein switch for regulating early
T cell signaling. The switch is generated by fusing an ER domain to the above-mentioned analogue-sensitive ZAP70, and shows
swift temporal control using two distinct small molecules, 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen
and 3-MB-PP1, to turn on and off protein activity, respectively. Dynamics
results indicate that the ZAP70 switch introduces tight temporal control
over early signaling in the TCR pathway, with activation in less than
2 min and inhibition within 1 min. The ON-OFF switch can also be used
to modulate the strength of activation by varying concentrations of
activator and inhibitor. While the switch is able to regulate early
T cell activation markers, we found that ON switch activity resulted
in stunted cytokine release, suggesting that the fusion of ER to ZAP70 is inhibiting its downstream effector function.
In order for the switch to meet the need for effective control in
T cell immunotherapy, further exploration is needed to understand
the cause of this constraint. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00394/suppl_file/sb7b00394_si_001.pdf To develop a dual-gated system for regulating T cell activity,
we engineered the ZAP70 to be sensitive to small molecule regulation.
We found serendipitously that by fusing an ER domain
to the N-terminus of ZAP70, we were able to render ZAP70 inactive.
The switch was also linked to an mCherry fluorescent protein to detect
expression in cells, and facilitate later downstream sorting of switch-expressing
cells. When the ER-ZAP70 (ZE) switch was introduced into
ZAP70-deficient Jurkat T cells (P116), the addition of 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen (4OHT) alleviated the inhibition
and allowed ZAP70 to transduce the signal originated from the TCR
and subsequently upregulate expression of CD69, a marker of T cell
activation (a top, b). It was also found that certain
configurations of the ER-ZAP70 fusion protein did not
exhibit this ON-activity as strongly as others (). The addition of 4OHT to wild-type Jurkat cells
or P116 did not impact CD69 expression, suggesting its specificity
for ER-ZAP70 (b). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00394/suppl_file/sb7b00394_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00394/suppl_file/sb7b00394_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00394/suppl_file/sb7b00394_si_001.pdf Previous work has shown
that when the gatekeeper methionine residue of the ZAP70 kinase domain
is mutated to alanine, a nonfunctional analogue of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP), the small molecule 3-MB-PP1 can bind to the ATP pocket and
inhibit kinase activity. 3-MB-PP1 therefore acts as a competitive
inhibitor, thus serving as an OFF switch for T cells expressing only
this analogue-sensitive (AS) ZAP70 allele. We tested whether our ER-ZAP70 switch could be combined
with the analogue-sensitive allele of ZAP70 into a single protein
to generate the first dual small molecule-gated ZAP70 switch (a bottom). Similar
to the ER-ZAP70 switch, variants of the ER domain and analogue-sensitive ZAP70 were tested, and results showed
that the effectiveness of the ON activity from the ER-ZAP70 constructs carried over to their respective ZAP70-AS-ER (ZASE) constructs ().
ZASE2 was chosen as the final ZASE construct due to the high CD69
levels resulted in the presence of 4OHT and anti-TCR antibody (C305),
while preserving low levels with anti-TCR antibody alone. Indeed,
CD69 levels indicate that the activity of the ZAP70-AS-ER protein was induced by 4OHT and potently inhibited by 3-MB-PP1 (c). When cells expressing
the switch fused to mCherry were treated with 4OHT, an elevation of
both mCherry and ZAP70 was also noted (d). Interestingly, when IL-2 levels were
analyzed for the ZE and ZASE switches, little elevation in IL-2 was
observed when the switches were turned on compared to what was observed
for the activation of wild-type ZAP70, suggesting that there may be
functional limitations to the ON-OFF switch (). There is, however, a small IL-2 increase with ON switch
conditions in comparison with the other combinations of small molecules,
though this is more prominent in the ZE switch than ZASE. Furthermore,
3-MB-PP1 has shown slight nonspecific inhibition of wild-type ZAP70,
though its effect is minimal (c). The inhibitor showed the same nonspecificity for
ER-ZAP70 as well, which was expected (). Characterization of the ON-OFF switch with TCRs. (A) Schematic
illustrating the mechanisms for the ZAP70 ON and ON-OFF switches.
(B) Various cell lines were treated with combinations of activator
and anti-TCR antibody, and CD69 levels analyzed by flow cytometry
(mean ± s.d.,  = 3, * <
0.0001). (C) CD69 levels for cells incubated with combinations of
activator, inhibitor, and anti-TCR antibody (mean ± s.d.,  = 3, * < 0.0001). (D) mCherry and
ZAP70 levels for ZASE-expressing P116 cells under various small molecule
conditions. Upon activation
of the TCR, a rise in intracellular calcium is known to occur. To test the dynamics of ZASE, P116 cells expressing the switch were
loaded with the Indo-1 AM dye to measure intracellular calcium flux
while treated with various combinations of 4OHT, 3-MB-PP1, and anti-TCR
antibody. To study the dynamics of ZASE ON activity, cells expressing
the ZAP70 switch were incubated with 4OHT at different time points
relative to stimulation of the TCR. When the TCR was stimulated, a
transient increase in calcium was observed. Subsequent addition of
4OHT resulted in a further increase in calcium levels. This elevation
in intracellular calcium was initiated immediately after 4OHT was
added, though peak calcium levels were achieved in just below 2 min
(a top). Treatment
of cells with 4OHT alone resulted in no calcium flux, until the TCR
was stimulated. At this point, the increase in calcium was greater
than if 4OHT had been added post-C305 (a bottom left). Cells preincubated with 4OHT
overnight prior to stimulation of the TCR showed an increase in calcium
when the TCR was stimulated, which was comparable to stimulation of
the TCR alone. However, the peak calcium level was sustained for a
longer time (a bottom right). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00394/suppl_file/sb7b00394_si_001.pdf ZASE-expressing cells were then tested with various combinations
of 4OHT and C305 to ensure that activation required both of these
molecules. When 4OHT alone was added to cells, no calcium flux was
observed, and addition of C305 alone resulted in a slight increase
in calcium levels. The largest increase in calcium was observed when
cells were treated with both 4OHT and C305 (b top). The same conditions tested in cells
expressing wild-type ZAP70 indicated calcium elevation whenever C305
was added, with peak levels slightly higher than what is observed
with ZASE. These cells did not seem to be affected by the presence
of 4OHT, though a mild dip in calcium was seen when 3-MB-PP1 was introduced,
likely due to nonspecific inhibition of wild-type ZAP70 (b bottom). Additionally,
the dynamics of wild-type ZAP70-expressing cells were recapitulated
by wild-type Jurkat cells. P116 cells expressing no ZAP70 displayed
a small increment in calcium when C305 was added, and it should be
noted that a basal level of signaling is present even in the absence
of ZAP70. This slight increase is likely due to ZAP70-independent
TCR activation pathways that have been tied to intracellular calcium
release, but the cells were otherwise unaffected by the molecules
(). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00394/suppl_file/sb7b00394_si_001.pdf It has been previously shown both  and  that 3-MB-PP1 is able to fully inhibit
analogue-sensitive ZAP70 in less than a minute, thus providing a rapid
OFF switch. To verify quick temporal
control using 3-MB-PP1, inhibition conditions were also assessed.
Combinations of activation using 4OHT and C305, and inhibition using
3-MB-PP1 were tested. Activated ZASE-expressing cells that were subsequently
inhibited with 3-MB-PP1 showed calcium levels brought down to basal
within 1 min. When these cells were activated but not inhibited, a
sustained calcium level was observed. Treatment with only 3-MB-PP1
indicated no change in calcium levels (c top). Simultaneous addition of C305 and
3-MB-PP1 resulted in a diminished calcium increase compared to cells
that were not treated with inhibitor (). Though complete shutdown was not instantaneous, this demonstrates
the immediate inhibitory effect 3-MB-PP1 can have on ZASE. The inhibition
conditions tested on wild-type ZAP70 cells also demonstrate more clearly
that wild-type ZAP70 is marginally inhibited by 3-MB-PP1, as cells
without the inhibitor contrastingly maintain their elevated calcium
levels (c bottom). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00394/suppl_file/sb7b00394_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00394/suppl_file/sb7b00394_si_001.pdf To verify that the ZAP70 switch can still be turned ON following
inhibition by 3-MB-PP1, cells expressing the switch were preincubated
with 4OHT and 3-MB-PP1, then washed with media containing only 4OHT.
These cells were then rested for various intervals of time and activated.
CD69 levels were measured as a marker for T cell activation. Within
2 h of washing out the drug and activation of cells, CD69 expression
in ZASE-expressing cells increased from basal levels to that comparable
to cells that had not been inhibited with 3-MB-PP1 ( top). This indicates that the inhibitor does not
irreversibly bind the switch, and ZASE is able to reactivate fairly
quickly following shutdown by the inhibitor. Preincubation of wild-type
Jurkat cells with the inhibitor did not hinder CD69 expression, and
ZAP70-deficient cells were unaffected by the inhibitor or C305 ( bottom). Calcium dynamics under varying small molecule conditions.
(A) Intracellular calcium levels of ZASE-expressing P116 cells, with
4OHT added at different time points relative to stimulation of TCR.
Control cells with no 4OHT or anti-TCR antibody are repeated in each
panel for comparison with basal calcium levels. (B) Activation controls
for cells expressing ZASE or wild-type ZAP70. Cells were treated with
or without 4OHT, and with or without anti-TCR antibody. All cells
were then inhibited with 3-MB-PP1. (C) Inhibition controls for cells
expressing ZASE or wild-type ZAP70. Cells were treated with or without
activation drugs, and with or without 3-MB-PP1. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00394/suppl_file/sb7b00394_si_001.pdf In a clinical setting, patient variability may require treatment
conditions to be tailored to the individual. The desired level of
T cell activity can also depend on the stage of treatment, and intended
immune response. As such, we systematically characterized the dose
response profile of ZASE activity with 4OHT and 3-MB-PP1 by measuring
CD69 levels, and showed that 10 μM of 3-MB-PP1 can inhibit activity
of ZASE at all tested concentrations of 4OHT (a). To reduce nonspecific inhibition of wild-type
ZAP70, a focused dose response was performed in the range of 0–10
μM and found that 7.5 μM 3-MB-PP1 was sufficient for shutting
off ZAP70 activity (b). Induction of the switch using 4OHT also occurs as an abrupt
change between 0.01 μM to 0.1 μM 4OHT, though the more
detailed dose response reveals a gradual increase in T cell activity
within this range (b). These gradual changes indicate that the intensity of T
cell activation can be controlled by altering the concentrations of
activator and inhibitor used. The same dose response of small molecules
was additionally tested in wild-type Jurkat and P116 cells, and displayed
no effect on activation of these cells (). The modulation of T cell activation using 4OHT was further
verified with calcium flux assays on cells expressing the switch.
Levels of calcium reached during activation increased in a direct
relationship with the concentration of 4OHT up to 0.1 μM. A
concentration of 0.01 μM 4OHT led to no further increase in
calcium compared to cells treated with no 4OHT, reinforcing the dose
response profile seen with CD69 expression (). Dynamics data for analogue-sensitive ZAP70
with varying concentrations of 3-MB-PP1 has previously been established
to control the extent of inhibition. Modulation of ZASE-controlled TCR activity as measured by CD69
levels, by modifying small molecule doses. (A) ZASE-expressing P116
cells were treated with various concentrations of activator and inhibitor,
and CD69 levels analyzed by flow cytometry. A wide range of concentrations
were tested. (B) 2-D dose response for ZASE-expressing P116 cells
with a narrowed range of concentrations tested. Calcium
dynamics for ZASE-expressing P116 cells using a range of 4OHT concentrations.
Cells were loaded with Indo-1 AM dye and treated with various concentrations
of 4OHT. Cells were then activated with anti-TCR antibody, and inhibited
by 3-MB-PP1. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00394/suppl_file/sb7b00394_si_001.pdf Though both TCRs and chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) contain
the CD3ζ domain that ZAP70 is known to interact with, surprisingly
ZASE exhibits compatibility issues with CARs. ER-ZAP70
and the ZASE construct were introduced into P116 cells expressing
a Her2 third generation H3B1 CAR comprising of the CD28 and 4–1BB
costimulatory domains, and CD69 levels analyzed as markers of T cell
activation. While 3-MB-PP1 was able to turn off T cell activation
initiated by CARs, the addition of 4OHT in the absence of Her2 displayed
leaky elevated CD69 levels for both ER-ZAP70 and ZASE
(). These raised CD69 levels were
observed for Her2 CARs of varying scFv affinity, and additionally
a CAR targeting CD19 (data not shown). The ZASE switch represents
the first dual small molecule gated switch in T cells, with a true
ON and OFF function that is regulated by two separate drugs. We have
shown that the switch is able to control the early T cell activation
pathway, as measured by CD69 and intracellular calcium. While the
mechanism for the ON switch remains enigmatic, we postulate that it
may be attributed to stabilization of the fusion protein when 4OHT
is bound to ER. This is supported by an increase in mCherry
and ZAP70 levels when cells were treated with 4OHT. The use of a mutant
estrogen receptor as a destabilization domain has also previously
been seen with the distinct mutated estrogen receptor ligand binding
domain (ERLBD), whose stabilization is recovered upon the addition
of 4OHT. The instability from such degradation
domains has previously been shown to result in the degradation of
the whole fusion protein, which could explain the ability of 4OHT
to control mCherry and ZAP70 protein levels. It is interesting to note that certain configurations of ER and ZAP70 do not encompass this ON switch activity, but
rather behave similarly to wild-type ZAP70 by allowing T cells to
activate whenever anti-TCR antibody is present. It is possible that
the structural conformations of certain ER-ZAP70 configurations
preclude control by 4OHT. While in theory the ZAP70 switch should
be able to control any receptor including the CD3ζ chain, its
curious incompatibility with CARs suggests there is more to its mechanism,
and could use additional study. Upon addition of 4OHT, higher expression
of the ZAP70 switch was observed in T cells, possibly raising the
basal level of CD69 and resulting in the leaky switch behavior observed
in CAR-T cells. It would also be interesting to quantify the amounts
of CAR and TCR on the surface of the T cells in order to determine
whether an excess of CARs to TCRs may be contributing to this leakiness.
Furthermore, minimal IL-2 induction is seen following ZE and ZASE
activation. As the ZAP70 protein also functions as an adaptor protein,
it is conceivable that the presence of the ER domain
obstructs its moderation of proteins known to regulate IL-2 production,
such as Lck. While early T cell activation
markers CD69 and intracellular calcium are regulated by the switch,
constraints on downstream effector functions like cytokine release
can impede its use in immunotherapy application, and should be noted
when assessing the limitations on the functionality of this ZAP70
switch. Calcium flux assays have indicated that the dual-gated
switch can be turned on in just under 2 min, and rapidly turned off
within a minute. While ON activity takes slightly longer to reach
peak calcium levels, the ZAP70 switch still exhibits tight temporal
control by 4OHT and 3-MB-PP1. The small molecules also show little
to no effect on wild-type ZAP70, emphasizing the specificity they
have to the switch. By varying concentrations of activator and inhibitor,
we were also able to modulate early T cell signaling through ZASE.
The switch thus enables quick regulation over early steps of the T
cell activation pathway, with degrees of activity swiftly controlled
by small molecule. The inclusion of ZASE in T cells is a step
toward alleviating overactivity issues that are currently observed
in cancer immunotherapy. Ideally, if off-target activities are detected
in time, the switch could also be used to shut off T cell activity.
However, in order for ZASE to have clinical use, the issue of diminished
T cell downstream effector function needs to be addressed. To determine
if or how ER may be obstructing ZAP70 activity, the current
roles of ZAP70 should be further investigated. For example, early
interactions such as ZAP70 binding to ITAMs and phosphorylation of
ZAP70 by Lck should be verified. The propagation of this signaling
should then be explored to determine if ER affects the
ability of the kinase to phosphorylate other proteins like LAT and
SLP76. If ER poses a steric hindrance on the function
of ZAP70, variants of ZASE could be tested that include linkers of
different lengths between the two proteins. Alternatively, if an unavoidable
characteristic of ER is impeding ZAP70 function, the
ERLBD could theoretically serve as the ON switch aspect of ZASE instead,
with the added benefit of control by the same drug. We believe that
with the right enhancements to ZASE to ameliorate T cell effector
function, it could become a suitable technology for improving the
safety of T cell immunotherapy. In order to reach this goal, the mechanism
of ZASE in the TCR pathway needs to be further studied. ZAP70 switches were introduced into human T cells using pHR lentivectors. The expression of ZAP70 switches is driven by
an EF-1 alpha promoter followed by a kozak sequence. Switches were
tagged with an mCherry fluorescent protein through a GS linker (5′-gggtctggctccggatcaagtggtggcagc-3′)
to verify expression of the construct in cells and facilitate downstream
cell sorting. Plasmids were packaged into lentiviruses using pDelta,
Vsvg and pAdv packaging and envelope plasmids. Lentiviruses
were generated using HEK293FT cells, which were cultured in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS; Thermo Fisher, 10437028), penicillin/streptomycin
(Corning, 30001CI), -glutamine (Corning, 25005CI) and 1
mM sodium pyruvate (Lonza, 13115E). ZAP70-deficient Jurkat T cells,
P116, were obtained from the Weiss Lab at UCSF and cultured in RPMI
1640 supplemented with 10% FBS and -glutamine. Wild-type
Jurkat cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 5% FBS, -glutamine and penicillin/streptomycin. For T cell activation,
2 × 10 cells were added to plate-bound C305 and incubated
overnight at 37 °C, 5% CO. Cells that were not treated
with 4OHT (Sigma-Aldrich, H6278–50MG; reconstituted in methanol)
or 3-MB-PP1 (Calbiochem, 529582–5MG; reconstituted in dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO)) were incubated with methanol or DMSO respectively
as a control. Lentivirus Generation and Transduction HEK293FT cells were grown in 6-well plates and cotransfected with
lentivirus packaging/envelope plasmids (described above) and ZAP70
switch-encoding vector using polythylenimine (PEI). Supernatant containing
virus was collected after 72 h and spun down to remove remnant cells.
P116 cells were infected with virus-containing media for 72 h at 37
°C before washing out the virus. Surface and Intracellular
Staining For surface staining, cells were stained for CD69
expression using APC-Cy7-conjugated mouse antihuman CD69 antibody
(BD Pharmingen, 557756) at a dilution of 1:100. Myc-tagged Her2 CARs
were stained using Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated mouse antihuman myc
antibody (R&D Systems, IC3696G). 2 × 10 cells
were washed twice with FACS buffer (1× phosphate buffered saline
(PBS), 0.1% NaN3, 1% BSA, 2 mM EDTA) before incubating with antibody
in the dark at room temperature for 40 min. Cells were then washed
and resuspended with FACS buffer before analysis on flow cytometer.
For intracellular staining, cells were washed with FACS buffer prior
to fixation (BD Cytofix, 554655) at room temperature for 10 min, then
washed again. The cell membrane was permeabilized by adding 90% cold
methanol to cells on ice and cold incubation for 30 min, followed
by washing and incubation with antibody. Intracellular staining of
ZAP70 protein was performed using Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated mouse
anti-ZAP70 antibody (Life Technologies, MHZAP7020) at a dilution of
1:50. Transduced cells were sorted for mCherry-positive
cells at the Boston University Imaging Core using a Sony SH800 Cell
Sorter. Cells were treated with 0.1 μM 4OHT prior to sorting.
Myc-tagged CAR and CD69 expression levels from T cell activation experiments
were measured poststaining using an Attune NxT flow cytometer. Supernatant from cells incubated with various combinations of C305,
4OHT, and 3-MB-PP1 was saved and tested in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) to measure IL-2 levels. The BD OptEIA human IL-2 ELISA
kit (BD Biosciences, 555190) was used according to manufacturer’s
instructions with a 0.05% Tween-20 in PBS (Thermo Scientific, 28352)
wash buffer, and remaining reagents from BD OptEIA Reagent Set B (BD
Biosciences, 550534). ELISAs were performed with 96-well MaxiSorp
plates (Thermo Scientific, 442404). Intracellular calcium levels were measured by loading 1.5 ×
10 cells with 8 μM Indo-1 acetoxymethyl dye (Invitrogen,
I1203) diluted in media (RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FBS and -glutamine). Loading specifications of 45 min at 37 °C
were used. Cells were then washed in media and incubated in the dark
at room temperature for 10 min. Prior to analysis, cells were equilibrated
to 37 °C, then read on a SpectraMax M5 (Molecular Devices) at
37 °C. The 400/500 nm emission ratio was taken as a measurement
of intracellular calcium. Cells
were incubated with 0.1 μM 4OHT and 7.5 μM 3-MB-PP1 for
16 h, followed by washing out of 3-MB-PP1 and incubating cells in
media containing 4OHT for various durations (2, 4, 8, 16 h). Cells
were then added to plate-bound C305 to activate for 16 h, stained
for CD69 and measured by flow cytometry. For the 0 h time point, 3-MB-PP1
was not washed out and cells were directly stimulated with C305. Control
samples were either incubated with no 3-MB-PP1 and then activated
with C305 (positive control), or incubated with 3-MB-PP1 and not activated
with C305 (negative control). Data
between two groups was compared using an unpaired two-tailed  test. A -value < 0.05 was considered
to be statistically significant..