Engineered bacteria offer the
potential to dramatically transform and improve approaches to biosensing,
diagnostics, and therapeutics. Bacterial biosensors have been widely used for environmental monitoring
and remediation, and are now being translated into
the field of healthcare to detect pathological biomarkers and diagnose
diseases. Bacteria also hold great promise for  diagnostics and therapies. For example, using mouse
models, researchers engineered bacteria to detect cancer metastasis, monitor gut inflammation, or specifically target cancer cells. In addition, microbiome engineering could help prevent or treat
infectious and autoimmune diseases. All these applications require sensors enabling bacteria to detect
and respond to various signals of interest. Cellular sensors were
first engineered by repurposing systems found in nature, like coupling
existing transcription factors to a reporter or by rewiring two-component systems. However, a sensor for every molecule of interest might not exist
in nature, limiting the range of detectable molecules and related
applications. A pressing challenge is thus to engineer synthetic receptors
enabling bacteria to detect novel signals. Several approaches
have been used to engineer synthetic receptors.
For example, transcription factor specificity can be switched to other
ligands by directed evolution. While useful, these sensors are
limited to recognizing structurally similar molecules and by the difficulty
to preserve allosteric control. Synthetic receptors have also been
engineered using conditionally stable ligand-binding domains (LBDs)
that are degraded in the absence of their ligands. Finally, synthetic metabolic pathways can transform nondetectable
molecules into ligands recognized by known transcription factors. However, all these systems rely on existing
LBDs and are limited to the detection of small molecules. Ideally,
synthetic receptors should use versatile LBDs for which
recognition specificity can be easily programmed for various applications.
In this regard, single-domain antibodies or antibody-like scaffolds
are ideal LBDs due to their high stability and solubility, and for
which combinatorial libraries can be selected to target many different
antigens, from small molecules to proteins. Consequently, single-domain antibodies
like camelid VHHs or scFvs have been used to design mammalian transmembrane
receptors such as chimeric antigen receptors (CARs), synthetic notch
receptors, and protease-based transmembrane
receptors. Despite such progress, to
this day all synthetic receptors using antibodies as LBD operate in
eukaryotic cells. We thus aimed at designing a modular bacterial
receptor platform
using single-domain antibodies as LBDs and following several specifications:
(i) receptor activation controls gene expression, so that synthetic
gene networks can be connected to ligand detection for further signal
processing (ii) the receptor mechanism
is scalable so that several orthogonal receptors can be designed following
the same principle; and (iii) the receptor system can be applied to
engineer either cytosolic sensors (for membrane permeable molecules)
or transmembrane receptors (for detection of ligands in the extracellular
environment). On the basis of these requirements, we provide
a general framework
to engineer synthetic prokaryotic receptors by coupling single-domain
antibodies undergoing ligand-induced dimerization with DNA-binding
domains for which activity is dependent on dimerization. Using  as a model system, we engineer
both transmembrane and cytosolic receptors using a VHH for ligand
detection. We demonstrate the scalability of our platform by using
the DBDs of two different transcriptional regulators and show that
receptor behavior can be optimized by tuning protein expression levels
and optimizing interdomain linker regions. Finally, we demonstrate
that receptor output can be connected to downstream synthetic gene
circuits. These scalable and versatile synthetic bacterial receptors
could be deployed in various chassis for applications in diagnostics,
therapeutics, and microbiome engineering. Engineering
Synthetic Receptors by Coupling Split-DBDs with
a Single Domain Antibody http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf DNA binding of transcriptional regulators
is generally dependent on dimerization of the DBD through the LBD. Deletion of the LBD/dimerization domain leads
to an inactive, monomeric DBD in which function can be restored  dimerization driven by fusing the proteins of interest. We first designed a synthetic receptor activated  ligand-induced dimerization by using the DBD of LexA,
a well-characterized transcriptional repressor regulating the transcription
of genes involved in  SOS response. Upon induction of the SOS response, RecA promotes
LexA inactivation through self-cleavage at residue 85, a flexible
hinge between DNA-binding and dimerization domains. The repressive
activity of the monomeric LexA DBD can be restored through fusion
with interacting proteins, a feature used in two-hybrid screens. In order to prevent interference from endogenous  LexA, we used the mutant LexA-408 and its corresponding promoter
that is not recognized by the wild type LexA (see ). As a ligand
binding domain, we chose a single-domain VHH camelid antibody that
can be dimerized upon binding to caffeine (henceforth termed VHH-Caffeine). As a negative control we used
a VHH targeting RNase A (henceforth termed
VHH-Control). We built two chimeric proteins, expressed in  cytoplasm, composed of an N-terminal LexA DBD
and a C-terminal VHH, and placed their expression under the control
of the pLacO1, induced by isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG), while the pLexA promoter drives
green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression. In the presence of ligand,
LexA DBD should dimerize and repress target gene expression (A). We expressed
all measurements in Relative Promoter Units (RPUs) by normalizing
fluorescence intensity to a strain containing a reference construct (see ). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf As positive and negative controls, we expressed full-length
LexA
and LexA DBD. As expected, we observed that full-length LexA mediated-repression
increased with IPTG concentration and was not affected by caffeine
(). We also observed,
as already reported, that the LexA DBD
could repress gene expression at high concentration (up to 35% repression
at 100 μM IPTG, ). We then characterized the behavior of cells expressing LexA-VHH
fusions in response to increasing concentrations of IPTG and caffeine
(B). We confirmed
by Western blot (WB) that both fusion proteins were expressed at similar
levels (). We first observed that similarly to LexA DBD, LexA-VHH-Caffeine
and LexA-VHH-Control displayed a concentration-dependent repression
in the absence of caffeine (up to 45% at 100 μM IPTG induction, B, lower rows). Both
LexA-VHH fusions had repressive activity comparable to LexA-DBD, suggesting
that this repression was primarily due to residual DBD activity and
not to VHH oligomerization. We then monitored the response of the
LexA-VHH fusions to increasing concentrations of caffeine. While no
change was detectable for LexA-VHH-Control (B, left panel), LexA-VHH-Caffeine had a dose-dependent
response to caffeine starting at 25 μM IPTG concentration and
1 μM caffeine (B, right panel). These results show that in the presence of
its ligand, VHH-Caffeine dimerizes and restores DNA-binding activity,
leading to transcriptional regulation. Response to caffeine was homogeneous
among the whole cell population (, upper panel). We observed a maximum repression
of 4.3-fold at 100 μM IPTG induction and 100 μM caffeine
(C,  lower panel). LexA-VHH-Caffeine
had a repression activity comparable to full-length LexA at similar
protein expression levels (respectively 100 μM and 12.5 μM
IPTG concentration, as full-length LexA had a higher expression level
for a comparable IPTG concentration). Taken together, these results
demonstrate that synthetic receptors can be engineered by coupling
split-DBDs with an antibody-domain undergoing ligand-induced dimerization. Engineering synthetic receptors using the split-DBD principle (A)
Overview of the LexA-based split-repressor system. LexA DBD was fused
to VHH-Caffeine. The monomeric chimeric receptor is expressed in the
cytosol upon IPTG induction. In the presence of caffeine, the chimeric
receptor dimerizes and binds to the LexA operator, blocking expression
of the reporter gene. (B) Response of cells harboring plasmids encoding
LexA-VHH-Caffeine and LexA-VHH-Control to increasing concentrations
of IPTG and caffeine. (C) Fold repression for the two LexA-VHH fusions
in response to increasing concentrations of IPTG and caffeine. For
each IPTG concentration, fold changes were calculated from (B) relatively
to cells grown without caffeine (lower row). Response
of LexA-VHH-Caffeine to increasing concentrations of caffeine
at 25, 50, and 100 μM IPTG induction. Upper panel: flow-cytometry
data of LexA-VHH-Caffeine response to caffeine at different expression
level. Lower panel: titrations curves of LexA-VHH-Caffeine in response
to increasing concentrations of caffeine and at different expression
level. Error bars: standard deviation between three independent experiments
performed in triplicate. * < 0.05, and ** < 0.01, compared with signal in the absence of caffeine. A Prokaryotic Transmembrane
Receptor Using a Single-Domain Antibody
for Ligand Detection One current limitation of whole-cell
biosensors is the difficulty to detect molecules in their extracellular
environment. For example, many biomarkers of disease are proteins
that cannot cross the cellular membrane. Having validated the principle of synthetic receptors using split-DBD,
we thus sought to apply this method to engineer transmembrane receptors. To this aim, we chose CadC, an  transmembrane
transcriptional activator from the ToxR family. CadC is composed of
a N-terminal cytosolic DBD and a C-terminal periplasmic pH sensor
domain. CadC activates the pCadBA promoter
when environmental pH decreases and in the presence of lysine. The Lysine permease LysP inhibit CadC activity
through interaction with CadC transmembrane domain when the environmental
lysine concentration is low. Interestingly,
dimerization of artificial transmembrane helices bound to the cytosolic
CadC DBD is sufficient to restore CadC transcriptional activity. In order to assess the potential of CadC
as a scaffold for transmembrane
receptor engineering, we wanted to (i) disrupt endogenous regulation
by environmental pH ( CadC C-terminal pH sensor
domain) and by lysine ( interaction between LysP
and CadC transmembrane region); and (ii) demonstrate that CadC could
be activated through dimerization of a periplasmic domain. To
do so, we first replaced the C-terminal periplasmic pH sensing
domain with the self-dimerizing leucine-zipper GCN4. Second, we replaced
the wt CadC transmembrane domain (targeted by LysP) by an artificial
transmembrane domain composed of 16 Leucine repeat residues. This
Leu(16) transmembrane helix was previously shown to support expression
of correctly oriented chimeric CadC proteins into  inner membrane. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf We placed the
expression of this fusion protein under the control
of the pLacO1 promoter induced by IPTG. As a reporter, we used the
GFP driven by the pCadBA promoter. We observed that cells expressing
CadC-Leu(16)TM-GCN4 produced a strong GFP signal (). In comparison, cells expressing
the same construction but using the wt transmembrane region had a
much lower activity. These results confirm that CadC transcriptional
activity can be restored  dimerization of a periplasmic
domain and that the Leu(16) transmembrane region is better suited
than the wt transmembrane domain for the engineering of synthetic
CadC receptors. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf We then built two CadC-VHH fusion proteins composed
of CadC DBD,
CadC juxtamembrane domain (JM), the Leu(16) transmembrane region (TM),
CadC wild type external linker region (EL), and the VHH LBDs (A). We placed the
expression of these chimeric proteins under the control of the pLacO1
promoter (B).
Both fusion proteins had comparable expression levels across the IPTG
concentration range (). We also confirmed by immunofluorescence that CadC-VHH-Caffeine
was targeted to the cellular membrane (). We then measured GFP expression in response to
increasing concentrations of IPTG and caffeine. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf We first observed a strong response of CadC-VHH-Caffeine
to increasing
concentrations of caffeine, starting at 25 μM IPTG concentration
(C). CadC-VHH-Control
did not show any response to caffeine. We calculated the signal swing
(, the absolute change in fluorescence intensity
between inactive and active states) and fold change in response to
caffeine (C
and D). We found that at 100 μM caffeine, the swing increased
with increasing receptor expression (swing = 6, 19, and 21 RPU at
25, 50, and 100 μM IPTG, respectively, C, right panel). However, the fold change
was maximal at 25 μM IPTG (∼10-fold), and decreased with
IPTG concentrations above (fold change = 6- and 4.6-fold at 50 and
100 μM IPTG, respectively; D, right panel). This decrease in fold change
is explained by a higher background noise due to nonspecific activation
of the CadC-VHH-Caffeine receptor at high expression levels (from
0.6 to 5.6 RPUs, ∼9-fold increase, ). On the other hand, CadC-VHH-Control fusion
did not show any background noise (C; ). Because both receptors were expressed at the same levels,
these results suggest that VHH-Caffeine has a higher propensity to
oligomerize than the VHH-Control. Therefore, higher expression levels
increase receptor sensitivity to caffeine, but also to nonspecific
self-activation and a deteriorated signal-to-noise ratio. We also
found that cells induced at 25 μM IPTG induction had a bimodal
distribution while at 50 μM and 100 μM the response to
caffeine was homogeneous over the whole cell population (, upper panel). Therefore,
receptor expression levels need to be balanced to satisfy two criteria:
support homogeneous response while minimizing self-activation and
background noise. These results show that the split-DBD principle
can be applied to engineer synthetic prokaryotic transmembrane receptors
using a single-domain antibody as a LBD. A prokaryotic transmembrane
receptor using a single-domain antibody
for ligand detection. (A) General architecture of synthetic transmembrane
receptor using the split-DBD principle. The DBD and Juxtamembrane
of the CadC transcriptional activator were fused to an Leu(16)TM,
an external linker, and VHH-Caffeine or VHH-Control as LBD. (B) Principle
of transmembrane receptor activation. Genes encoding CadC-VHH fusions
are placed under the control of the pLacO1 promoter. The N-terminal
CadC DBD is located in the cytosol and the C-terminal VHH in the periplasm.
In the presence of caffeine, the chimeric receptor CadC-VHH-Caffeine
undergoes ligand-induced dimerization and activates downstream reporter
gene expression. (C) Response of CadC-VHH-Caffeine and CadC-VHH-Control
to increasing concentrations of caffeine at different expression level.
(D) Activation fold of the two CadC-VHH fusions. For each IPTG concentration,
fold changes were calculated from (C) as in . Response of CadC-VHH-Caffeine
to increasing concentration of caffeine
at 25, 50, and 100 μM IPTG induction. Upper panel: flow cytometry
data of CadC-VHH-Caffeine response to caffeine at different expression
level. Lower panel: titration curves of CadC-VHH-Caffeine response
to increasing concentration of caffeine at different expression level.
Error bars: standard deviation between three independent experiments
performed in triplicate. * < 0.05, and ** < 0.01, compared with signal in the absence of caffeine. Optimizing Transmembrane
Receptor Signal-to-Noise Ratio through
Linkers Engineering We then wanted to improve the receptor
signal-to-noise ratio by decreasing its background noise. We postulated
that nonspecific oligomerization and activation could be reduced by
altering interdomain linker sequences. We decided to focus on modifying
(i) the external linker region, which was shown to influence receptor
basal activation rate and signal-to-noise ratios, and (ii) the juxtamembrane region (JM), also described
to have a strong effect on CadC response. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf We thus designed a library of 12 receptor variants by combining
3 different JM sequences (full-length [FL], partial deletion [PD]
and full deletion [FD]), with 4 types of external linkers (wild-type
[DTRLPMS, wt], flexible [GGGSG], rigid [EAAAK], and no linker [NL])
(A). We first
observed that all receptors incorporating the full deletion of the
JM region were nonresponsive to caffeine (B; ) due to proteolysis (). Variants incorporating the partial deletion of the JM
region exhibited a significant increase in both background noise and
signal intensity upon ligand addition. This increased noise was sequence
dependent as all FL and PD variants were expressed at similar levels
(). We found that
the best results were obtained using the CadC variant incorporating
the full length JM and no external linker, which displayed a significant
reduction of self-activation (B). While the swing of this construct was slightly
lower, the fold change was more than quadrupled compared to the wt
variant (5-  22-fold change, respectively, B). These data demonstrate
that the response properties of synthetic transmembrane receptors
can be optimized by varying the amino acid sequences of receptor linker
regions. Optimizing transmembrane receptor signal-to-noise ratio through
linker engineering. (A) Schematic diagram of the 12 receptor variants
tested. (B) Quantification of the response of 12 receptor variants
to 100 μM caffeine upon 50 μM IPTG induction. Error bars:
standard deviation between three independent experiments performed
in triplicate. * < 0.05, and ** < 0.01, compared with signal in the absence of caffeine. Connecting Synthetic Receptors
to Synthetic Gene Circuits Because split-DBDs control transcription,
they could be connected
to synthetic gene networks and support many applications requiring
downstream signal processing. As a practical
example, we connected the LexA system to a genetic inverter based on the BetI repressor (A). Starting at 50 μM IPTG induction, we observed a marked
increased in GFP intensity (B). While the swing was lower than with the repressor
only system (2.2 RPUs  12.2 RPUs at 100 μM
IPTG, respectively), the fold change was still significant, (∼4-fold, C), due to the very
low background signal in the absence of caffeine. Interestingly, we
observed no change in GFP signal across increasing concentrations
of IPTG. We hypothesize that the inverter module buffers the nonspecific
repressive effect from the DBD at high concentrations, probably because
of the delay required to degrade the BetI repressor. These data confirm
that synthetic receptors using the split-DBD principle can be connected
to synthetic gene networks for downstream signal processing. Connecting
synthetic receptors to downstream genetic circuits.
(A) General architecture of LexA-VHH-Caffeine connected to the BetI
inverter. LexA-VHH-Caffeine controls BetI expression, which controls
the GFP expression. (B) Response of cells containing the LexA-VHH-Caffeine
receptor connected to the BetI inverter to increasing concentrations
of IPTG and caffeine. (C) Fold activation of the LexA-VHH-Caffeine/BetI
inverter circuit. In
this work we developed synthetic bacterial receptors that use
a single-domain antibody as sensing domain. Our method consists on
fusing the DBD of a transcriptional regulator with a single-domain
antibody undergoing ligand-induced dimerization. Upon homodimerization,
the DNA binding activity of the DBD is restored, leading to transcriptional
regulation. We showed that the principle presented here is scalable
and can be applied to both transcriptional repressors and activators. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf We explored several parameters that can be tuned to improve receptor
behavior. We first showed that high receptor expression levels lead
to background noise arising from residual affinity of the monomeric
DBD for its operator () or from LBD multimerization. For example,
CadC-VHH-Caffeine exhibits a higher background noise than CadC-VHH-Control
(). Because VHH-Caffeine
dimerizes upon ligand binding, we hypothesize that noise arises from
an intrinsically higher tendency to oligomerize. VHH-Caffeine also
has a higher propensity to oligomerize when expressed at the membrane,
probably due to increased local concentrations and constrained mobility
that enhances the likelihood of interaction between receptors. Therefore,
a critical parameter affecting the performance of synthetic receptors
activated by ligand-induced dimerization is the propensity of their
sensing domain to spontaneously oligomerize. This tendency to oligomerize
can be decreased by reducing receptor expression levels, and further
engineering of sensing domain solubility/stability could also be used
to reduce self-oligomerization. Nevertheless, here we demonstrate
that VHHs can support the engineering of functional receptors and
are promising sensing domains. The use of other recognition units
will be constrained by their tendency to aggregate. We demonstrate
how receptor signal-to-noise ratio can be improved
by varying the different linker regions and anticipate that different
LBD-ligand complexes with different sizes and geometries will have
varying linker requirements relative to length, charge, or flexibility.
Transmembrane receptors coupled to new LBDs could be best engineered  high-throughput screening of combinatorial linker libraries
using a Flow-Seq approach. Alternatively,
directed-evolution coupled with stringent selection methods could
help design split-DBDs operating in a plug-and-play fashion. The synthetic receptors developed here
present several advantageous
features that should enable many applications. First, through combinatorial
library construction and high-throughput screening, synthetic binders
can be generated for a nearly unlimited numbers of ligands. To detect a monomeric antigen, two different antibodies targeting
different epitopes could be combined, an approach already used in
sandwich ELISA or in other split-protein biosensors. Second, many transcription factors have been characterized
from which several orthogonal receptors could be derived. Third, because our system controls transcription,
ligand detection can be connected to downstream genetic circuits.
We provide an example by connecting the LexA-based sensor to a genetic
inverter ().
Higher-order signal processing could also be performed, such as genetically
encoded logic or signal amplification. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf We also provide the first example, to the best
of our knowledge,
of a bacterial transmembrane receptor using versatile single-domain
antibodies for ligand detection. Such transmembrane receptors are
highly relevant for future applications in which engineered prokaryotic
cells need to detect ligands that cannot penetrate into the cytosol,
like proteins which are important pathological biomarkers. Importantly, VHH and other synthetic binders are efficiently expressed
and functional at the bacterial membrane. As a proof-of-concept, we
successfully expressed a synthetic alpha-rep binder recognizing GFP
and found that it could bind recombinant eGFP in  cells having a deficient outer membrane (). The transmembrane receptor principle developed
here is general enough to support deployment into other bacterial
hosts, such as Gram-positives. In this case, the receptor sensing
domain would be directly exposed on the cell surface and accessible
to extracellular ligands. In conclusion, prokaryotic receptors
using single-domain antibodies
as sensing domains offer a promising scalable ligand detection platform
to support many translational applications of synthetic biology, including
sophisticated low-cost diagnosis, environmental monitoring and remediation,
and targeted cellular therapeutics. Sequences for LexA, CadC, and
VHHs are provided in Supporting Information. All constructs were cloned
into the low-copy plasmid pSB4K5 using
Gibson assembly. Plasmid maps are available
in SM. All experiments were performed using  strain NEB10β (New England Biolabs). Plasmids and materials
will be made available through Addgene. Sequences will be deposited
into GENBANK. http://tmcalculator.neb.com/#!/ http://tmcalculator.neb.com/#!/ PCR amplifications
were performed
in a 40 μL reaction mixture consisting of 0.1–10 ng of
template DNA fragment, 1 μL of each forward/reverse primer (20
μM), and 20 μL of Q5 hot start high-fidelity 2× master
mix (NEB). After 30 s of initial denaturation at 98 °C, 35 cycles
were conducted with the PCR procedures of 10 s at 98 °C, 30 s
at corresponding annealing temperature (different with each primer
combination, calculated with NEB Tm calculator: ), and elongation (2 kb/min) at 72 °C, with a final extension
at 72 °C for 10 min. The PCR product was verified by gel electrophoresis,
then purified by PCR cleanup kit, and the DNA concentration was determined
using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer. The PCR reactions were digested with
1 μL DpnI (20 units/ml, NEB) in 40 μL CutSmart reaction
buffer (NEB) at 37 °C for 1 h to remove template DNA. The resulting
mixture was then used for Gibson assembly reaction. In each Gibson
assembly reaction, 100 ng of vector DNA fragment and 3–5 fold
of insert fragments were incubated with 10 μL of 2× Gibson
assembly master mix (NEB) in a final volume of 20 μL at 50 °C
for 60 min. To prevent the DNA ligase activity in the reaction mix
affecting the following electroporation efficiency, the reaction mix
was further heat-inactivated at 80 °C for 15 min. One μL of Gibson assembly
products was added into 40 μL NEB10β electro-competent
cells and then transferred in Biorad 0.1 cm gap Micropulser electroporation
cuvettes. Immediately after electroporation with Biorad Micropulser
electroporator using program EC1, 1 mL of prewarmed (37 °C) SOC
medium was added into the transformants. The cell culture was further
incubated at 37 °C with vigorous shaking for 1 h. The transformants
were then plated on the selection plate with antibiotics (, kanamycin) and incubated at 37 °C overnight.
The constructs were verified by Sanger sequencing. Functional
Characterization of Synthetic Receptors http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf Supplementary Figure S10 and S11 Plasmids encoding
the different receptors were transformed into chemically
competent  NEB10β (New England
Biolabs), and plated on LB agar supplemented with 25 μg/mL kanamycin.
For each construct, three colonies were picked and inoculated into
3 mL of LB/kanamycin and grown for 16 h. The following day, the cultures
were diluted 1:100 into 500 μL LB/kanamycin into 96 deep-well
plates, grown at 37 °C for about 1.5 h until O.D. 600 reached
0.3. IPTG and caffeine were then added at different concentrations.
Plates were then incubated at 37 °C for 16 h with shaking and
analyzed by flow cytometry. All experiments were performed at least
3 times in triplicate. Data points and error bars represent the mean
and standard deviation, respectively. The signal outputs with significant
difference verified by paired sample  test (-value < 0.05) marked by asterix. We used as an in vivo
reference standard a reference promoter (J23101) driving GFP, and
expressed all values in Relative Promoter Units (RPUs). We chose to
work within a range of caffeine concentration from 0 to 100 μM
as we observed a nonspecific receptor activation caused by excess
amount of caffeine at a 1 mM concentration () http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00266/suppl_file/sb7b00266_si_001.pdf Flow cytometry
was performed
using an Attune NxT cytometer coupled with high-throughput autosampler
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). 30 000 cells were collected for
each data point. Flow cytometry data were analyzed using FlowJo (Treestar
Inc., Ashland, USA). All raw data values are in . Calculation of Relative
Promoter Units (RPUs) Fluorescence
intensity measurements among different experiments were converted
into RPUs by normalizing them according to the fluorescence intensity
of an  strain containing a reference
construct and grown in parallel for each experiment. We used the constitutive
promoter J23101 and RBS_B0032 as our  reference
standard and placed superfolder GFP as a reporter gene in plasmid
pSB4K5. We quantified the median of fluorescence intensity (MFI) of
the flow cytometry data and calculated RPUs according to the following
equation: Calculation of Repression or Activation Fold Repression
and activation folds for the different synthetic receptors at different
caffeine concentrations were calculated by dividing the signal intensity
of cells grown in the presence of caffeine by the signal signal intensity
of cells grown at the same IPTG concentration without caffeine, according
to the following equation: In order to quantify
receptor expression
levels by Western-blot, all constructs were fused with a C-terminal
c-Myc tag. A 1.5 mL of overnight culture was centrifuged at 13 000 for 5 min to collect the cells. The whole cell extract
sample was prepared in 50 μL 1× SDS sample buffer and heated
at 95 °C for 10 min. After centrifugation for 10 min at 13 000, 10 μL of the denatured sample was fractionated
by SDS-PAGE and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane
using the Trans-Blot Turbo transfer system (Bio-Rad). The membrane
was washed twice with PBS and blocked with 5% nonfat dry milk dissolved
in PBST (PBS supplemented with 0.5% Tween 20) at 4 °C for 2 h.
After one wash with PBST, the membrane was incubated with two primary
antibodies: anti-c-Myc, chicken IgY fraction (Life, 1:2500); and anti-GroEL,
rabbit polyclonal antibody (Sigma, 1:5000) at 4 °C overnight.
Membranes were washed twice with PBST buffer for 10 min and incubated
with secondary antibodies at 4 °C for 2 h. After washing twice
with PBST, the membranes were imaged on a Typhoon scanner. The band
intensities were quantified using ImageJ software. The normalized
expression level (NEL) was calculated by following equation: Preparation of Cell Wall
Deficient Cell wall (outer
membrane) deficient  were grown in osmo-protective
medium composed of 2 × MSM medium
(40 mM MgCl, 1 M sucrose and 40 mM maleic acid, pH 7),
mixed 1:1 with 2 × Beef Medium (6 g beef extract/L, 20 g bacteriological
peptone/L, 10 g yeast extract/L, and 10 g NaCl/L). The overnight cultures
of  containing relative construct was
diluted 100-fold to Beef/MSM medium with 45 μg/mL cefsulodin
to transiently interfere with  outer
membrane formation. Cells were grown for 16 h at 30 °C. Images were acquired using IX71 inverted
microscope (Olympus) equipped with RFP (Ex 535/50, Em 610/75) and
GFP (Ex 480/40, Em 535/50) filters, and a Phantom Miro LC310 camera.
The microscope was operated by the Phantom Camera Control software.
An Olympus UIS2 UPLFLN 100× O2PH oil-immersion objective was
used. The images were processed using ImageJ (). Antibody Labeling of CadC-VHH-Caffeine Expressed on Cell Wall
Deficient Ten μL of  an overnight culture with or without the CadC-VHH-Caffeine
plasmid was added diluted into Beef/MSM/kanamycin medium with 45 μg/mL
cefsulodin to transiently interfere with  outer membrane formation. IPTG was added to the culture to induce
CadC-VHH-Caffeine expression. The cell culture was grown at 30 °C
for 16 h. Cells were centrifuged at 850 in 4 °C
for 10 min. The pelleted cells were blocked by Beef-MSM medium containing
5% BSA at 4 °C for 1 h. After blocking, the cells were labeled
with anti-c-Myc chicken IgY antibody (1:1000) at 4 °C for 1 h.
The cells were pelleted and washed twice with Beef-MSM medium containing
5% BSA, then further labeled with goat antichicken antibody conjugated
with Alexa 488 at 4 °C for 1 h. After being washed twice with
Beef-MSM medium–5% BSA, cells was analyzed by microscopy and
flow cytometry..