Gene regulatory
networks are
complex biological circuits that control a wide variety of cell-type
specific phenotypes. One aim of synthetic biology is to recapitulate
this level of regulation within synthetic biological circuits to enable a range of biotechnological and therapeutic applications. To date, prokaryotic regulatory systems (e.g., , , and ) have proven tremendously valuable for the construction
and implementation of synthetic genetic circuitries. Such examples
include toggle switching, counting, biocomputation, timing, oscillation, communication, and controlled expression
of therapeutic genes. Many of these circuits,
however, are based on a limited set of simple modular components.
Although these elements allow for straightforward and rapid assembly
of synthetic devices, they may not be optimal for the design of sophisticated
transcriptional networks that rely on
endogenous genetic elements or coregulatory factors. As such, there
is a pressing need for adaptable tools capable of providing highly
regulated control of gene expression in eukaryotic cells. Transcription
activator-like effectors (TALEs) are a class of naturally
occurring DNA-binding proteins that can be utilized for the design
of hybrid DNA-modifying enzymes. A typical
TALE DNA-binding domain consists of a series of 33- to 35-amino acid
repeats that each recognizes a single base pair (bp) of DNA via two
adjacent amino acid residues, termed repeat variable diresidues (RVDs)
(Figure ). TALE repeats
can be assembled into custom DNA-binding domains capable of recognizing
virtually any contiguous DNA sequence. Synthetic TALE arrays have
been fused to numerous effector domains including transcriptional
activators and repressors, nucleases, and site-specific recombinases. Because
of this versatility and the relative ease with which they can be constructed,
TALEs have found broad utility in biotechnology and the biomedical sciences. Recent studies have demonstrated
the effectiveness of TALEs for
synthetic biology. Most notably, combinations of TALE transcription
factors (TALE-TFs) have been shown to synergistically activate gene
expression in human cells, providing synthetic
biologists with a framework for devising novel circuits that mimic
the complexity of natural systems. Unlike the more commonly used tetracycline-inducible
system used in the first study to successfully
impart chemical control over endogenous gene expression with designed
transcription factors, TALE-TFs can be
engineered as two-hybrid systems to allow for gene induction only
in the presence of light or endogenous
stimuli. These approaches, however, are
limited by numerous factors, including low inducer sensitivity, toxicity,
and the necessity dual-gene systems to accommodate the two-hybrid
approach. To address this, we set out to develop a versatile new class
of ligand-dependent transcriptional activators by combining steroid
hormone receptor ligand-binding domains (LBDs) with custom-designed
TALE-TFs, a strategy that permits conditional activation of gene expression
in response to small-molecule stimuli. Such an approach should allow
for the control of a variety of TALE-TFs using a number of distinct
small molecules, and facilitate the design of highly responsive synthetic
networks that interact with endogenous genetic components. We
began by fusing the LBDs from the murine estrogen (ER) and human
progesterone (PR) receptors to a synthetic 15-repeat TALE protein
designed to recognize the AvrXa7 binding site linked to the VP64 transactivation domain (Avr15-VP64). The ER
and PR proteins are prototypical members of the nuclear steroid hormone
receptor family. In the absence of hormone, these receptors are inactive
due to association with several destabilizing factors. Upon ligand
binding, however, these hormone receptors are released by the inactivating
complex, undergo intermolecular homodimerization, and bind their target
DNA to activate transcription (Figure a).
We and others have previously shown that zinc-finger
transcription factors fused to these
LBDs modulate gene expression in response to specific chemical stimuli.
As the natural ligands of these mammalian receptors mediate significant
biological activity and thus may stimulate induction of unwanted and
potentially confounding gene networks, we employed mutants of the
ER and PR proteins that no longer bind their natural substrates but instead
recognize the synthetic agonists 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) and RU486,
respectively. We also investigated whether Avr15-VP64 could activate
gene expression in response to the insect hormone ponasterone A (PonA)
when fused to a single-chain regulator composed of LBDs from the retinoid
X-α/ecdysone (RXE) heterodimeric receptor systems (Figure b). Unlike the ER and PR proteins, which must dimerize to become active,
the single-chain RXE protein functions as a monomer, as RXEs undergo
an intramolecular rearrangement in response to ligand, enabling gene
regulation from a single DNA binding site. All LBDs were fused between
the C-terminus of the TALE DNA-binding domain and the N-terminus of
the VP64 transactivation domain, as illustrated in Figure . Supporting
Information Figure S1 To assess the ligand-responsiveness of each
chimeric TF, we developed
a transient reporter assay that correlates gene activation with increased
luciferase expression. We introduced five direct repeats of the 15-bp
Avr15 TALE binding site upstream of a luciferase reporter gene and
cotransfected human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells with reporter
plasmid and expression vectors for each TALE-TF (Figure a). Luciferase expression was measured 24 h after introduction
of 4-OHT, RU486, or PonA. In the absence of ligand, we observed negligible
amounts of luciferase expression; however, in the presence of the
appropriate small-molecule, we observed robust gene expression for
each Avr15-VP64 fusion (Figure b–d).
Notably, each ligand-inducible TF stimulated gene activation only
in the presence of its intended inducer (). This orthogonality suggests that these
systems could be used for the construction of multiplexed gene regulatory
networks. Notably, the single-chain RXE-Avr15-VP64 activator demonstrated
substantially higher levels of gene activation (∼1400-fold)
than the homodimeric PR-Avr15-VP64 (∼90-fold) and ER-Avr15-VP64
(∼350-fold) proteins after induction. All subsequent experiments
were, therefore, performed using the RXE regulatory system. Supporting Information Figure S2 To determine whether the RXE LBD regulates gene expression
over
a wide range of ligand concentrations, we evaluated the dependence
of gene activation by the RXE-Avr15-VP64 protein on PonA concentration.
We found that luciferase expression increased linearly in response
to PonA concentrations from 100 nM to 5 μM and that the highest
level of induction occurred with 10 μM PonA (>1600-fold)
(Figure e). We observed no luciferase expression
with PonA
concentrations less than 50 nM. Intriguingly, the ER and PR proteins
exhibited switch-like behavior by inducing high levels of gene expression
in the presence of 10 nM 4-OHT and 1 nM RU486, respectively (), indicating
that the ER and PR domains are less tunable than the RXE LBD. Taken
together, these findings indicate that RXE-based TFs are sufficiently
sensitive for applications that require tunable forms of gene activation. intercellular adhesion molecule 1 Supporting Information Figure S3 Supporting Information
Figure S3 Next, we sought to determine whether the RXE-based activators could
regulate gene expression at target sites derived from human promoter
regions. To test this possibility, we constructed eight RXE-TFs that
target distinct sites located within 700-bp of the transcriptional
start site (TSS) of the  () gene. Abnormal ICAM-1 levels are associated
with inflammation and atherosclerosis. All eight TALEs were composed
of 14.5 repeats (in order to target 15-bp sequences) and designed
to target sequences across the entire promoter region in the 5′
to 3′ orientation (Figure a). Notably,
TALE design was constrained only by the standard requirement for a
5′ thymidine nucleotide. In the future, this restriction might
be removed as a recent report has described the development of TALE
frameworks that demonstrate no base restrictions at this position
and allow for any sequence to be targeted. To assess the potency of each individual RXE-TF, we created luciferase
reporter constructs containing four direct repeats of each individual
TALE target upstream of the luciferase gene (Figure a). We cotransfected HEK293T cells with a single reporter
plasmid and the corresponding RXE-TF expression vector and measured
luciferase expression 24 h after induction with 5 μM PonA. Six
of the eight RXE-TFs (A, B, C, E, F, and H) increased luciferase expression
by more than 75-fold in response to PonA, and negligible amounts of
gene expression occurred in the absence of hormone (Figure b). The most potent activator, RXE-TF F, enhanced
luciferase expression by more than 500-fold after induction with hormone
(Figure b). Interestingly, we found that two
of the eight RXE-TFs (D and G) were unable to induce significant levels
of gene expression in response to PonA. Further analysis revealed
that the corresponding constitutively expressed (noninducible) TALE-TFs
were also unable to significantly enhance gene expression, suggesting
an inherent limitation within these TALEs or their target sites (). In general,
the RXE-TFs enhanced gene expression to within 2- to 5-fold that of
constitutively expressed TFs (). Next, we evaluated whether
the active RXE-TFs could regulate gene
expression from a full-length promoter sequence. To test this, we
cotransfected HEK293T cells with a reporter plasmid that contained
∼1000 bp of the  promoter with expression
vectors for each individual  RXE-TF. With the
exception of RXE-TF F, which activated luciferase expression ∼30-fold,
we found that each RXE-TF (A, B, C, E, and H) induced only modest
levels of gene activation (Figure c). However,
we found that cotransfection and simultaneous induction with combinations of RXE-TFs led to an apparent synergistic increase in gene activation.
In particular, codelivery of RXE-TFs B and F led to a ∼65-fold
increase in luciferase expression in the presence of PonA (Figure c). Intriguingly, simultaneous induction of all
six RXE-TFs led to only a ∼30-fold increase in gene activation,
indicating that the relative positions of the TALE binding sites impact
cooperative gene activation. octamer-binding
transcription factor 4 Supporting Information Figure S4 To examine the generality of the
RXE regulatory system, we constructed
and tested seven RXE-TFs composed of 14.5 repeats and designed to
target sites within 800 bp of the TSS of the human  () gene, which
has been implicated in both tumorigenesis and pluripotency (Figure a). Five of the seven RXE-TFs (A, B, C, E, and G)
induced luciferase expression at levels near that of constitutively
expressed TFs (Figure b and ). In particular, two RXE-TFs
(A and B) increased luciferase expression by more than 300-fold in
response to PonA. We note that four direct repeats of the binding
sites were also used in these reporter systems. To evaluate whether
these RXE-TFs could also regulate gene expression in the context of
the full promoter sequence with a single TF binding site, we cotransfected
a luciferase reporter plasmid that harbored ∼1000 bp of the  promoter with individual RXE-TFs. As with TFs targeting
the  promoter, individual -targeting RXE-TFs demonstrated only modest levels of gene activation,
but cotransfection of combinations of these TFs led to ∼40-fold
increases in luciferase expression in the presence of hormone (Figure c). Supporting Information Figure S5 Supporting Information Figure S6 Lastly, we sought to determine
whether RXE-TFs could regulate the
expression of an endogenous human gene. To investigate this possibility,
we transfected HeLa cells with combinations of the most potent RXE-TFs
designed to target the  promoter and then evaluated
surface expression of ICAM-1 via flow cytometry (Figure a and ). In the absence of hormone, we detected no appreciable increase
in ICAM-1 expression relative to expression on mock-transfected cells
for any combination of RXE-TFs. At 48 h after induction with 10 μM
PonA, however, we observed that ∼5–10% of all cells
transfected with individual (F) and multiple combinations of RXE-TFs
(B/F; E/F; H/F; and all RXE-TFs) showed an increase in ICAM-1 expression
(Figure b). In particular, ∼10% of
HeLa cells cotransfected with RXE-TF F or with the combination of
RXE-TFs E and F showed a significant increase in ICAM-1 expression.
Most notably, we found that the RXE-TFs up-regulated ICAM-1 expression
at rates within 2-to 3-fold the corresponding constitutively expressed
TFs ().
These values are similar to those previously reported with ligand-inducible
zinc-finger transcription factors; however,
alternate delivery methods could be used to improve the potency of the RXE-TFs. Finally, because
the  locus is likely epigenetically silenced
in HeLa cells, we could not assess the
ability of the -targeting RXE-TFs to induce
activation of the endogenous gene in this particular cell type. Taken
together, these findings suggest that, when coupled with TALE technology,
the RXE regulatory system is a generally effective means for regulating
the expression of endogenous human genes. Fusion of designed TALE-TFs with
LBDs derived from steroid hormone
receptors enabled the generation of a new class of potent, adaptable,
and conditional transcriptional activators. Our most active transcriptional
regulator was controlled by the retinoid X-α/ecdysone receptor
system and effectively regulated transgene expression in response
to the insect hormone ponasterone A in a dose-dependent manner. These
ligand-responsive activators also regulated expression of an endogenous
human gene at levels that approached those observed with constitutively
expressed transcriptional activators. Unlike recently described light-sensitive
zinc-finger and TALE transcriptional activators, this hormone-responsive gene
regulatory system is not based on a two-hybrid system (i.e., single-gene
system) and thus may be simpler to implement within gene networks.
Synthetic sensors and circuits have been constructed using a well-defined
suite of bacterial TF-promoter systems, and the use of artificial
zinc-finger transcription factors has been shown to be an effective
means for wiring synthetic transcriptional circuits in eukaryotic
cells. The range of sequences that can
be rapidly targeted to novel sequences by these components is limited,
however. The stringent, dose-responsive, and conditional gene regulatory
system described herein will provide synthetic biologists with a new
means for wiring and rewiring similar types of circuits with the added
potential of multiplexing. An important goal for future studies
will be to determine the extent
of off-target effects induced by the RXE-TFs, as recent studies have
indicated that TALEs composed of 18.5 repeats can potentially tolerate
up to 3 nucleotide mismatches. High-throughput
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) could be used to evaluate off-target transcriptional
activation. Finally, although it remains
unknown whether recently described CRISPR/Cas-based transcriptional
modulators are compatible with the regulatory systems described in this work,
this active area of research could dramatically expand the utility
of this approach. Ligand-inducible
TALE transcription factors. (a) TALE-TF proteins
fused to ligand-binding domains (LBDs) from the estrogen receptor
(ER) or progesterone receptor (PR) undergo intermolecular dimerization
in response to 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) or RU486, respectively,
and up-regulate gene activation from DNA sequences that contain two
direct or inverted repeat TALE binding sites. (b) TALE-TF proteins
fused to the chimeric single-chain retinoid X-α/ecdysone (RXE)
LBD undergo intramolecular rearrangement in response to ponasterone
A (PonA) and up-regulate gene activation from target DNA that contains
only a single TALE binding site. E.D. indicates effector domain. Activation
of gene expression by ligand-responsive TALE transcription
factors. (a) Schematic illustration of the luciferase reporter system
used to evaluate ligand-inducible TALE-TF gene activation. Avr15 target
site repeats indicated. (b–d) Fold-activation of luciferase
expression observed with the (b) PR/RU486, (c) ER/4-OHT, and (d) RXE/PonA
regulatory systems. (e) Fold activation of luciferase expression observed
by RXE-TFs with increasing concentrations of PonA. Error bars indicate
standard deviation ( = 3; -value
< 0.0005; paired -test). Ligand-dependent gene activation from the  promoter by RXE-TFs. (a) (left) Location (red circles) of the TALE
binding sites within the ICAM-1 promoter region, and (right) the sequence
of each target site. 5′ thymidine nucleotides highlighted red.
(b and c) Fold activation of luciferase expression after co-transfection
of RXE-TF expression plasmids with luciferase reporter plasmids containing
(b) four direct repeats of the  TF binding
site or (c) the full-length  promoter upstream
of a luciferase reporter gene. Error bars indicate standard deviation
( = 3; -value < 0.0005; paired -test). Ligand-dependent gene activation from the  promoter by RXE-TFs. (a) (Left) Location (red circles) of the TALE
binding sites within the  promoter region, and
(right) the sequence composition of each target site. 5′ thymidine
nucleotides highlighted red. (b and c) Fold activation of luciferase
expression after co-transfection of RXE-TF expression plasmids with
luciferase reporter plasmids containing (b) four direct repeats of
the  TF binding site or (c) the full-length  promoter upstream of a luciferase reporter gene. Error
bars indicate standard deviation ( = 3; -value < 0.0005; paired -test). Regulation of endogenous
ICAM-1 expression by RXE-TFs. (a) Location
(red circles) of the TALE-binding sites within the  promoter region, and (right) the sequence composition of each target
site. (b) Percentage of HeLa cells that showed an increase in ICAM-1
expression by flow cytometry after transfection with RXE-TFs targeting
the endogenous ICAM-1 promoter. Data was normalized to mock-transfected
cells. Error bars indicate standard deviation ( =
3; -value < 0.002; paired -test). Supporting Information Table S1 TALE arrays were constructed as
previously described using the Golden
Gate TALE assembly protocol described by Cermak et al. Synthesized TALE arrays were released by SfiI
digestion and ligated into the same restriction sites of the previously
described expression vectors pcD-ER-E2C-VP64, pcD-PR-E2C-VP64, pcD-RXE-E2C-VP64, and pcD-E2C-VP64 to generate pcD-ER-Avr15-VP64, pcD-PR-Avr15-VP64, pcD-RXE-Avr15-VP64,
pcD-RXE-ICAM-1–1, , 3...8-VP64, pcD-ICAM-1–1,2,3...8-VP64,
pcD-RXE-Oct-4–1,2,3...7-VP64, and pcD-Oct-4–1,2,3...7-VP64.
Correct assembly of each TALE construct was verified by sequence analysis
(). Supporting Information Table S2 To generate luciferase reporter plasmids, a fragment of the  gene was PCR amplified with the primers 5′
TALE-Luc-AvrXa15, 5′ TALE-Luc-ICAM-1 1,2,3...8, or 5′
TALE-Luc-Oct-4 1,2,3...7 and 3′ Luc-Rev. PCR products were
digested with XhoI and SphI and ligated into the same restriction
sites of pGL3-Basic (Promega) to generate pGL3-ICAM-1 1,2,3...8 and
pGL3-Oct-4 1,2,3...7. The  promoter was PCR
amplified from genomic DNA isolated from HEK293 cells with the primers
5′ Oct-4-Prm and 3′ Oct-4-Rev. The PCR product was digested
with SacI and dIII and ligated into pGL3 Basic
to generate pGL3-Oct-4. The pGL3-ICAM-1 reporter plasmid has been
previously described. Correct construction
of each plasmid was verified by sequence analysis. All primer sequences
are provided in . HEK293T cells (American Type Culture
Collection; ATCC) were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s
Medium (DMEM) containing 10% (v/v) Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 1%
(v/v) Antibiotic-Antimycotic (Gibco). Cells were seeded onto 96-well
plates at a density of 4 × 10 cells per well and
established in a humidified 5% CO atmosphere at 37 °C.
At 24 h after seeding, cells were transfected with 200 ng (total)
of TALE-TF expression vectors (individual or combinations), 5 ng of
pGL3 reporter plasmid, and 1 ng of pRL-CMV (Promega) using Lipofectamine
2000 (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
At 24 h after transfection, cells were incubated with 50 nM to 50
μM PonA (Life Technologies), 10 nM RU486 (Enzo Life Sciences),
or 100 nM 4-OHT (Sigma-Aldrich). At 24 h after induction, cells were
lysed with Passive Lysis Buffer (Promega), and luciferase expression
was determined with the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega)
using a Veritas Microplate Luminometer (Turner Biosystems). Data are
expressed as fold-activation, which was calculated as the average
luciferase activity of triplicate samples normalized to the luciferase
activity of cells transfected with pGL3 reporter plasmid and an empty
expression vector.  luciferase expression
from pRL-CMV was used to normalize for transfection efficiency and
cell number. HeLa cells (ATCC)
were maintained in
DMEM containing 10% FBS and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic. Cells were
seeded onto 24-well plates at a density of 1 × 10 cells per well and established in a humidified 5% CO atmosphere at 37 °C. At 24 h after seeding, cells were transfected
with 800 ng (total) of TALE-TF (individual or combinations) expression
vectors using Lipofectamine 2000, according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. At 24 h after transfection, cells were incubated with
10 μM PonA. At 48 h after induction, cells were harvested and
incubated on ice for 30 to 60 min with PE-conjugated mouse anti-human
CD54 (BD Biosciences). Cells were washed and resuspended with PBS/1%
FBS, and cell-surface expression of ICAM-1 was measured by flow cytometry
(FACScan Dual Laser Cytometer; BD Biosciences; FACSDiva software).
For each sample, 10 000 live events were collected, and data
were analyzed using FlowJo (Tree Star, Inc.). Relative ICAM-1 induction
is expressed as the increase in the percentage of PE-positive cells
in comparison to mock-transfected cells..