Biological
systems have been
classically explored by perturbing their genetic components and then
determining the phenotypic consequences. These perturbations are typically
achieved either through DNA mutagenesis, including random and targeted
gene disruption  various techniques, or by RNA
interference. However, such alterations are
typically either irreversible or incomplete. This limits the characterization
of pathways with toxic or conditionally lethal outputs. Generic
molecular tools that regulate protein stability synthetically
at a post-translational level, and in a reversible fashion, are vital
for the detailed understanding of conditional functions. To this end, various methods have been developed
that directly control target protein levels inside living cells. These include protein degron systems induced by auxin, light, or
destabilizing domains (DDs). Here, we mainly focus on the DD-based degron system. The DD strategy involves genetically fusing the protein of interest
to a small unstable protein domain. This DD-fusion protein is recognized
by the cellular protein quality control machinery, which will then
degrade the whole fusion protein. However, in the presence of a DD-specific
small molecule drug, the DD assumes a folded state and becomes stable,
allowing the target protein to carry out its normal biochemical function. This methodology therefore allows the possibility
to study both loss- and gain-of-function phenotypes of any protein
of interest (POI) from a single POI-DD genetic construct. Recently, two orthogonal streamlined versions
of these DD methods
were developed that control target protein levels in a rapid, reversible
and tunable fashion. The first engineered DD is based
on a human FK506-rapamycin-binding protein (FKBP) with 107-amino acid
residues. Point mutations in FKBP (F36V and L106P) confer instability
to fusion partners, which can be rescued by the cell-permeable high
affinity small molecule, Shield-1 (Shld-1). The second orthogonal DD is engineered from an  dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) protein with 159-amino
acid residues. Similarly, a few key mutations confer instability to
DHFR, which can be rescued by the highly permeable small molecule
drug, Trimethoprim (TMP). These systems
have been demonstrated to function in a variety of contexts, including
mammalian cell cultures, live mice, viral infections, and in pathogens
like  and . However, both FKBP and DHFR DDs display high background levels in
the absence of any drug. This basal level of
expression is often sufficient for the target fusion protein to carry
out its normal biochemical function and thereby precludes the observation
of any loss-of-function phenotype. The double
architecture for these DDs has recently been shown to minimize the
background expression levels, but a systematic exploration
should further expand the uses of this powerful methodology. In this study, we establish the background levels of the original
FKBP and DHFR DDs by developing an accurate quantification method.
Further, by systematically testing double architectures for these
original DDs, we show a reduction in the background levels to a very
low level compared to the original DDs, in the absence of any drug.
We demonstrate the applicability of the least-background double architecture
by developing a drug-stabilizable Gal4 expression system for . We show the functioning of the new
drug-inducible Gal4 system in the format of the widely used Gal4-UAS
bipartite expression system . Finally, we
demonstrate the tightness of the regulation provided by the least
background architecture, by regulating the expression of a highly
toxic cell death-inducing transgene . This
proof-of-concept application demonstrates the broader applicability
of the double architecture constructs. A Ratiometric
Quantification Method for DD Characterization The original
FKBP and DHFR DD studies compared the destabilization
effects relative to the uninduced conditions. This approach basically omits the background levels as it baselines
the destabilization effects by rescaling to the uninduced condition,
and further normalizes the resulting data to the induced condition.
Hence, we needed an alternative quantification method to directly
compare the different DD-fusion constructs in terms of  and . To this end, we repurposed a
commonly used method for expressing multiple genes under the same
promoter regulation in eukaryotes. This
method involves the coexpression of two different fluorescent proteins,
mCherry and enhanced Green Fluorescent Protein (eGFP), under the same
constitutive  promoter, making use of the
highly efficient self-cleaving 2A peptide sequence from  virus (). This design ensures the ratiometric expression
of both upstream  and downstream . We fuse the individual DDs to eGFP
and use the mCherry as a reference to measure the amount of fusion
protein synthesized (a). By first normalizing the eGFP fluorescence intensity to
mCherry intensity, this eliminates any cell-to-cell variability resulting
from plasmid vector dosage due to transient transfection, or inherent
stochastic gene expression. Finally, normalizing the resulting ratiometric
score to a wild-type control eGFP (without DD), allows straightforward comparisons of DD-tagged fusion
protein abundance at a percentage level. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf To quantify the destabilizing effects of the original DDs,
we have
cloned the individual DDs in frame with a C-terminal eGFP (DHFR-eGFP
and FKBP-eGFP) (see ). Since fusing
DDs to the N-terminus is known to exert a stronger destabilizing effect
compared to C-terminal fusions, we therefore chose the former configuration
for quantifying the original DDs. We
transiently transfected these constructs into  S2R+ cells, and measured the resulting fluorescence intensities
from mCherry and eGFP proteins after 3 days, by flow cytometry. The
DHFR-eGFP showed ∼18% background in the absence of TMP, but
could only be stabilized to ∼28% of the wild-type control eGFP
without DD, upon induction with TMP (b). By contrast, for the FKBP-eGFP fusion,
the background level was found to be higher at ∼38% without
a drug, while the Shld-1 drug stabilized the level fully (b). As expected,
the wild-type control eGFP without DD, remained 100% in both the absence
and the presence of TMP and Shld-1 drug molecules (b). This suggests that the
organic solvents used to dissolve the drug molecules, and the drugs
themselves have no effect on the control eGFP fluorescence intensity,
indicating of no apparent off-target effects (). Further titrations with various
concentrations of the drug molecules showed that the DD-fusion protein
levels can be tuned to a desired range using appropriate concentrations
of the drugs, albeit to a low fold-induction (c). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf To further validate the fluorescence-based
ratiometric quantification
method by an orthogonal method, we directly quantified the protein
abundance levels of mCherry and eGFP or FKBP-eGFP, in the absence
and presence of the stabilizing drug, by performing a Western blot
(). This quantification
method also involved the same data processing steps as the fluorescence-based
quantification method, but instead utilized the protein band intensities
quantified by an immunoblot (see ).
Interestingly, this quantification method is consistent with the fluorescence-based
quantification (). In particular, no significant difference (-value
= 0.4) in the background levels are observed between the two orthogonal
methods, in the absence of drug. Moreover, in the presence of drug,
both methods confirm the level of abundance of FKBP-eGFP back to that
of wild-type levels, which is within the measurement error. This confirms
that the differences observed among the different DD-fusion constructs
in the fluorescence based ratiometric quantification method are indeed
reliable. Since the fluorescence-based quantification method involves
the high-throughput collection of single-cell data by a flow cytometry,
we chose this method for the subsequent quantification of the DD constructs. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf The high background levels observed for DHFR-eGFP (∼18%)
and FKBP-eGFP (∼38%) DD constructs could be due to transient
transfection: the multiple copies of the DD constructs in individual
cells, resulting from transient transfection, would result in more
mRNA and this might ultimately produce more fusion protein, that could
overload the proteasome machinery. To test this,
we created stable  S2R+ cell
lines of DD constructs by utilizing the coexpressed Puromycin selection
marker (see  and a). We measured the fluorescence intensities
of mCherry and eGFP proteins after 3 days of the drug treatment in
the stable lines, using flow cytometry (). Both in the absence and the presence of drug molecules,
the DHFR- and FKBP-DD constructs displayed low background and low
stabilization levels. However, this resulted in almost exactly the
same level of inducibility to that of the transient transfection-based
quantification. Based on this, we chose to characterize subsequent
constructs in transient state. The background levels observed
for DHFR-eGFP (∼18%) and
FKBP-eGFP (∼38%) are rather high in  S2R+ cells. Given that these systems have been widely used in the
several organisms and cell types, they may have been performing better than in our observations. This
suggests that there may be differential degradation of the unfolded
protein by the ubiquitin–proteasome system in different organisms. To test this, we subcloned the DHFR-eGFP and
FKBP-eGFP constructs into a mammalian expression vector (see ). We further quantified the resulting constructs
in human embryonic kidney 293T cell line (HEK293T). Interestingly,
we observed only ∼0.9% and ∼10% background levels for
DHFR-eGFP and FKBP-eGFP, respectively (d). This is a large reduction in the background
levels for these constructs in HEK293T  S2R+
cells. However, in the presence of their respective drug molecules,
DHFR-eGFP could only be partially stabilized (∼8% of the wild-type
abundance), while FKBP-eGFP stabilized to the wild-type level of abundance.
As a result, these original DDs show 9- and 11-fold inducibility in
mammalian cells (d). However, qualitatively, their properties remain the same as in  S2R+ cells: DHFR-DD displays low background
in the absence of a drug, while FKBP-DD reaches the wild-type level
of abundance (d). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf To further assess the accuracy of ratiometric quantification
method,
we compared it to a simpler relative normalization by omitting the
mCherry fluorescence signal, on the data obtained for the DHFR-eGFP
and FKBP-eGFP constructs in  S2R+
cells (b) and
mammalian HEK293T cells (d). This revealed a ∼13- and ∼26-fold
induction in  S2R+ cells (), whereas there was
a ∼79 and ∼153-fold induction in mammalian HEK293T cells
(). This suggests
that simple relative normalization overestimates the fold-induction
by omitting the actual background levels. Furthermore, there is an
increase in the variability of eGFP fluorescence observed particularly
for the uninduced condition (). This can be attributed to the noise resulting from the
plasmid vector dosage of the transient transfection or inherent stochastic
gene expression, which could not be filtered-out due to the omission
of the reference mCherry fluorescence intensity. Overall, the quantification
revealed that the DHFR-DD displays lower background levels than the
FKBP-DD in an uninduced state. However, the FKBP-DD could be stabilized
fully upon induction with a drug, whereas the DHFR-DD could not. Notably,
the ratiometric quantification method allows a highly reproducible
comparison between DD constructs. Quantitative assessment
of the background levels and inducibility
of drug-controllable destabilizing domains (DDs) engineered from bacterial
DHFR and human FKBP proteins, by flow cytometry. (a) Overview of the
quantification method developed to quantify the DD fusion proteins.
The gene construct shows a multigene operon constitutively transcribing
one mRNA. After translation, three independent proteins (mCherry,
DD-eGFP and Puromycin selection marker) are derived from the self-cleaving
2A peptide (T2A). The DD-eGFPs are intrinsically unfolded and are
hence degraded; they are only stabilized by adding a small molecule
drug (blue diamond) that is specific to each DD. Hence, GFP fluorescence
increases relative to the mCherry control upon induction with a drug.
(b)  S2R+ cells with transient expression
of these constructs were treated with and without their respective
inducer drugs, and the mCherry and eGFP fluorescence was measured
by flow cytometry. The histogram shows the normalized mean eGFP fluorescence
in the mock-treatments with DMSO or Ethanol (−) and the presence
(+) of 10 μM drug (TMP for DHFR; Shld-1 for FKBP). Control eGFP
without DD: DMSO and Ethanol and 10 μM TMP and Shld-1. The fold-induction
and statistical significance resulting from a  test
are summarized with multiple asterisk marks representing the level
of significance (**** = -value ≤ 0.0001 and
n.s. = -value > 0.05). (c) Titration curve of
DHFR-eGFP
and FKBP-eGFP with various concentrations of TMP and Shld-1 drugs,
respectively. Triangles and filled circles are experimental results,
whereas the green line is a fitted Hill function. (d) Same as in (b)
but for the human embryonic kidneys cell line (HEK293T). The error
bars represent the standard deviation over the mean across the  biological replicates (b and d,  = 5
and c,  = 3). , the maximum
s.d. observed for DHFR-eGFP is ±0.38%, hence most error bars
are invisible in (c). A Double DD Architecture
Reduces the Background Levels and Improves
the Fold-Induction http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf An ideal DD should have 0% background
level in the absence of a drug, and should be stabilized back to 100%
upon induction with the drug. Each of the two original DDs possesses
one good property that is close to an ideal DD: DHFR displays a low
background levels, while FKBP can be stabilized back to 100% with
the drug (b
and d). We therefore reasoned that creating
chimeric DDs by combining the individual DDs might capture their best
qualities. Consequently, we fused the gene coding for the DHFR and
FKBP in frame to the N-terminus of eGFP to create a chimeric DD architecture,
DHFR-FKBP-eGFP. This architecture resulted in a relatively stable
fusion protein, which showed a high background of ∼29% in the
absence of both drug molecules. Moreover, this could only be stabilized
back to ∼38%, resulting in a rather poor inducibility of 1.3-fold
(). However, the
introduction of a single zinc finger domain as a structured linker
(zfln; 33-amino acid residues) in between the DHFR- and FKBP-DD, reduced
the background level from ∼29% to ∼18% (). This is same as the
background level of the parent DHFR-DD (b), thus demonstrating the acquisition of
desired property from the parent DHFR-DD. However, this chimeric architecture
could only be stabilized back to ∼39% upon induction with both
drug molecules. This percentage of stabilization is higher than the
parent DHFR-DD (28%, b), but does not reach anywhere near the 100% of the other
parent FKBP-DD. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf Because of the promising results with the structured
linker separating the DDs, we next fused the gene coding for the FKBP-DD
to the C-terminus of the DHFR-eGFP construct, to make a DHFR-eGFP-FKBP
chimeric DD architecture. The quantitative assessment of this design
revealed a much lower background level of ∼10% in the absence
of drugs, while stabilization with both TMP and Shld-1 could be achieved
up to ∼42% (a). In the absence of drugs, the chimera degraded ∼2-
and ∼4-times more efficiently than the parent DHFR- and FKBP-DD,
respectively, hence drastically reducing the background levels (a). Additionally,
the stability of DHFR-eGFP-FKBP was increased by a factor of ∼2,
when compared to the parent DHFR-DD. Overall, this increased the inducibility
range to a factor of ∼4-fold, which is an improvement on the
parent DDs. In the presence of just one drug, DHFR-eGFP-FKBP could
only be partially stabilized to ∼21% (). The maximum stabilization was achieved (∼42%)
only in the presence of both TMP and Shld-1 drug molecules, demonstrating
the specificity of the two orthogonally acting drugs (). Since the DHFR-DD has a higher propensity to degrade than
FKBP-DD,
this might account for the incomplete stabilization of the DHFR-eGFP-FKBP
chimeric DD. We therefore made a double DD architecture, FKBP-eGFP-FKBP.
Indeed, the quantitative assessment revealed a strong degradation
without drug (∼18% background level), and a full stabilization
was achieved with Shld-1. This design also degraded ∼2-times
more efficiently than the parent FKBP-DD, in the absence of the drug,
hence also reducing the background level (a). Overall, this resulted in a ∼7-fold
inducibility, hence widening the tunability (a and b). Although the DHFR-eGFP-FKBP
and FKBP-eGFP-FKBP DD architectures
degraded much better than the parent DDs in the absence of drug, there
was still considerable background levels (10–18% background
expression). This could be attributed to the lower propensity of FKBP-DD
to degrade in the absence of a drug, compared with DHFR-DD. We therefore
made a double DHFR-DD architecture, DHFR-eGFP-DHFR. This variant revealed
a very strong degradation in the absence of drug (∼1% background
level), and was stabilized back to 16% in the presence of TMP. Since
this design degrades ∼17-times more efficiently in the absence
of drug than the parent DHFR-DD, it was the lowest background DD system
tested up to that point (a). However, with TMP, this architecture was stabilized
∼2-fold less than the parent DHFR-DD. Nevertheless, this resulted
overall in a ∼15-fold inducibility, making it the most tunable
DD architecture (a and b). Recently, new DHFR-DD variants were engineered that
are described
as performing better in organisms that grow optimally at room temperature. We therefore further quantified the background
levels and inducibility of these DHFR-DD variants. Our quantitation
revealed that the DHFR-DD variant 07 (DHFR07) displayed a high background
level of ∼13% (a). Despite this, TMP could stabilize the level back to ∼51%,
which is higher than DHFR and results in a ∼4-fold induction.
By contrast the other construct, DHFR-DD variant 22 (DHFR22), displayed
only ∼3% background expression, which is the lowest background
among the parent DDs. Upon induction with TMP, this variant could
be stabilized back to ∼37%, resulting in an overall induction
of ∼11-fold, which is the highest among the parent DDs (a). Since these new DDs appeared promising,
we systematically created
the double architectures for DHFR07, DHFR22 and FKBP DDs. We quantified
the resulting constructs for their background levels and inducibility
(b). As before,
there were trade-offs between background and induction levels, resulting
in fold-inductions between ∼5- and ∼30-fold. Most interestingly,
the double architecture DHFR22-eGFP-DHFR22 displayed as low as ∼0.5%
background, making it the least background DD architecture described
so far. Upon induction with TMP, the level could be stabilized back
to ∼12%, which is lower than the parent DHFR22-DD (37%), but
still results in a ∼25-fold induction. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf In both single
and double architectures, the DD sequences occur
immediately downstream and upstream of the self-cleaving T2A peptide
sequence, respectively. Since the cleavage of polypeptides occurs
during translation, DD sequences might influence the processing efficiency
of T2A sequences to produce independent polypeptides. To verify this,
we performed a Western blot analysis on both single and double DD
architecture constructs (). This confirms the correct processing of the T2A sequences. We finally chose the least-background DHFR22 variant to explore
further the single and double DD architectures . Because for classes of proteins that function at extremely low
levels such as transcriptional activators, it is preferable to have low background levels, rather than the
maximum possible stability, in order to completely suppress the function
in an uninduced state. Quantitative assessment
of the background levels and inducibility
of the double architectures derived from the parent DHFR- and FKBP-DD
in  S2R+ cells. (a) Histogram showing the
normalized mean eGFP fluorescence in mock-treatments with DMSO and/or
Ethanol (−) and the presence (+) of 5 μM Shld-1 and/or
5 or 10 μM TMP drug inducer molecules. The horizontal lines
indicate the mean eGFP fluorescence of parent DHFR (dot) and FKBP
(hyphen) DDs in the absence of drug. (b) Titration curve for chimeric
DDs with TMP and/or Shld-1. Other labels are as for . Quantitative assessment
of the background levels and inducibility
of DHFR-DD variants in  S2R+ cells that
are optimized for room temperature. (a)
Histogram showing the normalized mean eGFP fluorescence for the DHFR-DD
variants 07 and 22 in mock-treatments with DMSO (−) and the
presence (+) of 100 μM TMP. (b) Histogram showing the normalized
mean eGFP fluorescence for the double architectures derived from the
parent DHFR-DD variants 07 and 22, and with FKBP-DD. The horizontal
lines indicate the mean eGFP fluorescence of parent DHFR-22 (dot)
and DHFR-07 (hyphen) DDs in the absence of drug. The error bars represent
the standard deviation over the mean across the 5 biological replicates.
Other labels are as for . The Least-Background
DD Architecture Tightly Regulates a Lethal
Phenotype in One of the most
challenging applications of the least-background DD architecture is
to apply it to signal-amplifying transcriptional activators. These proteins often function at extremely low
levels to initiate the transcription of target genes. The Gal4 transcriptional activator regulates transgene
expression under upstream activating sequence (UAS) promoter, which
is a widely used expression system in . Despite much progress with the existing Gal4-UAS system, there is
still a need to improve its functionality, especially to temporarily
express genes that result in lethality upon constitutive expression. This is challenging because of the issue of “leakiness”:
even low background expression cannot be tolerated due to the lethal
phenotype. We sought to compare the background levels of the
original and double architecture DDs . Hence,
we constructed both DHFR22-Gal4 () and DHFR22-Gal4-DHFR22
() architectures, by fusing the  in frame with the transcriptional activator  (a). To facilitate
the easy monitoring of the drug-induced phenotype, we spatially restricted
the expression of these constructs to the  eye. This was achieved by placing the expression of the constructs
under the control of the glass multiple reporter () eye-specific enhancer (a). We created transgenic flies from these two constructs,
by inserting them into the same genomic locus, to minimize the host
chromatin context influence on their expression. To test the inducibility of the DHFR22-DD architectures , we genetically crossed the driver transgenic fly
lines to a reporter line that encodes  under
the  promoter. Feeding the  adult flies on standard fly food, supplemented with various
concentrations of TMP, resulted in the induction of  reporter expression. The level of eGFP fluorescence observed in
the  eye increased with the amount of TMP
in the food (b and c). However, the mock-treated population from the original
DHFR22-DD architecture () showed no significant
difference in the level of eGFP fluorescence compared to the double
() architecture. This population in turn did
not show a significant difference in eGFP expression when compared
with that of the negative control population (b and c, Curly of Oster, ). The latter negative control population encodes dominant Curly
wings phenotype  marker instead of the 1xDHFR
or 2xDHFR driver transgenes. As expected, this negative control population
further showed no significant difference in eGFP expression among
the various TMP drug conditions. The observation that there was no
significant eGFP fluorescence difference between the mock-treated  and a negative control population indicates
that the fluorescent microscopy used to quantify the eGFP fluorescence
intensity is not able to differentiate the weak background eGFP signal
from that of the cellular autofluorescence. Because of this reason, we could not assess the background levels
at this stage (but see below). Overall, the induction experiment demonstrated
that the DHFR-DD-Gal4 system is functional in a whole animal. To further assess the background levels of both the original and
double DHFR22-DD architectures, we applied the driver lines in regulating
a lethal phenotype, induced by the expression of a pro-apoptotic gene.
For this, we chose head involution defective gene, , which executes a cell death pathway in . The  larvae from  and  crosses
with - line, were exposed
to mock- and drug-treated conditions to test for background and drug-induced
expression of  in the eye. This resulted in the
expected phenotype of structural defects in the eye in a drug-dependent
manner ().
However, the original single DHFR22-DD architecture (1xDHFR) showed
a mild phenotype even in the absence of TMP. The mild phenotype observed
in  genotype progenies shows complete
penetrance (b). Also, in the  data, the original architecture
displayed a higher undegraded background level compare to the double
architecture (). This can be attributed to the background expression of 1xDHFR22
that could activate the transcription of  even
in the absence of TMP. This is the main limitation of single DDs.
By contrast, the double DHFR22-DD architecture (2xDHFR) had a normal
wild-type eye phenotype in the absence of TMP (). Particularly, we observed no progenies
with the 2 genotype that displayed
eye defects in absence of TMP (b). This suggests that 2xDHFR is completely silent
in the absence of TMP. In the presence of 1.5 mM TMP,
we observed complete loss of eye
in both single and double architecture DHFR22 constructs. However,
we observed no or very few emergent adult flies with the  genotype, in proportion to the  genotype
(expected 50% each according to Mendelian inheritance principles,
given the crosses between heterozygote  driver line and homozygote  reporter
line). These progenies show a normal development until the pupal stage,
but no or very few adult flies emerge from the pupal case. This is
indicative of the lethality associated with higher expression of . This result is consistent with the constitutively active
Gal4 driver line. The  larvae from  (Gal4 without DHFR22) and - crosses also show a complete penetrance of lethality
(data not shown). However, in the case of  genotype flies, we do rarely observe the eclosion of a few adult
flies from the pupal case (b, high error bar). This could be due to the low exposure
of these larvae to TMP. The larvae that are in the later stage of
the third instar stop feeding and climb away from their food for pupariation.
Such larvae eventually eat less TMP compared to the first and second
instar larvae, and hence appear to have sublethal levels of  expression. This manages to rescue the lethality associated
with high expression of . These larvae show complete
loss of eyes upon maturation in to adult stage. On the other hand,
flies with  genotype did not show
any lethality in the 1.5 mM TMP condition. This suggests that the
expression level of  achieved with the 2xDHFR22
construct in 1.5 mM TMP is below the lethal level. Importantly, this
is sufficient to induce eye defects in adult flies (a). However, with TMP, we observed
that on average 84% of progenies with the 2 genotype displayed the eye defects phenotype (b). This is because the larvae that are in
the later stage of the third instar stop feeding and climb away from
their food for pupariation immediately upon inoculation of the fly
food with TMP. This effect may be tuned to attain 100% by excluding
the third instar larvae during inoculation. Moreover, a negative control
encoding a  dominant marker showed a wild-type
phenotype both in mock- and drug-treated conditions, suggesting that
the TMP drug has no apparent off-target effects. Taken together, the  data also support the improvement of the double
DHFR22-DD architecture over the original in regulating a developmental
lethal phenotype. 1xDHFR22;UAS-eGFP, 2xDHFR22;UAS-eGFP The drug-stabilizable Gal4 variants 1xDHFR22 and 2xDHFR22 function  in the format of the widely used Gal4- bipartite expression system for . (a)
Schematic representation of the constructs used to create drug-inducible
Gal4 driver lines.  encodes the single DHFR-DD
architecture with the DHFR variant 22, as a fusion to the  transcription factor.
A nuclear localization signal (NLS) is added N-terminally and expression
is driven by the eye-specific enhancer, glass multiple reporter (). Similarly,  encodes the double
architecture of DHFR22-DD. (b) A population of  progenies from  and  genetic crosses with  reporter line was
allowed to feed on standard fly food supplemented with DMSO (mock-treatment)
or various concentrations of TMP for 5-days. A negative control population
was derived from the Curly wings phenotype resulting from a dominant  marker from the heterozygote 1xDHFR or 2xDHFR driver
line. Samples of the population were imaged by fluorescence microscopy.
Representative images of adult fly eyes display an increase in eGFP
fluorescence intensity as a function of the inducer TMP. The upper,
middle and lower panels display, respectively,  progenies with genotypes  and . Scale bar: 1 mm. (c) Quantification
of eGFP fluorescence intensity in the  adult
eyes either mock-treated with DMSO or with various concentrations
of TMP. Data are presented as the mean fluorescence detected per eye.
The statistical significance resulting from a one-way ANOVA and Tukey’s
post hoc test is summarized with asterisk marks representing the level
of significance (n.s.= -value > 0.05, * = -value ≤ 0.05, *** = -value ≤
0. 001, and **** = -value ≤ 0.0001) on the
indicated data set. The error bars represent the standard deviation
over the mean across the biological replicates ( = 8–76 individual eyes per dose). A drug-stabilizable Gal4 driver with double DHFR22-DD
architecture
regulates  cell death gene expression tightly
without any observable background. Genetic crosses were set up between
a Gal4-driven reporter line ( encoding a
pro-apoptotic gene  under the UAS enhancer) and
drug-inducible  variants:  and  under a GMR enhancer. The resulting  population of third instar larvae were allowed
to feed on standard fly food supplemented with DMSO (mock-treatment)
or 1.5 mM of TMP. Eyes from emerged adult flies were imaged by bright-field
microscopy. A negative control population was derived from the Curly
wings phenotype resulting from a dominant  marker
from the heterozygote 1xDHFR or 2xDHFR driver line. (a) Representative
images showing structural defects in the adult eyes are displayed.
Scale bar: 30 μm. (b) Quantification of the structural defects
observed in the  adult eyes. The statistical
significance of  tests are summarized with multiple
asterisk marks representing the level of significance (n.s. = -value > 0.05, and **** = -value ≤
0.0001), on each indicated data set. The error bars represent the
standard deviation over the mean across the five independent experiments
( = 2–48 flies). N.B. several conditions
produced consistent results across the individual experiments (, zero s.d. and hence no error bars are displayed). In this study, we have
developed an accurate quantification method
to compare different DD constructs more directly, and found that the
original DHFR-DD displays less background, whereas the FKBP-DD can
be stabilized fully. We took advantage of these properties to make
double architectures that drastically reduce background levels, albeit
with some trade-off with respect to the maximal levels of stabilization
achieved with drug. Nonetheless, the double architectures are suitable
for applications requiring extremely low background levels over the
maximum stability trait. We demonstrated
the possible use of the least-background DD architecture
by constructing a new drug-inducible transgene expression system for
the widely used model organism, . By implementing a drug-inducible control of a cell death gene,
we demonstrated the advantage of the double architecture in tight
regulation of transgene expression. This new drug-inducible Gal4-UAS
expression system offers the potential for tighter spatial and temporal
control of transgene expression. For example, here we used an eye-specific
enhancer to drive expression of the DD-Gal4, but this can be easily
adapted to generate further tissue-specific driver lines, to allow
for wider spatial–temporal control of UAS-transgenes. The regulation of a transcription factor
activity in a drug-dependent
manner provides a direct ability to control genetic program of a cell
at the time of one’s choosing. A plethora of well-characterized
transcription factors is known, but small-molecule regulation is still
not widely used. Our study demonstrates the use of DD elements to
build these kinds of useful tools. Thus, the low-background DD architectures
developed here should be generally applicable. Furthermore, the drug-mediated
creation of tunable and reversible protein aggregates using DDs serves
as a good model system to understand protein aggregation associated
pathologies. Low background DD architectures
could help in discovering the fundamental cellular mechanisms involved
in unfolded protein clearance and unfolded protein response mounted
cellular stress. These could also be
used to explore the differential degradation of unfolded proteins
by the ubiquitin–proteasome system in different organisms. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00302/suppl_file/sb7b00302_si_001.pdf The low background expression that is achieved by the double architecture
can be attributed to the specific configuration of the individual
DDs in the architectures. The low background effect is clearly not
resulting from a simple dosage effect of the multiple DD copies. For
instance, the chimeric DD architectures DHFR-FKBP-eGFP and DHFR-eGFP-FKBP
show different background expression and inducibility ( and , respectively), indicating
that the configuration of the individual DDs in the architectures
matters. Furthermore, the concatenation architecture resulting from
two or three copies of FKBP-DD in a row at the N- and/or C-terminus
of the protein also showed no significant improvement over the single
and double copy architecture. Taken together, these
observations indicate that there may exist a context-dependent recognition
of the unfolded protein domains in a protein, by the cell degradation
system. In other words, given the differences in the degradation abilities
of the fusion proteins with multiple unfolded domains, either in the
N- or C-termini, or in both the N- and C-termini, this indicates independent
mechanisms of recognition or degradation. In conclusion, these improved DD architectures
should further widen
the broad range of applications that currently rely on the control
of protein function with small-molecules and may also reopen the studies that have been previously
hindered by the high-background levels of the parent DDs. The DHFR- and FKBP12-based destabilization
domains used in this study were originally developed by the Wandless
lab. The following
DD variants were used in this study: DHFR (Addgene plasmid #29325),
DHFR07 (#47080), DHFR22 (#47076) and FKBP (#31763). Corresponding
DNA sequences were fused either 5′ or 3′ of the  gene by overlap PCR extension and were cloned into
the pAc5-STABLE2-puro multicistronic
vector, using XbaI and dIII restriction enzymes,
and were verified by sequencing. The selected constructs were further
cloned into the mammalian expression vector pTargeT by TA cloning,
for measuring in human cell lines. To create constructs for
use in , first a basic vector backbone
was constructed by cloning the overlap PCR product from glass multiple
reporter,  basal promoter, and simian virus
40  sequences, with appropriate restriction
sites, into the pCR4-TOPO vector (Invitrogen). The cloned cassette
in this vector was flanked by short 40 base pairs (bps)  recombinase sites, allowing site specific
integration into the genome  ΦC31 recombinase
mediated cassette exchange. The  DNA
sequence was fused either to
5′ or 3′ of the  gene by overlap
PCR extension, and was further fused to mCherry sequence, in frame,  the self-cleaving peptide sequence T2A, derived from . The full-length
PCR products were cloned into the basic vector backbone using AgeI
and HindIII restriction enzymes. Cell Culture, Transfection
and Antibiotic Treatment S2R+
cells were obtained from the  Genome Resource
Center (DGRC). Cells were cultured in  Schneider’s
medium (Gibco), supplemented with 10% of fetal bovine serum (FBS),
1% of penicillin/streptomycin, at room temperature, in a humidified
chamber. The human embryonic kidney 293T cell line (HEK293T) was obtained
from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), and was cultured in
DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% of penicillin/streptomycin
at 37 °C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO. Transfections were performed using Effectene reagent (Qiagen), following
the manufacturer’s instructions, using 0.1 μg of DNA
with a DNA:Enhancer ratio of 1:8 and DNA:Effectene ratio of 1:10.
50 μL of the transfection complexes were added to each well
in a 96-well plate seeded with 1 × 10 (S2R+) cells
or 1 × 10 (HEK293T) in 100 μL of medium. All
transfections were performed in triplicates to quintuplicates. For stable cell line creation, transfections were performed in  S2R+ cells using 0.4 μg of DNA with the
same DNA:Enhancer and DNA:Effectene ratio, in a 6-well plate seeded
with 4 × 10 cells. At 72 h post-transfection, the
cells were selected in 10 μg/mL puromycin for a further 11 days. Drug Treatment and Flow Cytometry Cell cultures were
titrated with various concentrations of the appropriate orthogonal
drugs. 1.5 μL of different concentrations of 100× concentrated
drug solution (TMP in Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and/or Shld-1 in absolute
Ethanol) was added to the wells to achieve the final concentration.
For cultures without any drug, corresponding volumes of solvents (DMSO
and/or Ethanol) were added. The plates were incubated for 72 h before
harvesting for measuring the fluorescence by flow cytometry: fluorescence
measurements were performed on a BD LSRFortessa cell analyzer flow
cytometer. The eGFP fluorescence was measured using a 488 nm excitation
laser and a 515–545 nm emission filter, while mCherry fluorescence
used 561 nm excitation and 600–620 nm emission. A minimum of
10 000 cells was measured from each sample. From these single-cell
fluorescence intensities, we further computed the mean fluorescence
intensity per cell representing the population average for both mCherry
and eGFP separately using the FlowJo software (Treestar, Inc., San
Carlos, CA). The mean eGFP fluorescence values were normalized to
mCherry fluorescence intensities after subtracting for autofluorescence
derived from mock-transfected cells. The resulting ratiometric scores
were further converted to %, based on the ratiometric score of the
control eGFP, without DDs or drug, but with the respective solvents
of the drugs. Western Blot and Quantitative Analysis S2R+ cells were harvested
in 1x Laemmli sample buffer 72 h post-transfection.
The lysates were resolved on a AnykD Criterion TGX Stain-Free protein
gel (BioRad). The separated protein bands were subsequently transferred
onto a Nitrocellulose membrane using an iBlot gel transfer device
(Invitrogen). The FLAG-tagged mCherry and eGFP were detected using
the primary antibodies anti-FLAG (F3165; Sigma), anti-α-Tubulin
(T5168; Sigma) and anti-eGFP (Roche), respectively, at a 1:5000 dilution,
and a peroxidase-conjugated sheep antimouse secondary antibody (Jackson
ImmunoResearch) at a 1:50 000 dilution. Signals were detected
using SuperSignal West Pico PLUS chemiluminescent substrate (Thermo
Scientific) and a LAS-3000 imaging system (Fujifilm). The mean
protein band intensity values were extracted using freely available
Fiji software. The eGFP intensity values
were normalized to mCherry protein band intensities after subtracting
background. The resulting ratiometric scores were further converted
to %, based on the resulting ratiometric score of the control eGFP
(without DDs or drug, but with Ethanol). For experiments
involving TMP treatment, standard fly food was mixed with different
concentrations of 100× concentrated TMP, after liquefying the
food in the microwave. Fluorescence experiments were performed using
1 to 5 day-old adult progenies, obtained from the genetic crosses
between heterozygote  and  driver lines with a homozygote - reporter line. After 5 days in the food vials with various concentrations
of TMP, fly heads were imaged for fluorescence. For experiments involving
eye structural defects, larvae (from heterozygote  and  with homozygote - reporter line crosses) were inoculated into
food vials with DMSO or 1.5 mM TMP. Larvae were incubated in these
vials until the eclosion of adult flies. Emerged adult fly eyes were
imaged. Imaging and Quantitative Analysis All the microscopy
images were acquired using either Leica MZ16 F or Zeiss Axio Zoom
V16 fluorescence stereo microscope, mounted with a DFC300 FX or Axiocam
506 mono digital cameras, respectively. For representative eGFP fluorescence
images, background intensities were subtracted and false colored,
further linearly adjusted for levels using freely available Fiji software. Images were finally assembled using Adobe Illustrator
version CS6. From all the acquired eGFP fluorescence images,
quantitative fluorescence intensities were extracted as follows: The
region of interest was drawn around the fly eye and the mean fluorescence
intensity of a pixel in this region was calculated for each eye. The
background intensities were subtracted, by calculating mean pixel
intensities from the areas around the  head
object, and plotted on a graph, by calculating the mean over all the
data for each condition..