Optical dimerizers
represent
an emerging class of tools that allow control of cellular processes
with light. These tools are similar in concept to well-established
chemical dimerizer reagents, in that they provide a means to inducibly
control protein–protein interactions, but use light rather
than a small molecule for activation. As light can be delivered immediately
with subcellular resolution, such tools allow exquisite spatial, temporal,
and dose-dependent control of biological events. The basis of these
tools is an interaction between two proteins or domains where one
of the interacting partners is a photosensory protein or domain that
interconverts between two states upon light excitation. The second
protein or domain binds to the first in only one of the two states.
If photostimulation is not maintained, all photosensory proteins naturally
revert to their ground states over time (which varies from seconds
to hours depending on the system), and thus, the binding interactions
are naturally, and in some cases inducibly, reversible. At present,
several optical dimerization systems have been described
based on different light-sensing domains of plants: phytochromes,
cryptochromes, LOV domains, and UVR8. Two different systems based on  phytochrome
B have been developed: phyB/PIF3 and phyB/PIF6. In darkness or under far-red illumination (∼730
nm), phyB exists in a Pr (red-light-absorbing) state that is unable
to bind PIF family proteins, while absorption of red light shifts
phytochrome into a Pfr far-red-light absorbing state that allows binding.
The phyB/PIF3 system has been used to control transcription and intein splicing in yeast, but to date, it has not been successful
for controlling interactions in mammalian cells, while the phyB/PIF6
dimerizers have been used to control protein localization and activity
in mammalian cells and yeast. Naturally occurring blue-light-regulated dimerizers include those
based on cryptochromes ( CRY2/CIB1) and LOV domains ( FKF/GIGANTEA). Dimerizers sensitive
to UV light have also been developed, based on an  UVR8-UVR8 interaction or UVR8/COP1. While the above systems are based on natural plant protein interactions,
engineered systems include one derived from the fluorescent protein
Dronpa and several LOV-based systems,
TULIPs, LOV-ipa, and LOV-SsrA. Although different
optical dimerizer systems can be used for similar
purposes, they each have specific properties that may be advantageous
for certain applications. Although some of the dimerization systems
have been characterized in similar assays, there has been no systematic
side-by-side comparison and it can be difficult for users to compare
the different properties of each system. In this work, we set out
to benchmark the properties of four different optical dimerizer systems,
PhyB/PIF6, PhyB/PIF3, CRY2/CIB, and TULIPs, side-by-side in the same
assay, allowing quantitative evaluation of the light responses of
each system. To compare the properties of the four systems, we used
a yeast transcriptional assay. We further examined the blue light
regulated systems, CRY2/CIB and TULIPs, for ability to regulate a
yeast MAPK signaling pathway. Importantly, we demonstrate successful
use of the CRY2-CIB technology for membrane recruitment using a membrane-bound
CRY2 protein. This approach will allow more precise local control
of intracellular processes, as compared with prior approaches in which
CRY2 was cytosolic. Finally, we also describe an improved system for
regulating transcription with blue light in yeast using CRY2/CIB dimerizers. Analysis of Optical Dimerizers Using a Yeast
Transcriptional
System We used a split Gal4-based yeast two-hybrid assay
to compare the ability of cryptochrome (CRY2/CIB), phytochrome (phyB/PIF3 and phyB/PIF6), and
LOV domain (TULIPs) based dimerizer systems
to regulate transcription with light (Figure ). In this assay, the dimerizers bring together split halves of a
transcription factor (separated into a binding domain, BD, and an
activation domain, AD), leading to light-dependent induction of transcription
of a ß-galactosidase reporter (Figure a). As was previously reported, GalBD-CRY2
and GalAD-CIB1 yielded low levels of background in the dark but robust
activation with light application, while a truncated CRY2PHR domain
(residues 1–498 of CRY2) gave higher light-stimulated activity,
but with significantly increased background in the dark (Figure b). Supporting
Information Figure S1 We examined the LOV-based TULIP system in the same assay,
using
identical vectors and light conditions. TULIPs consist of an  LOV2-Jα-helix domain with a peptide tag
at the C-terminus of the Jα-helix (LOVpep), which binds upon
light excitation to a engineered erbin PDZ (ePDZ) domain. We tested LOVpep and two additional variants:
a mutant (“3x-A”; T406A/T407A/I532A) that increases
Jα-helix docking to LOV2, and a V416I variant that maintains
the lit state for an extended time (/–370 s). Each of
these was tested for interaction with a high affinity ePDZ domain,
ePDZb1. We first generated GalBD-LOVpep
and GalAD-ePDZb1 fusions, but yeast expressing GalAD-ePDZb1 showed
severe toxicity phenotypes (very poor growth and deformed cells).
During cloning, we identified a spontaneous frameshift mutant, exPDZb1,
that extended the amino acid sequence beyond the ePDZb1 stop codon
and suppressed the severe toxicity, but yeast expressing exPDZb1 in
the GalAD vector still showed slow growth (). Use of exPDZb1 in the lower-expressing
GalBD vector (“GalBD-exPDZb1”) allowed normal yeast
growth, and we used this configuration for all studies. While toxicity
was not observed with the original TULIP system in either yeast or
mammalian cells, the ePDZ constructs in
that study also contained a C-terminal extension (containing a multiple
cloning site linker), which extended the amino acid sequence beyond
the PDZ domain. Supporting
Information Figure S2a Supporting Information
Figure S2a Supporting Information
Figure S2b Figure c shows interaction
between wild-type
or long-lived (V416I) LOVpep with exPDZb1. While we did not observe
a substantial difference between LOVpep ( ∼ 30 s) or V416I LOVpep ( ∼ 370 s) when frequent pulses of light (every 12 s) were
applied (Figure c), with less frequent light
pulses we observed a reduction in light-dependent reporter activation
with wild-type compared with V416I (). The (“3xA”) mutant showed
poor light-dependent induction () and was not further characterized. We observed
background reporter activity in the dark that was also seen when GalBD-exPDZb1
was coexpressed with an empty vector control, and thus, it was not
presumed to be due to dark state binding (Figure c). Indeed, when we switched the BD and AD fusion partners
(generating GalBD-LOVpep and GalAD-exPDZb1) the reporter activation
in the dark was eliminated (). We next examined the interaction between  phyB and PIF3 or PIF6 (Figure d–f).
Previously, a N-terminal fragment of phyB (phyBNT, residues 1–621)
and PIF3 were used for light-inducible control of transcription in
yeast, while phyB908 (residues 1–908)
and the APB domain of PIF6 (PIF6APB, residues 1–100) were used
to regulate protein localization and function in mammalian cells. Light sensitivity of phyB requires binding to
a chromophore, phytochromobilin, or phycocyanobilin (PCB), that is
not present in yeast or mammalian cells; thus, cells were supplemented
with 10 μM PCB. As previously demonstrated, we
observed strong light-dependent induction of reporter activity using
phyBNT-GalBD and full length PIF3 (GalAD-PIF3), with essentially no
background activity in the dark (Figure e).
Substitution of full length PIF3 with the APB domain (PIF3APB, residues
1–100), or substitution of phyBNT with a longer construct,
phyB(908) (amino acids 1–908 of phyB) (Figure f) greatly reduced activity, suggesting these interactions
have reduced affinity. The PhyB(1-908)/PIF6APB combination used to
regulate activity and localization in mammalian cells also showed reduced levels of activity compared with phyBNT/PIF3
(Figure f). With both forms of phyB, use of
PIF3APB resulted in higher levels of reporter activity than PIF6APB
despite lower expression, suggesting that substitution of PIF3APB
for PIF6APB as a dimerizer module in mammalian cells could be preferable.
In all cases, interaction was dependent on red light and reversed
by far-red illumination. Our preliminary studies suggested that
dim broad-spectrum light
did not excite CRY2 and TULIP sample preparations but could stimulate
phyB. To quantitatively evaluate light sensitivity of each dimerizer
system, we tested different room illumination conditions (Figure ). In addition to testing dim ambient light (equivalent
to a dark closet with a door ajar, 590 μW/cm), we
also tested exposure to bright room light (samples placed directly
underneath a broad-spectrum fluorescent light source, 5120 μW/cm), to evaluate whether easily available fluorescent light
sources could substitute for wavelength-specific LED lights that we
typically use. Both the CRY2 and LOV
systems could be stimulated to the same degree by bright fluorescent
room light as by wavelength-specific LEDs and were relatively insensitive
to dim ambient light (Figure a). In constrast,
room light did not activate phyB nearly as well as a red LED array,
likely due to the presence of far-red light in the broad-spectrum
fluorescent bulbs. PhyB was exquisitely sensitive to even dim light,
which induced reporter activity to nearly the same amount as with
bright room light (Figure a). To determine
safe light conditions that would not activate phyB, we tested different
levels of fluorescent or wavelength-specific LED light for stimulation
of the PhyBNT/PIF3 interaction (Figure b).
Even very dim room light that would not be sufficient for performing
experimental manipulations (100 μW/cm) was sufficient
to significantly activate phytochrome, while a dim blue LED (180 μW/cm) did not stimulate reporter induction. Supporting
Information Figure S3 We carried out a more detailed assessment of cross-reactivity
of
the different systems to different lighting conditions and also assessed
crossreactivity with mismatched components (). We tested CRY2 and TULIP (exPDZb1)
baits for growth under red light and also for crossreactivity with
PIF components. Each bait showed specific interaction under blue light
with its counterpart bait, with no interaction under red light and
no crossreactivity with other AD-fused preys. We did not test the
phyB bait for stimulation by bright blue light, but note that any
blue light stimulated phyB could be reverted by subsequent application
of far-red light. Comparison of optical dimerizer systems for control of
DNA transcription.
Yeast expressing Gal4BD-X and Gal4AD-Y fusions (where X and Y represent
the light-interacting proteins) were tested by yeast two-hybrid with
a a ß-galactosidase reporter (schematic shown in part a) after
a 4 h incubation under different light conditions (D, dark; R, red
light, 60 s pulse every 30 min, 2.8 mW/cm, 660 nm; FR,
far-red light, 60 s pulse immediately after each red light exposure,
6.9 mW/cm, 730 nm; B, blue light, 700 ms pulse every 12
s for TULIPS and 1 s pulse every 3 min for CRY2/CIB, 5.8 mW/cm, 461 nm). EV indicates empty vector (Gal4BD or Gal4AD as
indicated) control. Shown are constructs used and ß-galactosidase
reporter activity of yeast expressing (b) Gal4BD-CRY2 (FL or PHR)
and GalAD-CIB1, (c) BD-ePDZb1 and AD-LOVpep (unmodified (“wt”)
or V416I), (e) PhyBNT-GalBD and full length PIF3 (PIF3FL), the APB
domain of PIF3 (aa 1–100, PIF3APB), or the APB domain of PIF6
(aa 1–100, PIF6APB). (f) PhyB(1-908)-GalBD (PhyB908) and PIF
versions as in part e. Inset: Immunoblot analysis of GalAD and GalBD
fusion proteins expressed in yeast. Schematics for constructs used
in phytochrome experiments are shown in part d. Light sensitivity of
optical dimerizer systems. (a) Response of
light-activated transcriptional systems to ambient or bright room
light. Yeast expressing indicated GalBD (X-BD or BD-X) or GalAD (AD-Y)
fusions were incubated under indicated room light for 4 h and assayed
for ß-galactosidase reporter activity. (b) Sensitivity of PhyB-PIF3
system to different room light conditions. Yeast expressing PhyBNT-GalBD
and GalAD-PIF3 were incubated for 4 h in the dark (‘D’)
or in the presence of fluorescent room light or blue light (‘B’,
461 nm) at indicated light intensities. Generation of an Optimized Blue Light Regulated
Transcription
System To develop a more robust blue light regulated transcriptional
system comparable with the phyB/PIF3 system, we optimized the CRY2/CIB
transcription system. We fused CRY2 to the LexA DNA binding domain
(LexA-CRY2) and CIB1 to a stronger VP16 activation domain (VP16-CIB1)
and examined activity of a LexA(8xop)-lacZ reporter, pSH18-34 (Figure ). While background activity in the dark was minimal,
reporter activity was stimulated ∼100-fold with blue light
application (Figure b). This construct shows
the largest fold transcriptional activation in a blue-light stimulated
system for yeast to date and should be useful for precise control
of protein expression levels in any yeast strain and without the requirement
for exogenous ligand. Optimized blue light transcriptional system. (a) Schematic
showing
indicated constructs used for the yeast transcriptional system. (b)
ß-galactosidase reporter activity of AH109 yeast expressing LexA-CRY2,
VP16-CIB1, and a pSH18-34 reporter plasmid after 3 h incubation in
blue light or dark. Light-Inducible Activation
of a MAP Kinase Pathway The results from the transcriptional
assays showed similar responses
for TULIPs and CRY2/CIB dimerizer systems. We further examined these
blue light regulated systems by comparing light induction in a completely
different application, the yeast mating response MAP kinase pathway.
The yeast MAP kinase pathway involved in mating response is a stereotypical
G-protein coupled receptor signaling pathway that is initiated by
ligand (α-factor) binding to a seven-transmembrane receptor
coupled to a G-protein, Gpa1. Gpa1 activation results in recruitment
of a scaffold protein, Ste5, to the plasma membrane, initiating a
MAP kinase phosphorylation cascade leading to transcriptional changes
and cell cycle arrest. Prior studies have demonstrated that simply
recruiting Ste5 to the plasma membrane is sufficient to bypass the
requirement for GPCR activation, resulting in MAP kinase pathway activation
in the absence of α-factor stimulation. Supporting Information Figure S4 Supporting Information Figure S4 Previously, the TULIP dimerization system was used to induce
translocation of the MAP kinase scaffold Ste5 to the plasma membrane,
resulting in tight light control of the mating response in haploid
yeast. In that work, the photoactivatable
LOVpep was tethered to GFP, and targeted to the plasma membrane via
fusion to the single-pass transmembrane protein Mid2, or to a version
of Mid2 consisting of only the signal sequence and transmembrane helix,
Mid2(SS/TM). Using a similar approach, we fused CRY2-GFP or CRY2PHR-GFP
to full length Mid2 or Mid2(SS/TM) (Figure a). We coexpressed the CRY2-Mid2 fusion constructs with CIB1-Ste5
or CIBN-Ste5 and assessed activation of the pathway using a P-DsRed reporter. We found that CIBN-Ste5 was incapable
of fully activating the pathway, as were CRY2 constructs tethered
to the truncated Mid2 protein, which had been functional with the
TULIP system (). The highest lit-state activation and greatest fold activation
were obtained using CRY2PHR fused to full-length Mid2 and CIB1-Ste5
( and Figure b,c). Surprisingly, use of CRY2PHR resulted in lower
background (dark activity) than full length CRY2, a result that is
in contrast with the transcriptional results in Figure b, in which use of CRY2PHR resulted in much higher background
activity. We directly compared the CRY2PHR/CIB1
combination with the corresponding
TULIP constructs, as well as with α-factor mediated pathway
activation (Figure b,c). Both CRY2/CIB and
TULIPs showed higher dark-state pathway activation than control cells,
although the dark-state activity was substantially lower for CRY2/CIB
than for TULIPs. With both systems, the lit-state activation was essentially
identical to α-factor-treated control cells. As seen in the
transcriptional activation assays, CRY2/CIB and TULIPs have a comparable
photoswitching dynamic range, although both systems require considerable
context-dependent adjustment to avoid high dark-state background (always
on) or low-lit state activation (always off). Comparison of CRY2/CIB and TULIP systems for activating a yeast
map kinase pathway. (a) Schematic of dimerizer constructs. (b) Graph
reporting DsRed fluorescence of cell populations expressing a P-DsRed reporter gene and Mid2-GFP-CRY2PHR and CIB1-Ste5Δ(CRY2/CIB), Mid2-GFP-LOVpep and ePDZb1-Ste5Δ(TULIPs), control cells bearing only the reporter gene
(control), or control cells stimulated with α-factor (control
+ α-factor). Samples containing dimerizers were either stimulated
with light (solid lines) or left in the dark (dashed lines) for 5
h. (c) Images of yeast expressing CRY2/CIB or TULIP constructs as
in part b. Here,
we directly compared the properties
of four optical dimerization systems, CRY2/CIB, TULIPs, phyB/PIF3,
and phyB/PIF6. We find the phyB/PIF3 system shows significant advantages
over the CRY2/CIB, TULIPs, and phyB/PIF6 systems for yeast transcriptional
control, with higher fold levels of activation, extremely low background,
and far-red reversible control. This system also shows exquisite light
sensitivity, and care must be taken when working with these constructs
to avoid ambient light exposure. Surprisingly, we found the phyB/PIF6
system, which has worked well for control of protein localization
in mammalian and yeast cells, to show much poorer ability to activate transcription in yeast compared
with the robust phyB/PIF3 system. While the phyB/PIF3 system is superior
for regulation of yeast transcription, a limitation is the requirement
for exogenous chromophore, although notably a biosynthetic pathway
for generating this chromophore has been reconstituted for mammalian
cells, providing a major advance for users of phytochrome. The two blue light regulated systems,
CRY2/CIB and TULIPs, showed similar levels of activity, light sensitivity,
and fold activation in the yeast transcriptional assay. We further
compared these two systems for ability to stimulate MAP kinase pathway
activation through plasma membrane recruitment of the scaffold protein
Ste5. Both systems activated the MAP kinase pathway to a similar extent
with light treatment. In dark, activity in both cases was minimal,
although we found the CRY2/CIB system showed slightly lower background
than TULIPs. In deciding between the two systems, the CRY2/CIB system
may be preferable if background activity is a concern. On the other
hand, the TULIP fusion tags are much smaller than CRY2/CIB, and thus
may be preferable for use with proteins that do not tolerate large
fusions. A final caution with use of TULIPs, when working with these
constructs for regulation of yeast transcription, we observed some
constructs showing significant toxicity (growth defects and misshapen
cells) that had not been observed in prior studies. Addition of C-terminal extensions to the sequences, as
occurred with a spontaneous mutation, alleviated toxicity. The prior-described
TULIP constructs also contained C-terminal
extensions, which may explain why no toxicity was observed in these
studies. Alternatively, differences in localization may be a factor:
the proteins in this study were localized to the nucleus, compared
to the cytosol in prior experiments. We used the CRY2/CIB dimerizers to develop a more robust light-activated
transcriptional system for yeast. This system shows low background,
high fold-activation with light, and can be utilized in any yeast
strain to drive expression under LexA operator control. We expect
this system may be orthogonal to the phyB/PIF3 system, allowing the
possibility for multiplex control with red and blue light. In developing
this work, we also demonstrate successful placement of a membrane-tethered
CRY2 that retains ability to interact with a cytosolic CIB1. In the
original report of light-inducible dimerization using CRY2/CIB, attempts
were made to tether CRY2 to the plasma membrane via fusion to a prenylated
EGFP, but CRY2 was unable to interact with CIB in this configuration. A tethered CRY2 that can be locally photoactivated
will be useful for focal activation of signaling molecules at the
plasma membrane or other subcellular sites. Another notable
outcome of this study is the observation that the
behavior of these constructs in different applications is quite context-dependent.
When we compared use of full-length CRY2 with truncated CRY2PHR for
activation of the MAP kinase pathway, we found CRY2PHR to result in
significantly reduced background activity. In contrast, we observed
the opposite results with the transcriptional studies. Domain configuration,
biological context, and construction details appear to have profound
and unpredictable effects on photoswitching. Thus, users interested
in conferring optical control to specific targets are advised to test
not only different optical dimerizer systems but also different configurations
(i.e., N- vs C-terminal fusions), different truncations, and different
linker lengths, as these may be important for optimal activity. The past few years have led to a flurry of publications of new
optical dimerizer systems, and additional protein modules and improved
systems are steadily being added to the optical dimerizer toolset.
We envision the assays described here may be useful for benchmarking
these new systems as they become available, allowing users to gain
a better understanding of their background, light sensitivity, fold-activation,
and other quantitative parameters. Yeast strains used for two-hybrid
assays were AH109 (MATa, trp1-901, leu2-3, 112, ura3-52, his3-200,
gal4Δ, gal80Δ, LYS2::GAL1-GAL1-HIS3, GAL2-GAL2-ADE2, URA3::MEL1-MEL1-lacZ, MEL1), and Y187 (MATα ura3-52,
his3-200, ade2-101, trp1-901, leu2-3, 112, gal4Δ, gal80Δ,
met-, URA3::GAL1-GAL1-lacZ, MEL1) (Clontech).
The yeast strain used for MAP kinase assays was S288c  PFUS1–DsRedMax::TRP1. For two-hybrid experiments, each photoreceptor
domain was fused to a Gal4 binding domain (Gal4BD) and expressed in
yeast strain AH109 (Clontech). phyBNT-GalBD (containing amino acids
1–621 of phyB fused at the N-terminus of the Gal4 DNA binding
domain) in plasmid D153 and pGAD424-PIF3 were gifts from Peter Quail.
To generate phyB908, D153-phyBNT was digested with Not I and phyBNT
was removed and replaced by phyB(1-908) via homologous recombination,
generating a fusion of phyB908 at the N-terminus of GalBD. LOVpep
variants, ePDZb1, and CRY2 variants used in bait constructs were fused
at the C-terminus of Gal4BD in plasmid pDBTrp via homologous recombination. The exPDZb1 construct contained a
“LGIRRPAAKLIPGEFLMIYDFYY” extension at the C-terminus
of the erbin PDZb1, which came from a spontaneous mutation generated
during homologous recombination in yeast (a frameshift insertion mutation
occurring between the penultimate coding residue and the stop codon)
that extended the coding sequence into the vector. The GalAD-PIF6APB
prey was cloned by homologous recombination into pGADT7rec (Clontech)
cut with I, generating a construct containing
the Gal4 activation domain, a GSSLGSGSGSGSGSSD linker (used in ref ()), followed by residues
1–100 of PIF6. We also generated and tested a GalAD-PIF6APB
construct in pGAD424, where PIF6 was inserted in place of full length
PIF3 at RI and HI sites. This
construct showed similar results as the pGADT7rec PIF6 construct (data
not shown). The GalAD-PIF3APB prey was cloned by homologous recombination
in pGADT7rec, at the C-terminus of the Gal4AD. To generate GalAD-LOVpep
and variants, the LOVpep insert was removed from pDBTrp-LOVpep at RI/HI sites and ligated into pGADT7rec.
GalAD-ePDZb1 was cloned by ligation in pGADT7rec at Nco I and HI sites. exPDZb1 was cut out of pDBTrp at RI/HI sites and cloned by homologous recombination
into pGADT7rec digested with RI and HI. Generation of GalAD-CIB1 and pDBTrp-CRY2 constructs were previously
described. pSH18-34 (Life Technologies),
containing 8xLexA operator sites driving expression of lacZ, was used
as a reporter for the experiment in Figure . For MAP kinase experiments, CIB–Ste5Δand ePDZb1–Ste5Δconstructs under GAL1
promoter control were integrated at the URA3 locus in the S288c derived
line. The Mid2-GFP-CRY and Mid2-GFP-LOVpep constructs under GAL1 promoter
control were integrated at the LEU2 locus. AD and BD plasmids were
transformed into Y187 and AH109 strains, respectively. Yeast were
mated on YPD plates followed by selection of diploids on SD-Trp/-Leu
plates. Yeast were grown overnight in SD-Trp/-Leu medium, followed
by dilution to 0.2 OD in SD-Trp/-Leu medium the next
morning. Following an initial 3 h growth period in the dark, cultures
were either kept in the dark or exposed to a red or blue LED light
source for 4 h. For experiments with phytochrome, 10 μM PCB
was added during the initial dilution to 0.2, as this concentration
was determined sufficient for maximal activation with a 4 h incubation
time. After light treatment, cultures were harvested in log phase
and lysed with Y-PER reagent (Thermo Scientific) and assayed for β-galactosidase
activity using a standard protocol (Clontech Laboratories, protocol
#PT3024-1) using ONPG (Sigma-Aldrich) as a substrate. Miller Units
were calculated based on the following formula: 1000 × OD/( ×  × OD). Experiments were carried
out at least three times with similar results to those shown. LOVpep and PDZb1 were coexpressed
as GalDBD (bait) or GalAD (prey) fusion proteins in AH109 × Y187
yeast. Cells were grown to log phase then diluted to 0.3 OD and optical density was measured at indicated times during incubation
at 30 °C. Cells were lysed
at 4 °C in 2×
Laemmli sample buffer by glass bead lysis. Proteins were separated
by electrophoresis on an SDS-PAGE gel and transferred to nitrocellulose
membranes, followed by probing with Gal4BD (sc-577) or Gal4AD (sc-1663)
antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). S288c  PFUS1–DsRedMax::TRP1
yeast expressing Ste5 and Mid2 fusions were grown overnight in YPD
at 30 °C with shaking, then aliquoted into microtiter plates.
Dark plates were kept in the dark, while light exposed plates were
placed under a benchtop fluorescent light (for flow cytometry experiments)
or exposed to blue LED lights for 5 h with shaking. Cells were centrifuged
and resupended in 1 mL PBS and analyzed by flow cytometry, or mounted
on coverslips and imaged using a confocal microscope..