In addition to intercellular communication mediated by soluble molecules, two cells can transmit signals through membrane-associated receptors and ligands. Adaptive immunity represents such a system, where the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) protein on the surface of antigen-presenting cells (APC) interacts with the T-cell receptor (TCR) on T lymphocytes. If the TCR binds peptide-bound MHC (pMHC) of the right complementarity, then the interaction results in tyrosine phosphorylation of the TCR (herein referred to as TCR “triggering”) and the initiation of signals that activate the T cell. The TCR has no intrinsic kinase activity, unlike many other receptors, and instead relies upon on a T-cell specific kinase called Lck. Also distinct from other systems, the phosphorylatable tyrosine residues of the TCR (the ITAMs) do not reside on the polypeptides that contact the pMHC (α, β) but instead are contained on tightly associated CD3 subunits (γ, δ, ε, ζ). The phosphylated ITAMs then bind a second kinase, ZAP70, which is subsequently activated and drives downstream signalling. Despite considerable work, the mechanism by which pMHC binding leads to TCR triggering remains poorly understood (reviewed in). Some models propose that pMHC binding evokes a conformational change in the TCR that makes its cytoplasmic ITAM domains more accessible to Lck kinase. Alternative triggering hypotheses include activation through the aggregation of TCR molecules, and “kinetic segregation”, where TCR phosphorylation is favoured by its partitioning into plasma membrane domains that contain Lck kinase but are depleted of CD45, an abundant transmembrane phosphatase. However, while TCR clustering and the segregation of CD45 away from the TCR have been observed, it has not been established whether such events are necessary or sufficient for signal transduction across the plasma membrane. In addition, the physical basis of protein segregation within the plasma membrane is unclear. Reconstitution of a biological phenomenon with defined components has proven to be a powerful means for dissecting molecular mechanisms. We have made use of this approach by introducing the genes encoding the TCR and other proteins required for regulating its phosphorylation into a non-immune cell and recapitulating TCR triggering when this cell forms a conjugate with an APC. Since each protein can be introduced separately and genetically engineered, this system has allowed us to test models of TCR triggering and the roles of individual proteins in a manner that is difficult to achieve with native T cells. Reconstitution of regulated TCR triggering We first sought to reconstitute Lck-mediated TCR phosphorylation in a non-immune cell and then determine which factors are needed to keep the TCR quiescent (). As the basis of our reconstitution, we expressed the complete set of protein chains of the 1G4 TCR in the plasma membrane of HEK cells (hereafter, “HEK-1G4”) ( and ). The expressed TCR complex did not show detectable phosphorylation (assayed by a phosphospecific antibody to the CD3ζ chain, an essential TCR subunit required for signalling) unless Lck and ZAP70 were co-expressed (). Lck kinase activity, as detected by measuring levels of activating (Tyr) and inhibitory (Tyr) phosphorylation, appeared to be unaffected by the presence of the TCR or ZAP70 (). However, ZAP70 activity, as measured by increased Tyr phosphorylation, was only detectable in the presence of both Lck and the TCR (), which agrees with previous data that this kinase is inactive until it binds to phosphorylated CD3ζ ITAMs (). We confirmed the activity of ZAP70 by demonstrating phosphorylation of co-expressed LAT, its downstream substrate and critical adapter protein for T cell signalling (). To establish a quiescent system that could be activated by pMHC, we next sought to restrain Lck’s kinase activity. CSK induces an “inactive” conformation of Lck by phosphorylating its C-terminus (Tyr). However, co-expressing CSK and CSK-binding protein (CBP), which localises CSK to the plasma membrane (), was insufficient to repress Lck phosphorylation of CD3ζ (). CD45 is a tyrosine phosphatase that modulates T-cell signalling in a complex manner by dephosphorylating the inhibitory Tyr and activating Tyr of Lck and the ITAM tyrosines of the TCR (). Co-expression of CD45 with Lck severely diminished Lck-induced ZAP70 activation but only modestly inhibited phosphorylation of the CD3ζ chain of the TCR (). However, simultaneous expression of CSK/CBP and CD45 dramatically reduced CD3ζ phosphorylation (). This synergy depended on CBP (), suggesting that membrane recruitment of CSK is required for its potency. Thus, the two major activities known to repress TCR phosphorylation in T cells are sufficient, when combined, to keep the TCR in a quiescent state in this reconstituted cell system. ZAP70 is normally cytosolic but binds to phosphorylated TCR ITAMs. The translocation of ZAP70-GFP from the cytosol to the plasma membrane therefore provides a microscopy-based assay of TCR triggering. Indeed, Lck expression in HEK-1G4 cells caused ZAP70-GFP to accumulate at the plasma membrane (), while co-expression of CSK/CBP and CD45 delocalised ZAP70 to the cytoplasm (). Furthermore, ZAP70-GFP translocated rapidly to the plasma membrane upon CD45 phosphatase inhibition by pervanadate (, ). Thus, this visual assay provides a dynamic readout of TCR triggering. Reconstitution of a T cell-APC conjugate Having identified a minimal set of components that could be expressed in HEK-1G4 cells to mimic the basal or “off” state of their T-cell counterpart, we next attempted to trigger signalling by having the 1G4 TCR interact with its ligand, the MHC class-I complex bound with a short peptide (ESO9V) and expressed in the Raji B-cell line as the antigen presenting cell (“APC”) (; ). Since HEK and Raji B-cells have no intrinsic affinity for each other (), we expressed the immune cell adhesion proteins CD2 and ICAM1 on the HEK-1G4 cells (), which can interact with their respective counter-receptors CD58 and LFA-1 expressed endogenously on Raji cells (). This strongly increased the conjugation between the two cell-types, with the LFA-1/ICAM1 interaction being the predominant driver (). We found that the HEK-1G4 cells formed a cup-shaped contact around the APC expressing antigenic pMHC (), which was strikingly similar to T cell-APC conjugates. pMHC was concentrated at the site of cell-cell interaction (), and importantly, ZAP70 in the HEK-1G4 cells translocated to the plasma membrane in this region revealing that TCR triggering had occurred (; confirmed by immunoblotting in ). Triggering was rapid, and could be observed within one minute of cell contact (). Membrane translocation of ZAP70 did not occur when HEK-1G4 cells were conjugated with Raji cells expressing a control peptide-MHC complex () or in HEK-1G4 cells lacking transfected Lck (, ). We also found that the ITAMs of CD3ζ were sufficient for ligand-specific ZAP70 translocation by using a minimal TCR complex with the intracellular sequences of CD3γ,δ and ε truncated after the transmembrane domain (“TCRζ”, ). Although the APC used in these experiments expressed the cognate pMHC at high levels (~50 pMHC/μm), ZAP70 recruitment was still observable at lower, more physiological levels of antigenic pMHC (~3 pMHC/μm) (). In summary, an APC expressing the appropriate pMHC is able to elicit a specific TCR triggering response from our reconstituted HEK-1G4 cell. Disrupting the actin cytoskeleton severely inhibits T cell activation, but its role in TCR triggering is uncertain. Depolymerisation of actin filaments in HEK-1G4 cells prior to mixing with APCs significantly decreased the number of conjugates (), but cells that did interact still showed ZAP70 recruitment (). This result suggests that the cytoskeleton facilitates the initial cell-cell interactions but is not essential for TCR triggering in this reconstituted cell system. Mechanistic insight into how the TCR was triggered by pMHC came from the observation that CD45 phosphatase was excluded from the cell-cell interface where the TCR was bound to its cognate ligand () while Lck remained included (). Since complete repression of Lck phosphorylation of the TCR required both CD45 and CSK/CBP (), the segregation of CD45 away from the TCR would be predicted to shift the steady state balance towards TCR phosphorylation. Previous studies have also found that the majority of CD45 is excluded from the interface of real T cell-APC conjugates and could be involved in triggering. However, it has been difficult to ascertain whether CD45 exclusion is responsible for, or a consequence of TCR triggering. To show more definitively that CD45 exclusion has a causal role, we redirected phosphatase activity into the cell-cell interface by fusing the intracellular phosphatase domains of CD45 to the extracellular and transmembrane domains of CD2 (termed CD2CD45), since CD2 was localised within the conjugate interface (). The CD2CD45 construct was clearly observed within the conjugate interface (), and ZAP70 was no longer recruited to the conjugate region, indicating that TCR triggering was abolished (). This result shows that CD45 exclusion is required for TCR triggering in our reconstituted cell system. To show that CD45 exclusion and TCR triggering were not dependent on each other, we temporally separated the formation of the signalling zone from TCR triggering by engineering a TCR lacking its ITAMs but instead having an intracellular recruitment domain (FKBP) (TCRFKBP, ). We expected this receptor to localise within the cell-cell interface through its extracellular interaction with pMHC, but unable to recruit ZAP70 in the absence of any signalling motifs. To initiate TCR phosphorylation and ZAP70 recruitment, an FKBP-binding domain (FRB) was fused to the cytoplasmic region of CD3ζ (FRB-CD3ζ), which can be induced to dimerise with TCRFKBP upon addition of the drug rapamycin (). CD45 and pMHC were excluded and concentrated from the conjugate interface, respectively in the absence of rapamycin. However, ZAP70 was recruited to the membrane in the zones of CD45 exclusion only when the separated components of the TCR (TCRFKBP and FRB-CD3ζ) were brought together with rapamycin (). Time lapse imaging showed no discernible delay between the translocation of FRB-CD3ζ to the plasma membrane and the subsequent recruitment of ZAP70 (; ). The mechanism of CD45 segregation We next wished to explore what forces produce CD45 exclusion. Since a control peptide bound to pMHC did not elicit CD45 segregation (), the adhesion pairs (CD2/CD58 and LFA-1/ICAM1) must be incapable of driving exclusion (). We next tested the TCR-pMHC interaction alone, and found that it was sufficient for conjugation () and CD45 segregation (). FRAP and FLIP experiments showed that the TCR remained mobile after pMHC binding and free to escape the conjugated region, showing that the segregated zone was not formed by an immobile aggregate and remained contiguous with the rest of the cell surface (). Thus, the TCR-pMHC interaction is necessary and sufficient for CD45 exclusion, with no requirement for downstream TCR triggering/signalling. Next, we examined how the TCR-pMHC interaction affected the spacing of the two plasma membranes of the interacting cells. Using a subdiffraction-resolution method, we measured the separation between a GFP-tagged TCR in the HEK cells and mCherry-pMHC in the APC (; see ). The measured distance of ~31 nm () suggests a cell-cell separation of ~15 nm, which agrees well with the 13 nm cell-to-cell distance between T cells and conjugated APCs measured by EM. In contrast, the membrane separation for Raji cells expressing control pMHC conjugated through adhesion molecules alone (ICAM-LFA1 or ICAM-LFA1/CD2-CD58) was much greater (). These results show that the TCR-pMHC interaction brings the membranes much closer together than occurs with the adhesion molecules. Proteins with extended extracellular domains (such as CD45) might be prevented from entering regions of close membrane apposition, as suggested by the kinetic segregation model. We tested this hypothesis by fusing the intracellular phosphatase domains of CD45 to an extracellular domain (from CD86) of comparable size to the TCR (termed CD86CD45). CD86CD45 was also excluded from the cell-cell interface, although its exclusion () and TCR triggering () were somewhat lower than seen with the large CD45 construct (). Because of this unanticipated exclusion of a protein with a small extracellular domain, we next tested mCherry fusion proteins of a series of membrane proteins with different properties: CD58, a transmembrane protein with an equivalently-sized extracellular domain to CD86, β-adrenergic receptor (βAR), a seven transmembrane protein with small extracellular loops, and CaaX, a short targeting sequence that confers prenylation and links the fluorophore to the inner leaflet of the bilayer (). CD58 was excluded to a similar level as CD86CD45, showing that the segregation of the latter construct was not due to the intracellular phosphatase domains of CD45 (). βAR, a protein with a large lateral footprint, was also partially excluded (), possibly through a crowding effect arising from the high density of pMHC-TCR in the conjugate region. However, the CaaX prenylated mCherry was evenly distributed throughout the cell membrane, showing no exclusion by TCR-pMHC (). The above experiments cannot explain why CD2 () and CD2CD45 (), whose extracellular domains are similar in size to CD86, were not excluded from the cell-cell contact zone (). We speculated that binding of CD2 to its ligand (CD58) endogenously expressed on the APC provided a counteracting force to constrain CD2 within the conjugate region. If this were true, then expressing CD28, the binding partner for CD86, on the APC should diminish the TCR-pMHC mediated segregation of CD86CD45. Indeed, when CD86CD45-expressing HEK-1G4 cells were conjugated with APCs co-expressing CD28, CD86CD45 now localised at the cell-cell interface and TCR triggering was greatly diminished (). In summary, the TCR-pMHC interaction alone is capable of excluding plasma membrane proteins with extracellular extensions and that exclusion can be overcome by the energy provided by binding to a protein partner on the APC. Triggering of artificial receptors The preceding experiments suggested that TCR triggering results from CD45 segregation, which is driven by the binding interaction between the TCR and pMHC. If this is true, then interactions between extracellular domains of membrane proteins with the proper spacing and affinity might elicit comparable effects to TCR-pMHC, as has been shown in T cells. To explore this idea, we engineered a chemically-controlled, cell surface receptor system consisting of a transmembrane protein with extracellular FKBP and the intracellular CD3ζ domains expressed in the HEK cell (FKBPζ; mimicking the TCR) and a transmembrane protein with an extracellular FRB expressed in the APC (mimicking the pMHC) (). FKBPζ and FRB will only interact in the presence of rapamycin, forming a complex that spans a similar distance to TCR-pMHC. In the absence of rapamycin, conjugates formed (through the LFA1-ICAM1 interaction) but ZAP70 was not recruited to the membrane (). However, with rapamycin, FKBPζ receptor clusters were observed at the cell-cell interface, even with low levels of FRB ligand that are equivalent to physiological densities of antigen pMHC (~5 molecules/μm; ). Furthermore, CD45 was excluded from and ZAP70 was recruited to these receptor clusters, indicating that “triggering” had occurred (). Our artificial receptor is structurally analogous to chimaeric antigen receptors (CARs), which have an extracellular single-chain antibody fragment fused to a transmembrane sequence and cytoplasmic CD3ζ ITAMs. When the CD19-specific CAR, which has shown promise in recent clinical trials as a gene therapy treatment of leukaemia, was expressed in our reconstituted HEK cells and these cells were conjugated with Raji B cells (which are CD19), we observed CAR clustering, ZAP70 recruitment and CD45 exclusion (). This triggering was ligand-specific, since conjugation with CD19 cells did not produce these effects (). Interestingly, the interface of many CD19-CAR HEK cell and CD19-Raji B cell conjugates showed a highly convoluted membrane surface (), which was not seen for cells interacting via either TCR/pMHC or FKBPζ–FRB. This membrane effect could be a product of high affinity antibody binding and might warrant further investigation for its relevance to CAR potency or potential side effects. Our reconstitution experiments reveal a physical mechanism for TCR triggering that differs from dimerization or conformational change models proposed for many cell surface receptors. We find that the binding energy of the TCR-pMHC interaction generates an exclusion force for membranes proteins with large and/or unligated extracellular domains, even in the absence of downstream signalling. By linking an inhibitory phosphatase activity to a transmembrane protein (CD45) that is subject to the exclusion force and an activating kinase (Lck) to the inner leaflet of the membrane that is not, the TCR-pMHC interaction can shift the kinase-phosphatase balance and thus trigger the TCR, as first suggested by the kinetic segregation model. Since the FKBP-rapamycin-FRB or antibody-antigen modules can replace the extracellular TCR-pMHC interaction, conformational changes in the TCR are unlikely to be critical for the fundamental mechanism of triggering. Coreceptors and actin also do not appear to be essential for transducing TCR-pMHC binding across the plasma membrane, although they may very likely be necessary for achieving the high sensitivity and full selectivity of T cell activation. This could be tested in the future by pushing our reconstituted system to respond to very low antigen densities using more sensitive readouts of triggering. The precise mechanism by which the TCR-pMHC interaction results in protein exclusion remains unanswered, although our data provide certain clues. Exclusion according to the kinetic segregation model is based on the greater size of the extracellular domain of CD45 compared to the TCR-pMHC complex. However, while size influences the extent of exclusion, our data reveals that membrane proteins with small extracellular domains are excluded, suggesting that additional forces must be acting on the system. We speculate upon the driving force in the following model, which incorporates previous findings. Within the initial adhesion mediated by LFA-1/ICAM1 between the T cell and APC, transient fluctuations bring the two membranes in closer apposition, allowing TCR and pMHC molecules to interact (). The binding energy of this interaction must be sufficient to overcome unfavourable membrane bending and compression of the large proteins that constitute the glycocalyx, such as CD45, which occur when the two membranes regions are brought close together (). In a critical next step, separate regions of close membrane apposition passively consolidate into larger, contiguous regions, resulting in a net decrease in membrane bending as has been previously suggested. Proteins that do not provide any binding energy will be excluded over time, since as they diffuse from the region, interacting molecules will be further clustered as the area of close apposition is minimised (). These same principles may explain how TCR microdomains initiate when T cells interact with pMHC on a supported lipid bilayer (note the small exclusion zones in our experiments at low ligand densities ( and )). Overall, our data suggests how the binding energy associated with specific molecular recognition events that take place between two interacting cells can be transduced into intracellular biochemical reactions that change cell behaviour. This model provides a plausible mechanism to explain how chimaeric antigen receptors trigger T cells to kill cancerous cells and may apply to other cell types that signal using membrane-bound receptors and ligands. Multiple proteins were expressed in HEK cells using a combination of transient and stable expression by lentiviral transduction; proteins were expressed at close to physiological levels and in the correct localisation as described in the . To create cell conjugates, the two cell types were centrifuged, resuspended at high density, and placed on glass-bottomed dishes for live-cell imaging at 37°C using spinning disc confocal microscopy. Image analysis, including the intermembrane distance algorithm, was performed using ImageJ and Matlab (). Full methods and  accompany this paper. NIHMS376110-supplement-Supplementary_Figures.pdf NIHMS376110-supplement-Supplementary_Methods.pdf NIHMS376110-supplement-Supplementary_Movie_1.avi NIHMS376110-supplement-Supplementary_Movie_2.avi NIHMS376110-supplement-Supplementary_Movie_3.avi NIHMS376110-supplement-Supplementary_Movie_4.avi NIHMS376110-supplement-Supplementary_Movie_5.avi.