Increased
ability to engineer
microbial hosts has led to quick expansion of synthetic biology applications
ranging from therapeutic cells to biological production of fuels,
chemicals, and pharmaceuticals. This ability
has been enabled by the availability of novel genome editing tools,
such as CRISPR-Cas9, by rapid and affordable DNA sequencing and synthesis
services, and by the use of modular and standardized DNA parts that
allow quick assembly and optimization of genetic systems. Such tools
are especially well established for the commonly used model and production
organisms such as . Another widely
used model and production host with a comprehensive collection of
engineering tools is the yeast . However, development of the tools in  lags behind as compared to . Especially
tools for gene expression control need to be developed further. The orthogonality of gene expression systems
is an important feature
to limit or, in the best case, completely avoid the cross-talk between
the engineered gene circuit and the native cellular regulation. The
use of homologous (native) DNA regulatory parts in an expression system
can lead to unintended behavior that is caused, for instance, by changing
growth conditions during extended bioprocesses. This is due to the
often poorly understood, complex native cellular regulation in which
several transcription factors and other regulators are involved and
can influence the performance of the expression system. Adjustability, expression output stability and predictability, the
ability to reach high expression levels, and independence on specific
inducer compounds are also desirable features of gene expression tools.
To address these challenges, a number of recent studies describe development
of orthogonal gene expression tools for . In most cases, the gene expression tools are based on the use of
synthetic transcription factors (sTF) consisting of modular parts,
such as DNA binding proteins, receptor domains, and transcription
activation domains. Modularity of the different parts is a great advantage
as it allows design of sTFs with desired functions and target specificities.
In addition, the existing parts typically originate from evolutionarily
distant organisms, such as bacterial repressor proteins, zinc finger domains, transcription activator-like
effectors (TALEs), or the Cas9 null mutant
(dCas9) protein, which have no homologues in yeast and thus potentially
provide a high degree of orthogonality. The expression level
of a target gene is, to a large extent, dependent
on the (sTF-dependent) promoter strength, which in turn is defined
by the modules used in the expression system. The core promoter as well as the number of sTF binding sites, or their distance from
the core promoter, are the most important and commonly modified parameters
which determine the synthetic promoter strength. In addition, the affinity of the sTF to
its binding sites and the capacity of the activation domain to recruit
transcription machinery can greatly affect the target expression levels.
For example, the use of strong transcription activation domains, such
as VP16 or Gal4, can lead to significantly higher expression levels
compared to weaker activation domains, such as B42. In challenging genetic engineering applications,
cellular hosts may be designed to contain complex genetic circuits
performing intricate biological tasks. The construction of such systems
typically requires simultaneous use of several sTFs each controlling
a specific sub-operation in the circuit. For functional
establishment of such genetic tools, a spectrum of transcription factors
needs to be carefully characterized, especially for the absence of
cross reactivity, and also for functionality in relation to different
core promoters and binding sites used in the target synthetic promoters.
However, many of the systems developed in yeast so far have been based
on the use of a single sTF. At the same time, the orthogonality of
different sTFs and synthetic promoter modules have not been studied
extensively. For example, several synthetic transcription factors
have been successfully used in engineered genetic circuits, and a wide variety of promoters and core promoters is also available. However, a comprehensive characterization and
comparison of different DNA parts, as well as their detailed analysis
once integrated into complex expression systems, is often not available.
In addition, the methods used for the characterization vary greatly.
This represents a significant challenge for the design and establishment
of robust genetic circuits in which precise balancing of expression
levels is required. In this study, we developed and characterized
in depth a set of
orthogonal transcription factors and synthetic promoter parts for
use in complex genetic networks in yeast. The orthogonal transcription
factors were engineered to either upregulate (sTF) or downregulate
gene expression (synthetic repressor, sRep). In addition, a library
of core promoters was tested and characterized. As a result, we established
a novel setup for a bistable switch using the developed DNA parts.
The bistable switch herein has two distinct expression states and
a genetic memory allowing it to retain its programmed status in the
absence of inducer compounds over 80 generations (12 days). The functionality
of the switch was demonstrated by switching between two branches of
the violacein biosynthetic pathway resulting in on-demand formation
of different end-products. To develop a modular toolbox for
gene expression in yeast, a set of sTFs were constructed and expressed
under the  core promoter (cp). We previously showed that cp provides a
low and constitutive expression level. It could thus be well suited even for expression of strong sTFs,
which can have detrimental effects on growth if expressed at high
level. The test platform
for the sTFs was composed of synthetic promoters that control the
expression of the reporter gene Venus (yellow fluorescent protein)
(A). The synthetic
promoters contained eight binding sites for the sTF to be tested followed
by the cp. The sTFs are modular and consist of
a bacterial DNA binding protein, the SV40 nuclear localization signal,
and a C-terminal VP16 activation domain (VP16AD). The DNA-binding
protein modules were selected from the previously characterized bacterial
repressors with a DNA-binding motif. The tested repressors were LexA, SrpR, PhlF, TetR, Bm3R1, TarA, LacI, GalR, Orf2, IscR (NCBI Reference Sequence: NP_252504.1), and BrlR (NCBI Reference Sequence: NP_253565.1), of which SrpR, PhlF, TetR, Bm3R1, TarA, and Orf2 belong to the
TetR repressor family. LacI, LexA, and
TetR are DNA-binding proteins commonly used in synthetic expression
systems in eukaryotic hosts. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf For testing of the system, the
sTF and the reporter genes were
integrated in a single copy in the genome of . The capacity of the sTFs to form a functional expression system
was tested by analyzing the reporter gene Venus fluorescence (A). Six sTFs proved
to be highly functional and able to activate reporter gene expression
at significant levels, Bm3R1-sTF being the strongest activator (B–C). The
other sTFs, based on LacI, GalR, Orf2, IscR, or BlrR DNA-binding proteins
did not activate the reporter gene, or alternatively they caused severe
morphological changes or growth inhibition. These candidates were
not analyzed further. The analysis of the six functional sTFs revealed
a high level of orthogonality. No cross-reactivity was observed with
the binding sites of the other sTFs (B and Supporting Information, ), with the exception of the SrpR binding
site, for which a minor activation was triggered by LexA-, TetR-,
and TarA-sTFs. In case of TarA-binding sites, also a negligible activation
by the SrpR-sTF was detected. Most of these side-activities are likely
due to minor sequence similarities found in the corresponding binding
sites (). Negligible expression
of the reporter was observed in the absence of an sTF (C). In addition, with the exception
of the TarA-sTF, the expression of sTFs did not affect growth (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf To achieve adjustable gene
expression levels, the sTF-dependent
promoters were engineered to contain 0, 1, 2, 4, or 8 sTF binding
sites. A clear increase in the reporter gene expression was observed
in response to increasing number of the sTF binding sites in strains
containing LexA-sTF, SrpR-sTF, PhlF-sTF, or TarA-sTF (C). However, in the case of
Bm3R1-sTF and TetR-sTF, already one or two binding sites resulted
in maximal expression level of these synthetic promoters. As expected,
the expression level of the sTFs itself had a strong influence on
the range of expression level of the reporter gene (). To directly assess the functionality of
the expression system,
transcription level analysis was carried out for strains containing
expression systems with two or eight sTF binding sites (D). With the exception of the
PhlF strains, the relative differences in reporter gene transcription
level corresponded to the Venus fluorescence level. In the PhlF strains,
the Venus reporter transcription level was similar to those in the
TetR and Bm3R1 strains, although the fluorescence signal was similar
to those in the LexA and SrpR strains. Comparison of the transcription
level to strong native genes ( and ) revealed that higher expression level was achieved by the strongest
versions of the engineered promoter systems as exemplified by the
fact that the reporter transcript level significantly exceeded the
levels of  and . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf Characterization
of orthogonal activators. (A) Scheme of the synthetic
expression system for testing of the engineered transcription activators.
Two genome-integrated DNA cassettes provide expression of the synthetic
transcription factor (sTF) and the reporter gene (Venus). The selected
sTFs are expressed from the  core promoter, ensuring
a low and constitutive expression level. The sTF-specific binding
sites (BS) upstream of the  core promoter form
the synthetic promoter for the reporter gene (Venus). (B) Orthogonality
matrix of the sTFs and their binding sites. The specificities and
off-target activities of the sTFs were analyzed in strains carrying
all combinations of the sTF and 8 BS reporter cassette pairs. The
fold activation represents fluorescence ratio between the strain containing
the sTF-BS pair and the corresponding strain lacking the sTF cassette.
The values are calculated from three biological replicates. The corresponding
fluorescence values are listed in . (C) Tuning of gene expression level by different sTFs. The modified
reporter cassettes with sTF-dependent promoters containing varying
numbers (0–8) of the sTF-specific BSs were used. The strain
“8 BS (wo sTF)” represents a negative control strain
lacking the sTF cassette. The values represent the mean of three biological
replicates ± standard deviation (SD). (D) Transcription analysis
of the selected strains (from C) with 2 or 8 BSs in the sTF-dependent
reporter cassette promoters. “P” represents the parental
strain without the sTF and reporter genes. The values represent the
mean of two biological and two technical replicates ± SD. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf The construction of genetic circuits
requires tools that enable adjustable and robust gene expression control.
The sTFs described above enabled tuning of target gene activation.
To achieve tight repression, the DNA binding property of the sTF proteins
were considered for use as repressors. To test this, SrpR, PhlF, TetR,
Bm3R1, and the previously used LacI were fused to SV40 NLS to facilitate nuclear localization
and to generate synthetic repressors (sRep). In addition, the synthetic
promoters were modified by the introduction of sRep-specific binding
sites in the core promoter downstream of the TATA-box. The concept
of the synthetic repression system for testing the repressors is shown
in A. The test
system was constructed as an extension of the LexA-based expression
system with four binding sites (A), where the cp was replaced
with a spectrum of modified core promoters that originate from  (cp, cp, cp),  (cp, cp), and  (cp). A separate sRep expression
cassette was introduced which provided the control of repressor abundance
via the thiamine repressible  promoter. The activity
of p is dependent on thiamine concentration,
allowing the dose-dependent regulation of sRep levels (). A set of yeast strains was constructed
with three expression cassettes
integrated in single copy in their genomes: (1) the LexA-sTF cassette,
expressing sTF under the cp for constitutive
activation of the reporter gene expression; (2) the reporter (Venus)
cassette, where the reporter gene was under the control of an sTF/sRep-dependent
synthetic promoter; and (3) a corresponding sRep expression cassette.
In addition, control strains lacking the sRep cassette were constructed
to assess the performance of the fully activated system. The highest
activation of the reporter gene expression was observed in the presence
of high thiamine concentration (800 μg/L, p repressed) (B,C), where the reporter gene expression was at similar level as
in strains lacking the sRep (C). Lowering the thiamine concentration led to a gradual
activation of the sRep expression, resulting in decreased reporter
levels and eventually full repression of reporter expression in the
absence of thiamine (B,C). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf As expected, the introduction of the sRep binding
site affected
the core promoter functionality. In most cases, the modified core
promoters showed decreased activity as compared to the wild-type versions
(). The results are in line with
previous reports showing that the introduction of repressor binding
sites affect native core promoter elements which are important for
proper transcription initiation. It appears
that already at low level, some sReps show higher capacity to repress
the reporter expression than others. The  promoter,
used for the sRep transcription control, is fully repressed at thiamine
concentration of 800 μg/L, and it is only mildly activated at
400 μg/L (). The Bm3R1-
and TetR-sReps-mediated repression was more sensitive to decreasing
thiamine concentration from 800 to 400 μg/L compared to SrpR-
and PhlF-sReps (C). This could indicate higher affinity of the “stronger”
sReps to their binding sites. This is in line with the results obtained
for the activation function of the sTFs (C), where the Bm3R1- and TetR-based sTFs
triggered higher expression levels of the reporter gene than the SrpR-
and PhlF-based sTFs. Characterization of orthogonal repressors.
(A) Scheme of the synthetic
repressor (sRep) system for testing of the sReps and the corresponding
repressible core promoters. The LexA-sTF functions as a constitutive
activator for the reporter gene (Venus). The production of sReps leads
to repression through binding within the core promoter and blocking
of transcription initiation. The sTF is constitutively expressed from
the cp, whereas the sReps are expressed from
the thiamine repressible  promoter. The sRep
system is encoded by three DNA cassettes each integrated in separate
loci in the genome. (B) Transcription analysis of an example strain
containing the sRep system with Bm3R1-based sRep and cp with two Bm3R1-specific binding sites. Cells were cultivated in
varying thiamine concentrations to adjust the level of the sRep expression.
The values represent the mean of two biological and two technical
replicates ± SD. (C) Reporter (Venus) fluorescence in strains
carrying different sRep systems cultivated in various thiamine concentrations.
“No rep” represents control strains without the sRep-cassette
(cultivated in 400 μg/L thiamine concentration). The values
represent the mean of three biological replicates ± SD. Establishment of a Bistable Switch http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf To test the established
tools in the control of a complex, multilayered, genetic circuit,
a novel type of a bistable switch was designed with a genetically
encoded memory function. The structure of the bistable system is shown
in the A,B
(and its alternative version B in the ). The switch is activated by introduction of a strong temporal signal
that causes activation of downstream genes leading to a stable state
of the circuit, with the simultaneous repression of the genes required
for the opposite state. Upon removal of thiamine, transcription of
the TetR-sTF is triggered, while in the presence of galactose transcription
of the Bm3R-sTF is switched on. In the system, the signals are mediated
by modified versions of Bm3R1- and TetR-sTFs (“Switch cassette”, A,B). In the Bm3R1-sTF,
a shortened version of the Cln2 degradation tag was introduced to the C-terminus of the protein to generate Bm3R1-sTF-Cln2-sh.
In the TetR-sTF, the VP16 activation domain was replaced by the weaker
B42 activation domain (B42AD) to generate TetR-B42. These modifications
were made to eliminate toxicity of highly overexpressed sTFs containing
VP16AD. Addition of the degradation tag decreases the effective abundance
of the Bm3R1-sTF-Cln2-sh protein and also decreases the activity of
the VP16AD (our unpublished observation). The overexpression of sTF
with B42AD does not have a negative impact on the fitness of yeast
cells. The expression of these transcription
factors was controlled by the galactose-inducible  promoter (for Bm3R1-sTF-Cln2-sh) and the thiamine-repressible  (for TetR-B42) promoter (A,B). The choice of these promoters was motivated
by two key features important for the functionality of the bistable
switch; they confer very low or no background transcription in the
repressing conditions and provide very high expression levels when
induced (). At the core of the system is the
“Control cassette”
which allows switching between two mutually exclusive expression states:
TetR state and Bm3R1 state. The cassette has a novel bidirectional
architecture in which two engineered core promoters the cp and the cp, selected based on the repression
assay (C),
were fused together in opposite directions. These core promoters control
the expression of TetR-sTF and Bm3R1-sTF simultaneously. Once the
system is set to the TetR state, the TetR-sTF should activate its
own expression, forming a feed-forward loop (A). At the same time, the TetR-sTF should
act as a repressor for the Bm3R1-sTF through binding at the  core promoter. Once the system is in the opposite,
Bm3R1 state, the expression of the Bm3R1-sTF forms a feed-forward
loop and simultaneous repression of the TetR-sTF (B). An important feature of
the “Control cassette” is the moderate strength of both
core promoters and the high repression capacity of the sTFs. These
features provide mutually exclusive expression of the sTF and the
stability of each state. The output signal of the bistable circuit
was monitored via a “Reporter
cassette” containing expression cassettes for reporter genes
encoding either BFP (blue fluorescent protein) or Venus. In the cassette,
upstream of the repressible core promoters, four binding sites for
TetR-sTF or Bm3R1-sTF have been implemented to control the expression
of Venus (TetR-BSs + cp) and BFP (Bm3R1-BSs
+ cp), respectively (A,B). Thus, in the Reporter cassette, TetR-sTF
activates Venus expression and simultaneously represses BFP expression,
whereas Bm3R1-sTF functions in the opposite manner. In addition, the
bistable switch system contains a “Diagnostic cassette”
which was used to indirectly monitor the expression pattern and level
of the sTFs in response to switch state changes. The Diagnostic cassette
contained the same repressible-core promoter architecture as used
in the Control cassette, but here the presence of the TetR-sTF activates
the expression of KO2 (orange fluorescent protein) gene, whereas the
Bm3R-sTF drives the expression of mCherry (A,B). All four cassettes of the bistable
switch system were integrated
in a single copy to four separate loci in the  genome, and the resulting strain was subjected to a series of tests
to assess the functionality of the engineered genetic circuit. First,
detailed transcription analysis was performed to characterize the
dynamics of the transitions between the states (C). The initial “synchronization”
of the whole cell population into the TetR state was achieved by cultivating
the yeast cells in the absence of thiamine. This triggered strong
upregulation of the TetR-B42 resulting in activation of the TetR state
(i.e., TetR-sTF feed-forward loop and the production of Venus and
KO2 and simultaneous repression of the Bm3R1 state) (C). When thiamine was provided
again (cells transferred into the complete SCD medium), the TetR-B42
transcription was rapidly inactivated. The active TetR-sTF feed-forward
loop, however, retained the circuit in the TetR state and provided
stable expression of Venus and KO2 while simultaneously repressing
the Bm3R1 state. The transition from the TetR into the Bm3R1 state
was triggered by transferring the cells into a galactose-containing
medium. This led to a rapid induction of the Bm3R1-sTF-Cln2-sh expression
from the Switch cassette and inhibition of the TetR-state transcription
activity (C).
There was a several hour delay in the Bm3R1-state activation that
is likely due to the presence of residual TetR-sTF protein and its
association with the binding sites at the cp that is driving the Bm3R1-sTF expression. Once this sTF was degraded
or diluted through cell proliferation, Bm3R1-sTF-Cln2-sh initiated
the Bm3R1 feed-forward loop and the expression of BFP and mCherry.
When galactose was removed (cells transferred into the SCD medium)
and the Bm3R1-sTF-Cln2-sh transcription was inactivated, the Bm3R1-sTF
resumed the control over the circuit. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf The functionality and
robustness of the bistable switch was tested
by extended continuous cultivations and serial transitions between
the states. The cells were initially synchronized (switched) to either
the TetR or Bm3R1 state, and then repeated cycles of switching between
the states were performed over 16 days (D). After each switch, while the cultivation
was continued in non-inducing conditions (SCD), the fluorescent protein
production stabilized and remained stable until the next switch, as
monitored by the fluorometry measurements on the population level
(D). The single-cell
analysis performed by flow cytometry revealed that virtually all cells
in the populations showed the predicted fluorescence pattern in each
state (). The circuit performed
remarkably well, in accordance with the design; importantly, it remained
functional over a long time period. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf The ability of the bistable
switch system to maintain the programmed
state for extended time is an essential feature for any application.
Therefore, we investigated the stability of the circuit in a memory
test. For this, the cells were first synchronized to either the TetR
or Bm3R1 state and then subjected to continuous growth in non-inducing
SCD medium for 12 days (E). In the case of TetR state, the system remained highly
stable for the duration of the whole experiment. The Bm3R1 state showed
also a stable pattern; however, at the late stage of the experiment
(after 10 days) a small increase of Venus and KO2 fluorescence levels,
associated with the TetR state, were detected (E). The fluorescence flow cytometry performed
after 6 days of cultivations in non-inducing medium showed that virtually
all the cells in both populations were in the correct state (). These results show that the developed
gene expression tools provide a predictable and robust performance. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf Performance of the bistable
switch circuit. (A,B) Schemes of the
bistable switch circuit states. The genetic system is encoded by four
DNA cassettes, each integrated in separate loci in the genome. The
circuit operates in two distinct and mutually exclusive states, TetR
and Bm3R1, respectively. Transcriptional activation is indicated by
a filled arrow, the vertical line in front of the arrow indicates
simultaneous repression of the other direction. An open arrow next
to core promoters (CPs) indicates the direction of transcription activation
facilitated by the CP. (A) The TetR state is triggered by the absence
of thiamine (via the p). Expression of TetR-B42
in the switch cassette activates transcription of the TetR-sTF and,
simultaneously, blocks the Bm3R1-sTF expression in the control cassette.
By the action of the TetR-sTF, a feed-forward loop is formed to ensure
stable maintenance of the TetR state, resulting in expression of Venus
in the reporter cassette and KO2 in the diagnostic cassette. At the
same time, TetR-sTF acts as a repressor for Bm3R1-sTF, BFP, and mCherry.
(B) The Bm3R1 state is activated in the presence of galactose (via p), and all the regulatory events in the circuit are
reversed (switched) as compared to the TetR state. The Bm3R1-sTF-Cln2-sh
activates the expression of the Bm3R1-sTF to form another feed-forward
loop triggering a cascade of activations and repressions resulting
in a stable state. (C) Time course transcription analysis of the bistable
switch during the transition between the states. The cells were switched
to the TetR state in the absence of thiamine for 24 h (yellow box)
followed by cultivation in non-inducing SCD medium (white box). Subsequent
switch to the Bm3R1 state was triggered by a 24 h cultivation in the
presence of galactose (gray box), followed by another cultivation
in non-inducing SCD medium (white box). In the heat map, the values
are relative to the maximum transcript level of each gene (in percent).
The value 100% corresponds to the highest measured signal in the time
course. The  transcription was used as a reference
value in the analysis. The shown values are the mean values of two
biological and two technical replicates. The absolute (numerical)
values from this analysis are listed in the . (D) The system was switched several times between the
TetR and Bm3R1 states by cultivating cells for 24 h in the inducing
conditions, in the absence of thiamine (yellow shading) or in the
presence of galactose (gray shading), followed by a 48 h cultivation
in non-inducing conditions (SCD). Each cultivation was refreshed every
day for the duration of the experiment (16 days). The color of the
yeast cells in the scheme represents the main fluorescent protein
expressed in each state, Venus (yellow) or BFP (blue). The fluorescence
values in the graphs represent the mean of four biological replicates
± SD. (E) memory test of the bistable switch. Either the TetR
or the Bm3R1 state was switched on, followed by cultivation in non-inducing
SCD medium for 11 days (culture diluted in fresh medium every day).
The fluorescence values represent the mean of four biological replicates
± SD. Bistable Switch in Control of a Metabolic Pathway The
utility of the bistable switch system was tested in a metabolic pathway-engineering
example. We employed the system as a transcription regulator of the
heterologous violacein pathway in ,
allowing switching between two alternative branches of the pathway.
The pathway consists of five enzymes—VioA, VioB, VioC, VioD,
and VioE—which convert -tryptophan into violacein
via formation of different pigment molecules (A). The first
part of the pathway, consisting of VioA, VioB, and VioE enzymes, leads
to protodeoxyviolaceinic acid (PDVA) formation. This intermediate
can be non-enzymatically converted into a green-colored pigment, prodeoxyviolacein
(PDV). In the next step, VioD enzyme converts PDVA into protoviolaceinic
acid (PVA), followed by the VioC-catalyzed conversion to violaceinic
acid, which is spontaneously transformed into the final product, the
purple-colored violacein (V). PVA can also be converted non-enzymatically
into another green pigment, proviolacein (PV). Expression of
the entire pathway results predominantly in the formation of violacein.
However, the VioC has also a side activity and can convert PDVA into
deoxyviolaceinic acid, which is further spontaneously transformed
into a red-colored pigment, deoxyviolacein (DV). Thus, by altering
the expression of  and  genes
in the presence of constitutively produced VioA, VioB, and VioE enzymes,
it should be possible to generate a yeast strain capable of producing
either red DV or green PV. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_001.xlsx Supplementary sequences and strains http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf To test this, VioA, VioB, and
VioE enzymes were constitutively
expressed in the  strain forming the
VioABE background strain ( and  file). Into
this strain, the bistable switch system was implemented to control
the  and  expression (B). For this purpose,
we used an alternative version of the bistable switch (Version B, ), where the core promoters driving
the expression of target genes (here  and ) did not contain the repression binding sites. This
design provides higher expression levels of the target genes. The
characteristics of the version B switch are shown in detail in the . No Diagnostic cassette was used in
the violacein pathway application. The cells were initially switched
into either TetR or Bm3R1 state, and then transferred and cultivated
in the non-inducing SCD medium (C). In the TetR state, the expression of  gene was maintained by the circuit, and the pathway flux was directed
toward the formation of PV (C and ). In the
Bm3R1 state, the production of red-colored DV was observed through
activation of the  gene, and also a small amount
of violacein (V) was detected (C and ). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_001.xlsx Transcription analysis was performed on samples collected during
the cultivations (). The analysis
confirmed that the bistable circuit maintained the programmed states
in the cells. Especially, the TetR state showed stable expression
profiles of the genes over the course of the experiment. In the Bm3R1
state, however, the transcript level of the  gene
was decreased over time, while there was an increase in the  gene expression. This corresponds to the appearance
of small amounts of violacein (V) in the culture. In conclusion, the
results describe a broad toolbox for precise gene expression control
in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf Bistable switch in the violacein pathway control.
(A) Scheme of
the violacein pathway and the pathway metabolites: PDVA, protodeoxyviolaceinic
acid; PVA, protoviolaceinic acid; PDV, prodeoxyviolacein
(green pigment); DV, deoxyviolacein (red pigment); PV, proviolacein
(green pigment); and V, violacein (violet pigment). Parts of the pathway
controlled by the bistable switch are indicated by green shading (the
TetR-state specific) and pink shading (the Bm3R1-state specific).
(B) Scheme of the genetic circuit controlling the expression of  and  genes. The bistable switch
is based on the version B of the system, where the core promoters
of the control cassette are non-repressible (cp and cp). Detailed characterization of the
version B is shown in . The TetR
state (green arrows) activated by absence of thiamine and maintained
by the TetR-sTF feed-forward loop results in stable expression of . In the absence of VioC enzyme (TetR state), the end-product
of the pathway is green-colored PV. The Bm3R1 state (brown arrows)
activated by the presence of galactose and maintained by the Bm3R1-sTF
feed-forward loop results in stable expression of . In the absence of VioD enzyme, in this state, the VioC activity
leads to formation of the red-colored DV. (C) A schematic presentation
of the experiment and the UPLC analysis of the intracellular pathway
metabolites. The cells were initially switched to either the TetR
or the Bm3R1 state by a 24 h cultivation in inducing conditions, followed
by cultivation in non-inducing SCD medium for 48 h (cultures diluted
in fresh medium every day). UPLC analysis was performed on the metabolites
extracted from cells at the end of each cultivation. The pigment formation
was also visible in cells initially switched to the TetR or the Bm3R1
state and subsequently grown on non-inducing SCD solid medium for
2 days (agar plate sections shown next to the UPLC chromatograms). Engineering
of increasingly complex synthetic gene circuits requires
robust and predictably performing gene expression tools. In this study,
we set out to establish such tools and to demonstrate their utility
in the implementation of synthetic genetic networks in yeast. The
developed toolbox contains a set of orthogonal DNA-binding proteins
that, depending on their design, acted either as activators (sTFs)
or as repressors (sReps). In addition, we engineered and characterized
a library of core promoters, which can be used together with the sTFs
and sReps to create functional genetic devices with predictable performance.
Finally, we took advantage of the characterized toolbox and developed
a novel type of bistable switch as an example for the assembly of
a complex genetic circuit using these tools. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf The sTFs tested
in this study were expressed under the control
of the cp whose basal transcription activity
provides sufficient expression of the sTF. The absence of upstream
regulatory sequences is a key advantage in using only the core promoters
to provide constitutive expression of the sTF. In addition, it is
important to maintain the sTF expression level low as the sTF overexpression
can lead to toxic side effects. Moreover, some core promoters are functional across a wide spectrum
of species. This allows design of broadly applicable expression systems
for different hosts. For instance, cp, cp, and cp from , or cp from , used here for the expression of an sTF () or in the sTF-dependent promoters
(), have been
successfully employed in an expression system for a broad spectrum
of fungal species (Rantasalo et al., manuscript in preparation). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf Not all of the tested bacterial repressors were suitable for use
as the DNA binding (and dimerization) parts of the sTFs. Only 5 out
of 11 candidates were able to trigger reporter gene expression without
any visible negative impact on the fitness of the modified hosts (). Two sTFs were functional in terms
of reporter gene activation, but their use resulted in undesirable
phenotypes: expression of the TarA-based sTF led to a mild growth
retardation (), whereas the GalR-based
sTF caused a severe growth defect associated with a high genetic instability
of the sTF expression cassette (data not shown). This suggests off-target
activation of some endogenous yeast genes by these sTFs with harmful
consequences. The BlrR-based expression system was disqualified due
to an intrinsic activation of the reporter cassette even in the absence
of the sTF, possibly by an endogenous transcription factor (data not
shown). The LacI, Orf2, and IscR did not constitute a functional expression
system, as no reporter fluorescence was detected in the modified hosts
(data not shown). However, among the selected functional sTFs, high,
but not equal, expression level of the reporter gene was observed.
The Bm3R1- and TetR-sTFs conferred the strongest capacity to activate
transcription (C), which could indicate a high affinity of these synthetic TFs to
their binding sites in the target promoters or higher stability of
the sTF proteins in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf One of the
most important features of the engineered gene expression
systems is the possibility to fine-tune expression levels of target
genes. An obvious approach, also applied in other synthetic expression
systems, is modulating
the number of sTF binding sites in the sTF-dependent promoters. We
tested a range from one to eight binding sites in the upstream sequence
of the sTF-dependent promoters (C) and found that expression tuning was possible only
for the weaker activators (LexA-, SrpR-, and PhlF-sTFs), while the
strong activators (TetR- and Bm3R1-sTFs) had a narrow range of expression
level close to the maximum output. This indicates that relatively
high basal transcription activity of the cp,
in combination with high affinity of the strong sTFs, could be responsible
for full activation of the target gene transcription. We attempted
to reduce the expression of the strongest sTF (Bm3R1-sTF) by using
weaker core promoters for its expression to decrease its concentration
and to enhance regulation based on the binding site-number (). This resulted in a broader range
of expression outputs likely due to lower occupancy of the binding
sites in the promoter and consequently a more pronounced effect of
the number of binding sites in transcriptional regulation (especially
in case of the very weak cp). Other important
parameters of an expression system are the maximal
achievable level of transcription and a stable expression pattern
in diverse conditions. The level of transcription provided by the
expression system developed here exceeds the transcription level of
the strongest native genes in  (e.g., , D). In addition, it seems that the level of reporter expression in
the strongest versions of the system, especially the Bm3R1-sTF-based
system, conferred a maximal achievable transcription output of the
fully activated core promoter used in the sTF-dependent promoter (cp). It is known that the core promoter, as part of
a full promoter, has a strong impact on the overall expression level. Therefore, it is likely that the expression
output of the Bm3R1 system could still be increased if a stronger
core promoter is used in the sTF-dependent target gene promoter. The
strong native promoters (such as p, p, p, etc.) are traditionally used for heterologous
gene expression in , and they are usually referred to as constitutive promoters
with stable expression outputs. In fact, the activity of these promoters
is highly dependent on the conditions, conferring the highest activity
in the presence of glucose (fermentative growth) and being strongly
down-regulated during respiratory and stationary growth phases. This could be a disadvantage
in many applications where robust and stable expression is desirable.
The expression system developed here is designed to be constitutive,
as it does not contain any regulatory sequences (such as native upstream
elements in the promoters), which are often subject to conditional
control. This makes these novel tools, especially the Bm3R1-based
version, an attractive candidate for applications in which high and
stable expression levels are needed. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf However, the highest possible
expression of a target gene is not
always the aim in biological engineering tasks. In addition to precise
regulation of transcriptional activation, controlled down-regulation
of expression can also be an essential feature for the development
of genetic circuits. Especially in metabolic engineering, redirecting
metabolic fluxes through temporal and/or targeted repression of selected
native or heterologous genes could improve availability of crucial
substrates or prevent excessive accumulation of intermediates compromising
the productivity or fitness of the production organism. Complex genetic
circuits typically rely on fast responses and exact expression levels
of their parts, which is hard to achieved by only transcriptional
activation. We therefore developed a synthetic repression system with
a well-characterized set of synthetic repressors (sReps) and corresponding
core promoters (A). The system was based on engineered core promoters containing
binding sites for the sRep in their structure, where the sRep binding
aims to block the recruitment of RNA polymerase or general transcription
factors to the core promoter. We showed that the
level of repression was directly dependent on the sRep concentration
(). Already
very low levels of sRep led to mild repression in the case of Bm3R1-sRep
and TetR-sRep. This implies high affinity for these proteins to their
binding sites that are present in the engineered core promoters. To
achieve complete repression, however, very high levels of the sReps
needed to be produced. This could be problematic in applications where
tight repression is needed, but an advantage in applications where
only partial downregulation of transcription would be beneficial,
such as in decreasing flux through an essential metabolic pathway.
A tight repression functionality could be implemented to the current
sReps by the addition of a specific repression domain. An important outcome of the repression system
is the set of modified core promoters, which confer a broad range
of activities (). This information
can now be utilized in the construction of sTF-dependent expression
systems with a high range of achievable expression levels, and it
highlights the importance of the core promoter (together with variable
numbers of the sTF-binding sites) for the overall performance of the
expression system. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf The predictable behavior of expression tools
is an essential attribute
for efficient strain engineering. However, due to the complex nature
of biological systems, even the tools generally considered as “orthogonal”
can sometimes behave unexpectedly. To demonstrate the predictability
of the tools developed here, we established two versions of bistable
switch circuits (version A, , and version B, ), where the proper functionality strongly depends on the exact performance
of each of its components. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf By design, bistable systems have
two distinct and stable states,
and the transition between the states occurs as a response to temporal
input signals. A few artificial bistable
switch-like circuits have been previously developed for various hosts,
such as for , yeast and mammals. However, as
opposed to previously developed systems in yeast, our circuit includes a robust memory function, which was demonstrated
to retain its programmed status for at least 12 days of continuous
cultivation. The two circuit versions differed only in types of the
core promoters used in the Reporter cassette; this however had significant
consequences on their functions. While the use of repressible core
promoters in version A resulted in faster responses upon switching
to the opposite state, in version B the use of unmodified core promoters
led to much higher expression levels of the target genes (BFP and
Venus). Also other interesting phenomena were associated with the
functionality of individual parts. In both versions, it seemed that
the transition from the TetR into the Bm3R1 state was slower than
the reverse transition. This was particularly visible on the lower
level of the Bm3R1-state-specific fluorescence at the beginning of
cultivation in the SCD medium after each transfer from galactose,
and a longer time needed for stabilization of the Bm3R1-state fluorescence
outputs (D, ). This might be caused by higher affinity
and/or longer half-life of the TetR-sTF, which could result in the
observed slower transition between the states. In addition, analysis
of reporter protein fluorescence confirmed differences between system
versions observed at the transcription level. In version B, there
was clearly a visible delay in the disappearance of the fluorescent
proteins encoded by the Reporter cassette after each switch to the
opposite state (). In general,
the generated bistable switch systems showed very robust functionality
and prompted us to apply this tool in a metabolic engineering task. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_002.pdf The violacein biosynthetic pathway was selected as an example metabolic
pathway to demonstrate the utility of the bistable circuit (). The bistable switch
was used to control/switch carbon flux between two branches of the
pathway leading to two different pigments. The functional expression
of the violacein pathway, namely the upper part consisting of VioA,
VioB, and VioC enzymes, in the tested yeast strain resulted in a significant
growth defect. This was likely to be associated with a too efficient
consumption of -tryptophan by the pathway, as the addition
of excessive amount of -tryptophan to the culture media
partially rescued growth (data not shown). Regardless of this challenge,
the bistable switch proved to provide mutually exclusive control of
production of the end-product pigments, either proviolacein (PV) or
deoxyviolacein (DV), depending on the state of the circuit (C and ). In the Bm3R1 state, however, also
some violacein (V) appeared to be co-produced together with DV. This
was most likely caused by the low expression level of the  gene forming the whole violacein production pathway
in the Bm3R1 state (). The architecture
of the violacein cassette (B), where the  gene is downstream
of the  gene, may have caused a weak long-distance
activation of the cp of the  gene by the Bm3R1-sTF bound in the promoter of the  gene. This phenomenon could be eliminated if repressible CPs, such
as those in version A of the bistable switch, would be used. In conclusion,
we demonstrated here that these well-characterized and robustly performing
DNA parts can be highly useful tools in the development of sophisticated
genetic circuits, which can find multiple applications in biotechnology. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_001.xlsx Supplementary sequences and strains strains which
were used as parental strains in this study were CEN.PK102-5B (H3900;
ura3-52, his3-delta1, leu2-3,112, TRP1, MAL2-8c, SUC2), CEN.PK111-32D
(H3891; URA3, HIS3, leu2-3,112, TRP1, MAL2-8c, SUC2), CEN.PK113-5D
(H3895; ura3-52, HIS3, LEU2, TRP1, MAL2-8c, SUC2), CEN.PK113-7A (H3888;
URA3, his3-delta1, LEU2, TRP1, MAL2-8c, SUC2), and CEN.PK102-3A (H3899;
ura3-52, HIS3, leu2-3,112, TRP1, MAL2-8c, SUC2), which were kindly
provided by Dr. P. Kötter (Institute of Microbiology, J.W.
Goethe Universität). H-number indicates strain number in VTT’s
internal collection. List of constructed  strains are shown in the  file. Media used in the experiments
and the strain
construction were yeast extract peptone with -glucose (YPD,
20 g/L bacto peptone (Becton Dickinson), 10 g/L yeast extract, and
20 g/L -glucose) and synthetic complete medium (SCD, 6.7
g/L yeast nitrogen base (Becton Dickinson), 20 g/L -glucose,
and 790 mg/L complete supplement mixture (Formedium)) with different
dropout variations: SCD without uracil and leucine (SCD-UL), SCD without
histidine and leucine (SCD-HL), and SCD without histidine, uracil,
and leucine (SCD-HUL). For the CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene integrations
into  locus, lysine-deficient SCD medium supplemented
with 100 mg/L thialysine was used. Medium used in the repression experiments
was SCD with varying thiamine concentrations (0, 100, 200, 400, or
800 μg/L). The yeast nitrogen base without thiamine and amino
acids (Formedium) was used and supplemented with thiamine (Merck)
to the desired concentration. The media used in the bistable switch
experiments were SCD supplemented with additional glucose and thiamine
(SCD-extra; SCD with 40 g/L -glucose and 1000 μg/L
thiamine), SCD without thiamine (SCD-wo-thi; 20 g/L -glucose
and 0 μg/L thiamine), and SC with galactose (SCgal; SC with
20 g/L -galactose and 400 μg/L thiamine). Media used
in the experiments with bistable switch with violacein pathway were
supplemented with an additional 1000 mg/L tryptophan. Media used in
the induction analysis of p and p were SCD-extra-wo-thi (SCD with 40 g/L -glucose and 0
μg/L thiamine) and SCgal-extra (SC with 40 g/L galactose and
1000 μg/L thiamine). Corresponding agar plate media were prepared
by supplementing liquid medium with 20 g/L of agar. All the plasmids used in this study were cloned
according to the manufacturer’s protocol using Gibson assembly
(New England Biolabs) or restriction enzyme-based techniques (Thermo
Fisher Scientific). Kapa Hifi enzyme (Kapa Biosystems) was used for
all PCR reactions. Ligation and Gibson assembly mixes were transformed
into  TOP10 by electroporation, and the correctness
of plasmids was confirmed by analytical digestion and sequencing.
Synthetic DNA fragments and primers were obtained from Integrated
DNA Technologies. transformations
were done using the standard lithium acetate protocol. Either the expression cassettes were released
using I restriction enzyme from plasmids, or the
plasmids were linearized using I restriction enzyme
prior to the transformation. The cassettes were integrated into yeast
genome into the following loci:  (Venus cassettes,
and Reporter or violacein cassettes of bistable circuits),  (sTF and sRep cassettes, and Control cassettes of bistable
circuits),  (Switch cassettes of bistable circuits),  (LexA-sTF cassette for repressor strains, and Diagnostic
cassettes of bistable circuits), or  (VioABE
cassette) (integration flanks used in the expression cassettes are
listed in ).
Expression cassettes containing violacein pathways genes , , and  were PCR amplified
from the plasmid using the primers oCC-121 and oCC-122 containing
5′ and 3′ flanking sequences for the integration into  locus. The genome integration was facilitated using
CRISPR/Cas9 by co-transforming the plasmid pCC-036 containing Cas9
under p and guiding RNA (gRNA) for  expressed under p. The gRNA protospacer sequence
was AGACCAGATAGAACATGAGA. The transformed
cells were selected on plates containing thialysine. Integration Loci of Transformed Expression
Cassettes integration locus (protein ID in JGI) selection marker (selection condition) 50 bp (−80 to −31 bp upstream
of start codon) 50 bp
(+1 to +50 bp downstream of stop codon) 50 bp (−50 to −1
bp upstream of start codon) 50 bp (+1 to +50 bp downstream of stop codon) 48 bp (−109 bp to −62 bp upstream
of start codon) 50 bp
(+1 to +50 bp downstream of stop codon) no selection marker (selection in gRNA plasmid) 60 bp (−60 bp to −1 bp upstream of start codon) 60 bp (+1 bp to +60 bp
downstream of start codon) http://genome.jgi.doe.gov/programs/fungi/index.jsf http://genome.jgi.doe.gov/programs/fungi/index.jsf Joint Genome Institute’s
database, . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_001.xlsx Supplementary sequences and strains Single colonies
were isolated
from transformation plates and regrown on the corresponding selection
plates. Phenol–chloroform method was conducted to extract genomic
DNA from yeast cells. First, 600 μL of glass beads, 600 μL
of 1xTE (pH 7.5), and 600 μL of phenol–chloroform–isoamyl
alcohol solution (50% phenol, 48% chloroform, 2% isoamyl alcohol)
were mixed, and the extraction was done using Precellys24 homogenizer
(Bertin Instruments). The aqueous layer was diluted 100x into water
to obtain template for the copy number analysis. Copy number analysis
was conducted with quantitative RT-PCR Lightcycler 480II (Roche) using
LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The signal from target gene was compared to signal from
the  gene. The clones containing a single copy
of the transformed cassette (ratio ∼1:1 toward the ) were selected for further use. The primers used in
copy number analysis are listed in the  file. Fluorescence Measurement
with Fluorimeter Cultivation
samples were collected by centrifugation and resuspended with 200
μL of water. A 200 μL portion of the suspension was transferred
to Black Cliniplate (Thermo Fisher Scientific),, and fluorescence
was measured with Varioskan (Thermo Electron Corporation). The excitation/emission
wavelengths for measurement of BFP (blue fluorescent protein) were
399/456 nm, for Venus (yellow fluorescent protein) 510/530 nm, for
mCherry (red fluorescent protein) 587/610 nm, and for KO2 (orange
fluorescent protein) 550/570 nm, respectively. A 5 nm bandwidth and
500 ms measurement time were used in each measurement. Cell density
(OD) measurement was done for normalizing fluorescence
measurement results. After fluorescence measurement, cells were diluted
100× into water, and then OD was measured with
Varioskan (photometric measurement mode, wavelength = 600 nm, bandwidth
= 5 nm, measurement time = 100 ms) using transparent microtiter plate
(Nunc 96F, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The arbitrary units (AU) reported
in figures were obtained by dividing the fluorescence measurement
value by the OD value. Transcription Analysis
and RT-PCR Cell cultivation
samples were pelleted by centrifugation and washed with cold water.
Cell pellets were frozen with liquid nitrogen and samples were stored
at −80 °C. Total RNA was extracted using RNeasy
Mini Kit (Qiagen; protocol for yeast). DNase treatment (DNase I RNase-free,
Thermo Fisher Scientific) was performed to remove residual genomic
DNA from the samples. Transcription First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit
(Roche) was used for the cDNA synthesis according to manufacturer’s
protocol. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_001.xlsx Supplementary sequences, and strains Diluted cDNA samples were mixed with primers, and
LightCycler 480
SYBR Green I Master (Roche) according to manufacturer’s protocol.
The RT-PCR was conducted using Lightcycler 480II (Advanced Relative
Quantification Tool; Roche). The primers which were used in transcription
analysis are shown in the  file. Target gene expression levels were normalized
using expression levels of ubiquitin-protein ligase encoding gene , which has been reported
to confer exceptional transcription stability in various conditions
making it suitable for such use. Cells to be analyzed were
diluted into 1x PBS prior to the analysis. Venus, and BFP fluorescence
was measured from 10 000  cells
using FACSAria III (BD) flow cytometry. BFP was measured using the
375 nm laser and 450/20 nm filter, whereas Venus was measured with
488 nm laser and 530/30 nm filter. No gating was performed on the
data. Violacein Pathway Metabolite Analysis For the analysis
of the intracellular violacein pathway metabolites, yeast cells were
collected from 4 mL of a liquid cultivation by centrifugation. The
cell pellets were disrupted by adding 500 μL of preheated methanol
and incubating at 95 °C for 15 min. Samples were centrifuged
and the supernatants were analyzed. Violacein, proviolacein,
deoxyviolacein, and prodeoxyviolacein were qualified using the ACQUITY
Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters) with
ACQUITY Van Guard pre-column and ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 2.1 × 100
mm, 1.8 μm analytical column. The columns were maintained at
40 °C; 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (eluent A) and in water
(eluent B) were used as eluents with the flow rate of 0.5 mL min as follows: 0–1.5 min, 95% A, 5% B; 1.5–7.0
min, decrease 16.9% min A, increase 16.9% min B; 7.0–9.0 min, 2% A, 98% B; 9.0–9.1
min, increase 15.5% s A, decrease 15.5% s B; 9.1–11.5 min, 95% A, 5% B. Injection volume
of 2 μm was used for the analytes. Absorbance was measured with
a UV/vis detector at 600 nm. Analysis of Orthogonal
Activators http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_001.xlsx Supplementary sequences and strains Fluorescence Measurement with Fluorimeter The functionality
of each sTF and orthogonality in  was
tested by fluorescence measurements. The experiments were initiated
by pre-cultivating  cells (strains marked
with asterisk in the column “Analysis of orthogonal activators”
in the  file) at 30 °C on YPD plates for 24 h. Four ml of SCD-UL medium
in 24-well plate was inoculated to initial optical density of 0.2
(OD) by the pre-culture. Three parallel replicates were
cultivated for each strain. Cells were cultivated 18 h at 28 °C,
800 rpm. Fluorescence was measured as described in the “”
section. Transcription Analysis
and RT-PCR In addition to the fluorescence measurements, transcription
analysis was performed for the subset of the strains. Strains containing
sTF and Venus expression cassettes either with 2 or 8 sTF binding
sites (strains H4603, H4605, H4608, H4610, H4613, H4615, H4618, H4620,
H4623, H4625, H4628, H4630, H4878, H4880, H4883, and H4885) were pre-cultivated
on SCD-UL plates for 24 h (30 °C). Strain H3888 was used as a
control strain (P). Cells were grown in SCD-UL in identical way as
described above in the fluorescence analysis, and samples for transcription
analysis were collected after 18 h of cultivation. Samples were processed
as described in the “” section. The growth of strains containing an sTF
expression cassette and 8BS version of the Venus expression cassette
(strains H4605, H4610, H4615, H4620, H4625, and H4630) were analyzed.
H3888 was used as a control strain (WT). Cells were pre-cultivated
24 h on SCD-UL plates at +30 °C. Aliquots of 4 mL of SCD-UL in
a 24-well plate were inoculated to optical density OD of 0.2, and cells were cultivated 24 h (+30 °C, 800 rpm). Optical
density was measured after 24 h of cultivation, and this culture was
used to inoculate SCD-UL medium to optical density of 0.1. Inoculated
SCD-UL medium was transferred to a Bioscreen microtiter plate (250
μL per well), and the growth was followed with Bioscreen C MBR
automated turbidometric analyzer (Growth Curves Ltd.) at 30 °C.
OD measurement was taken every 30 min. Five biological
replicates were cultivated for each strain. Analysis of Orthogonal
Repressors http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00076/suppl_file/sb8b00076_si_001.xlsx Supplementary sequences and strains Fluorescence Measurement with Fluorimeter The functionality
of repressors and engineered core promoters (with repressor binding
sites) was tested by fluorescence analysis. The analysis was initiated
by pre-cultivating  cells (strains marked
with asterisk in the column “Analysis of orthogonal repressors”
in the  file) on YPD plate at 30 °C for 24 h before starting the experiment.
Four ml of SCD medium with 0, 100, 200, 400, and 800 μg/L thiamine
was inoculated in 24-well plate to initial optical density of 0.2
(OD). Strains lacking repressor cassette (but containing
the integrated cassette with URA3 selection marker) were cultivated
only in standard SCD containing 400 μg/L thiamine (standard
YNB (Becton Dickinson) used for the SCD preparation). Three parallel
replicates were cultivated for each strain at 28 °C (800 rpm)
for 18 h, and the fluorescence was measured as described in the section
“”. In addition, the activity of p in
varying thiamine concentrations was tested using the same experimental
setup (strain H5127). Transcription Analysis and RT-PCR Transcription analysis was performed on
the yeast strain containing cp (strain
H4888). Cells were pre-cultivated on YPD plate for 24 h at 30 °C,
and 4 mL of SCD containing 0, 100, 200, 400, and 800 μg/L thiamine
in 24-well plate was inoculated to initial optical density (OD) of 0.2. Two parallel replicates were cultivated at 28
°C (800 rpm) for 18 h, and the samples for the transcription
analysis were prepared as described in the section “”. Analysis
of the  and  Promoter Induction Fluorescence Measurement
with Fluorimeter Strain containing bidirectional cassette p-Venus
and p-BFP was cultivated
overnight in 65 mL of SCD-extra (30 °C, 250 rpm). Cultivation
was split into two tubes (32.5 mL per tube) and pelleted by centrifugation.
Supernatant was removed, and pellets were suspended into 300 mL of
SCD-extra-wo-thi (induction of p) or SCgal-extra
(induction of ) medium. Cells were cultivated
at 30 °C (250 rpm), and 50 mL samples (one biological replicate)
were collected at 2, 4, 6, 8 and ∼18 h of the cultivation.
Venus and BFP fluorescence was measured from the samples as described
above in the section “”. Analysis of the Bistable
Switch Fluorescence Measurement with Fluorimeter The continuous-growth
tests for the serial switches and the “memory tests”
were done by sequential cultivations of the cells in liquid media
at 28 °C (800 rpm). The cultivation volume was in each case 4
mL (four biological replicates), and each cultivation was continued
for 24 h. The follow-up 4 mL cultivations were inoculated by 30 μL
of the previous cell culture, and the length (in days) of each consecutive
cultivation is indicated in the figures. The fluorescence measurement
was performed after each 24 h of cultivation as described in the section
“”. The serial switch experiment was started by pre-cultivating
strains H5206 (switch version A) and H5208 (switch version B) on SCD-UL
plates for 24 h at 30 °C. Next, 4 mL of medium, either SCD-wo-thi
(initiating the TetR state) or SCgal (initiating the Bm3R1 state),
was inoculated to initial optical density (OD) of 0.2.
After 24 h of cultivation in these inducing media (28 °C, 800
rpm), the cultivation was continued in SCD-extra for 48 h (culture
refreshed after 24 h of cultivation). After cultivation in SCD-extra,
cells in the TetR state were transferred into the SCgal medium, and
the cells in the Bm3R1 state into the SCD-wo-thi medium for next 24
h. After that, cultivation was again continued for 48 h in SCD-extra
(culture refreshed after 24 h of cultivation) prior to next cultivation
in either SCD-wo-thi or SCgal. In total, the cultivation was continued
for 16 days. Fluorescence flow cytometry was also performed for the
samples collected at the end of days 3 and 6, as described in the
section “”. Fluorescence
Measurement with Fluorimeter The “memory test” was done by switching
cells first
to either TetR or Bm3R1 state. After that, the cultivation was continued
in SCD-extra, and the programmed state of the cells was followed by
fluorescence measurements. The experiment was started by cultivating
strains H5206 (switch version A) and H5208 (switch version B) in 4
mL of either SCD-wo-thi (TetR state) or SCgal (Bm3R1 state) for 24
h (28 °C, 800 rpm). The subsequent cell cultivations in SCD-extra
were inoculated using 30 μL of cell suspension from each previous
cultivation, and the cultivation was continued for the next 24 h (28
°C, 800 rpm). The inoculation of fresh SCD-extra was repeated
always after 24 h. The experiment was continued for 12 days in total.
Fluorescence measurement was done every day after 24 h of cultivation
as described in the section “”. In addition, fluorescence
flow cytometry was performed on samples collected at the end of day
6. Transcription
Analysis and RT-PCR In addition to fluorescence measurements, transcription analysis
was performed on the bistable-switch strains. Strains H5206 (switch
version A) and H5208 (switch version B) were cultivated in 50 mL of
SCD-extra-wo-thi for 24 h at 30 °C (250 rpm). This culture was
used for inoculation of 150 mL of the SCD-extra medium to initial
optical density of 0.2 (OD). Cells were cultivated at
30 °C (250 rpm), and samples were collected for transcription
analysis at time points 0, 2, 6, and 24 h to monitor dynamics of the
transcription pattern stabilization after transfer from inducing conditions
to non-inducing condition. After 24 h of cultivation in the SCD-extra
medium, the cells were transferred to SCgal-extra medium (150 mL,
initial OD of 0.2). Samples for transcription analysis
were collected at 3, 8, and 24 h to monitor dynamics of the transcription
responses during switch of the system into the opposite state. Finally,
the cells were transferred from the SCgal-extra medium into 150 mL
of the SCD-extra medium (initial OD of 0.2), and samples
were collected at 2 and 6 h to monitor stabilization in the newly
gain state. RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, and RT-PCR were done as
described in the section “”. Analysis of the Violacein
Pathway Control by the Bistable Switch The experiment was
done in a similar way as the bistable switch
“memory test”. Strains H5285 (switch-controlled VioC
and VioD) and H5285 (VioABE background strain) were first pre-cultivated
on the SCD-extra plates for 24 h at 30 °C. The liquid cultivation
was started by inoculating 4 mL of either SCD-extra-wo-thi medium
(switch to the TetR state) or SCgal medium (switch to the Bm3R1 state)
to OD of 0.8 by the pre-cultures. The inducing cultures
were carried out for 24 h at 28 °C (800 rpm), after which the
cultivations were continued in non-inducing conditions (SCD-extra)
for 3 days. Cells were transferred into fresh medium every 24 h using
100 μL of previous culture. All the media (liquid and plates)
used in this experiment were supplemented with additional 1000 mg/L
tryptophan. Transcription
Analysis and RT-PCR Violacein Pathway Metabolite Analysis Samples for transcription analysis (two biological
replicates) and for liquid chromatography were collected after every
24 h. Samples were pelleted by centrifugation and washed with cold
water. Cell pellets were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80
°C. Transcription analysis and liquid chromatography were conducted
as described in the sections “” and “”, respectively. The number of used replicates in each experiment
is shown in figure legends as well as in the methods discussion. The
results represent averages of individual data values. Error bars given
in graphs represent ± one standard deviation..