Synthetic genetic systems commonly
use genetic elements whose functional properties are already known.
Modularity of the elements is key to this enterprise, so that elements
from diverse genetic backgrounds can be combined with simple linker
sequences into interacting networks that create new pathways and functions
(e.g., ref ()). It
is commonly assumed that the nonfunctional sequences used to join
the different molecules are inconsequential. Yet the linker sequences
used to join the different modules may have regulatory effects and
might impair fitness. Here we consider whether modularizing a genome
per se disrupts the patterns of gene expression that are important
to fitness. A model system for evaluating this question is the
bacteriophage
T7. T7 is one of the best understood of the tailed phages from molecular
and physiology perspectives. It has also
been used in studies of in vitro evolution, with characterizations
of fitness during adaptation and of molecular evolution across the
entire genome accompanying the adaptations; T7 has been the subject of an empirically based, kinetic simulation
model. More recently, the first 30% of
the T7 genome was refactored, a form of modularization, mostly by
insertions of short DNA sequences between genes and between genes
and regulatory elements, in part to render the genome amenable to
systematic analysis of gene and element function. The wild-type T7 genome is close-packed, and although only
a few coding sequence overlap, many ribosome-binding sites are in
the coding sequence of the upstream gene; such genetic organization
may be highly sensitive to precise position effects . However, refactoring
did not create, destroy, or otherwise modify elements of known essentiality
to T7. It is thus possible to test the fitness effect of refactoring
per se, without the complications associated with new combinations
of genes and regulators. Plaque size and other simple assays had suggested
that refactoring had fitness costs, but
one could not infer just how impaired the engineered genome was, nor
whether most or just a few elements were detrimental. Here we
propagate this refactored T7 to enable it to evolve and
correct any defects by adaptation. We identify which elements are
lost during adaptation and how fitness evolved, in order to assess
the implications of genome modularization and which types of modularization
are problematic. Last, we suggest how experimental evolution may not
only identify design problems but also lead to improved engineering. T7 is a member of the  that infects Gram-negative enteric bacteria.
Its dsDNA genome is ∼40 kb, with nearly 60 genes but little
coding sequence overlap. One distinguishing
characteristic of T7 is that it encodes a phage-specific RNA polymerase
and 17 phage-specific promoters, along with typical DNA metabolism
and structural genes. The phage-determined regulation of gene expression
provides a basis for understanding and modeling the quantitative dynamics
of the intracellular life cycle; this
understanding likewise provides a basis for positioning design elements
to avoid disrupting genes and regulatory elements. T7 can evolve to
grow extremely rapidly when hosts are maintained in excess and attains
a growth rate of 44 doublings per hour, or over 10 descendants
per hour in broth at 37 °C. This
high intrinsic fitness enables the virus to grow well even when its
genome has suffered numerous insults, either by design or mutation,
so it is well suited for genome manipulations. The intrinsic high
fitness of T7 also means that slight disruptions of the genome are
readily detected and thus it is well suited for identifying potential
problems with synthetic designs. A large number of T7-like genomes
have been sequenced; although they can vary extensively at the nucleotide
sequence level, they exhibit extensive synteny, varying mainly by
the presence or absence of genes with homology to homing endonucleases
that have no known role in the T7 life cycle and by the exact complement
of non-essential (in the laboratory) early genes. Many recognized
regulatory elements are also conserved by genome position in T7-like
genomes. Most genes and elements impacted by the refactoring of Chan
et al. fall into the non-essential category:
only five of the 21 genes modified are normally considered to be essential.
However, the number of progeny per infected cell can be reduced by
perhaps an order of magnitude, and fitness of a mutant phage can likely
be reduced (relative to wild-type) by 10–15 doublings/h before
plaque morphology differences or titers are readily noted. Thus although
any single engineered change may have little effect on the expression
of a non-essential gene or function of a dispensable regulatory element,
the combination of many changes introduced at the same time may exert
a significant disruption in the phage life cycle. T7αβ (the refactored T7) and T7 (wild-type)
were each separately adapted for rapid growth under two conditions:
using BL21 as host in LB and the K-12 host IJ891 in M9 glucose media.
The former condition is collectively referred to as “broth”
(subscripted as LB), the latter as “M9” (subscripted
as M9). The two broth adaptations consisted of ∼100 generations
of serial transfer, whereas the M9 adaptations consisted of ∼700–1000
generations of growth in a continuous flow system followed by brief
adaptations by serial transfer. All environments provided unlimited
hosts for the bulk of the adaptation period, so selection favored
rapid growth of the phage populations. The M9 environment was
designed after initial results from the
T7αβ broth adaptation revealed a single deletion
that included the loss of several early genes (–) and extending ∼200 bases upstream
of . Deletions extending into early genes have
been commonly observed in prior adaptations in broth of both wild-type
and various mutant T7 strains, but never with loss of sequences upstream
of . As the deletion in the broth adaptation removed
14 design elements, the intent with the replicate adaptation in M9
was to create an alternative environment that would maintain at least  and . We hoped to determine whether
their associated design elements were explicitly deleterious or were
merely deleted as part of a large region whose net presence was deleterious.
M9 media is known to favor retention of , and host IJ891 (, containing the type I restriction enzyme EcoK1)
was expected to select for , which defends the
phage against type I restriction. The M9 environment was thus expected
to retain at least 4 and possibly 8 of the 14 elements lost in the
LB adaptation of T7αβ. Molecular Evolution of Design Elements Both adaptations
of T7αβ resulted in the deletion or modification of several
design elements (Figure ). Sequencing was
performed on the evolved populations; changes are reported only if
they exceeded 50% as those not reaching 50% would be unlikely confer
a significant fitness benefit. Of the original 65 design elements,
40 were maintained after adaptation in M9 glucose and 45 in broth
(unintended design element duplications are neglected in these totals,
and most design elements were lost as pairs). Despite vastly different
levels of molecular evolution between the M9 and broth conditions
( give
all changes in the adaptations, and Figures  and  show changes in the refactored portion
of the genome), both adaptations of T7αβ resulted in deletions
of (i) early region genes and associated design elements (genes –, with associated losses
of 10 design elements in M9 and 14 in broth), (ii) the two elements
that separated genes  and , and (iii) the two elements between  and . Sequences in (ii) and (iii) evolved back to wild-type.
No other design elements were lost or modified in T7αβ, but six other design elements were lost or modified in
T7αβ (Figure ). Elements
D4R-D5L and D9R-D10L were lost as part of the large deletion of the
early region in T7αβ but were lost as separate
deletions in T7αβ. We can attribute the M9
deletion of D4R-D5L specifically to a fitness cost of those design
elements because no T7 genes or regulatory elements were affected.
The M9 deletion of D9R-D10L included the 3′ end of , so the fitness benefit of this deletion need not have
been due to loss of the design elements. Both adaptations to M9 experienced far more and
different types
of molecular evolution than is typical in T7 adaptations using broth
(ref (), as is also
evident when comparing the M9 and broth adaptations here, Figures , , and ). Although the M9 adaptations
were done mostly in chemostats and thus for longer than we typically
adapt by strict serial transfer, there is no precedent for this much
molecular evolution in the many adaptations we have done previously
in broth, some of which also used a chemostat. The increased evolution
in minimal media was surprising, as minimal media may be imagined
to be more typical than broth of the native T7 environment, which
is likely sewage. It is noteworthy that the evolved T7 retained complete  and  genes,
as designed, whereas T7αβ evolved partial
deletions of both. The initial T7αβ carries a 5-codon
deletion in 0.3 (), but surprisingly,
plating assays showed that the gene was functional. Nevertheless,
loss of an intact  presumably imparted some detriment
to the phage. The evolved phage retained 4 of 5 Eco KI sites, so the
absence of functional  would have led to a much
larger loss of fitness on IJ891. If such a result holds up on further
replication, one might speculate that the loss of  and  in T7αβ but not
in T7 argues that modularization altered the benefit
of those early region genes. However, additional testing is required
to rule out that the engineering merely altered the types of deletions
most likely to arise, and that the loss of  and  in T7αβ in turn merely reflects
the first deletion that arose with a net benefit. It is clear that
neither T7αβ gene  nor  is required to be intact for growth on IJ891 in M9 glucose media
at 37 °C. Evolution of design elements
in the refactored portion of T7 (α
and β sections, extending into gene ). Gene
sizes are drawn to scale, so the genome is split near the midpoint
of the αβ region rather than at the junction separating
α and β (within gene ). The top genome
in each trio is the engineered genome, showing locations of design
elements (blue dots), genes, and some regulatory elements (alternating
light colors). Design elements from refactoring are labeled above
the genome, genes below. The lower two genomes, representing the LB
(broth) and M9 adaptations, show the locations of design elements
that persisted throughout the adaptation as well as (i) deletions
in red (numbered consecutively, spanning the portion of the genome
deleted), (ii) substitutions, either as thin, vertical black lines
if occurring outside design elements or as white circles if inside
the element, and (iii) insertions shown in green. No insertions and
only one substitution occurred in the LB adaptation (for this portion
of the genome). Two substitutions in the M9 line are obscured by the
design elements, one near U3 and one near 15L. Insertion locations
are shown without shifting the downstream frame of reference. Most
design elements were created in pairs and are too close together for
adequate resolution here, so only the rightmost element in each pair
is labeled (e.g., the construction of D10R-D11L-gene , D11L-D12L is represented in the figure as 11L, gene 1, 12L). Each
element label gives the number of elements represented by the label;
a “3” is due to unintentional duplication of an element
in the design. See  for details of these changes as well as changes in the remainder
of the genomes. Evolution in control adaptations of the wild-type genome.
As in
Figure , except the phage genomes are the
wild-type T7 (top) and the two adaptations initiated with wild-type;
only that portion of the wild-type genome overlapping with the refactored
region of T7αβ is shown. Deletions (shown in red in proportion
to their size) are numbered consecutively; substitutions are shown
as thin black vertical lines; insertions are shown in green in approximate
proportion to their size but without displacing the reference frame
downstream. The only change observed in the LB adaptation over this
portion of the genome was a deletion, but there was profoundly more
change in the M9 adaptation. See  for details of these changes as well as changes
in the remainder of the genomes. Plaque sizes and other assays had
indicated that the fitness, especially at 37 °C, of the initial
T7αβ was much reduced from that of wild-type. The adaptations performed here provide insight
into which elements are problematic and how much fitness is depressed
by the remaining elements. Fitness of T7αβ was indeed
depressed in both environments relative to that of T7 (Figure ). Despite considerable fitness improvement, both
adaptations of T7αβ approached, but did not reach, the
fitness of wild-type phage adapted to the same conditions. However,
in broth the residual fitness discrepancy is small, suggesting that
the remaining design elements have little impact on fitness. Furthermore,
our measure of fitness is a growth rate, highly sensitive to small
changes in generation time (e.g., lysis time), so this residual fitness
impact is possibly due to subtle phenotypic effects. Note that fitness
of an evolved T7αβ depends not only on residual design
elements but also on changes in other parts of the genome, so a difference
in fitness between an evolved T7αβ and an evolved T7 need not be due to remaining design elements. As one example,
T7αβ is missing large parts of  and , whereas T7 is not, a difference
that likely enhances the fitness of T7. Fitness of wild-type
and refactored T7 before (light blue) and
after adaptation (magenta). Fitness of the evolved T7 is
significantly higher than that of the evolved T7αβ in
the corresponding growth media (M9:  = 6.9,  = 0.0023; broth:  = 5.18,  = 0.0066; significance levels
assume a 2-tailed test). Bars represent 1 std error. Extensive refactoring of part of the phage
T7 genome created substantial
fitness costs. The fact that no genes were eliminated or added in
the design suggests that the fitness effects are due to regulatory
effects on the phage life cycle. Small changes in the level of transcription
or translation of a gene, resulting from synthetically altering intergenic
regions, may have large effects on overall phage fitness, especially
when fitness is measured as growth rate and is thus sensitive to changes
in generation time, as here. Adaptation of the refactored phage in
two environments led to substantial fitness increases but fell short
of the fitness of T7 adapted to the same conditions. Nevertheless,
the majority of design elements remained intact in both adaptations,
which means that these changes to the wild-type sequence did not grossly
perturb gene expression. This observation bodes well for the evolutionary
stability of  designs of synthetic regulatory
circuitry. The fitness of T7 when grown under conditions of
unlimited hosts
is easily depressed by regulatory changes, even seemingly minor ones.
When fitness is as high as 40 dbl/h, small changes in lysis time–as
little as 0.1 min, only slightly less than 1% of the latent period–have
a meaningful effect on fitness, so the
phage is highly sensitive to the duration of its life cycle. It is
thus not surprising that the introduction of short segments between
genes could impair fitness, but the expectation now is that the effects
of most individual insertions should not be large. However, a perspective
on the fitness cost of engineering is provided by adaptation of the
wild-type genome. The wild-type genome is itself imperfectly “designed”;
it invariably evolves/adapts when grown in a constant environment,
and the adaptation is usually environment-specific. It is thus expected that any form of genetic engineering
will also have fitness effects in at least some environments. Indeed,
plasticity of a genome enables some level of growth in very different
environments where an optimal, specialist genome may not replicate.
Where adaptations are particularly informative is in identifying “universal”
design flaws, i.e., those elements lost or modified in both environments
(parallel changes). The design elements lost in parallel across
these adaptations are
too few to draw any strong conclusions about general types of design
problems. The deletions identical to both adaptations were of the
design elements used to separate overlap between genes  and  and a spacer inserted to increase the 2-base
gap between  and . Both deletions
were facilitated by sequence duplication between the insert and the
3′ end of the upstream gene. In contrast, the inserts placed
between  and , between  and , and between  and  (all originally with 1-base overlaps or
1-base separations) had similar characteristics yet remained intact.
D15R (shown as 16L in Figure ) was also lost
or modified in both adaptations, yet the intergenic region into which
it was placed is relatively large. The attempted separation of the
overlap between genes  and  was
unsuccessful (Chan et al., 2005), but this overlap is now known to
affect the translational coupling of gene  and
gene , and a successful
cloning may have been strongly selected against during propagation
of T7β. Interestingly, the Δ5 deletion that arose in the
T7M9 adaptation removes much of gene  and even
causes a frameshift, but the hairpin that sequesters the gene  ribosome binding site would still be disrupted as ribosomes
translate the mutant  RNA, thereby allowing translational
coupling. The potential importance of sequences outside coding regions
cannot be overemphasized when designing synthetic stand-alone genetic
elements. Thus, some overlaps and short intergenic regions have substantial
regulatory significance, but we cannot yet predict them with confidence. Deletions of the early region were also observed in both adaptations.
The fact that a single, large deletion was observed in the broth adaptation
prohibits any conclusion about the fitness effects of the associated
design elements . In the M9 adaptation, however,
deletions (Δ1, Δ2, and possibly Δ4) in the early
region occurred that were limited to design elements (and perhaps
remnants of a deleted gene, in the case of Δ4), suggesting those
elements were specifically detrimental. Even so, because this region
is subject to much evolutionary change it is difficult to correlate
detrimental effects with specific design elements. Although
deletions shorten the genome, allowing it to be replicated
faster, and although some deletions may remove coding sequences, lessening
the energy cost of translation, it is not obvious that either contributes
significantly to T7 fitness. The majority of newly replicated T7 DNA
is not packaged into new particles and overall cellular protein synthesis
is reduced after T7 infection. Given the
complexities of the adaptation of T7αβ, perhaps the only
accurate way to assess fitness costs of individual elements is to
introduce them one at a time into a preadapted wild-type genome. Such
an approach is not obviously feasible with so many design elements. More elements were lost in the M9 than in the broth adaptation.
A confounding effect in this comparison is that considerably more
evolution occurred outside design elements in M9 than in broth, suggesting
that the wild-type T7 genome is not intrinsically as well-suited for
growth in M9 as in broth. The large number of changes observed serves
as a reminder that attempts to modularize a genome presumes an evolutionarily
stable state. Modularization elements are unlikely to be stable if
the intrinsic elements of the genome are themselves unstable. Fitness impairment from refactoring/modularization is not unique
to phages. The MIT ‘Biobrick’ toolkit contains a highly
versatile, modularized set of elements for bacterial gene expression,
but the elements are intrinsically unstable when bacteria are allowed
to adapt. There are two components to
the evolutionary instability: an intrinsic fitness cost and the rate
at which mutations arise that improve fitness. Enhanced evolutionary
stability was achieved by redesigning the elements to reduce sequences
prone to deletion. Such an approach
may be useful for creating a refactored T7 with
enhanced evolutionary stability, especially in the design regions
expanded by sequence duplication. However, avoiding sequences prone
to deletion does not itself overcome the basic problem that design
elements may impose a fitness cost. Yet this redesign approach does
suggest a stepwise protocol by which genome engineering may be augmented
with experimental evolution. The initial adaptation of a synthetic
genome will identify problematic elements by their loss or modification.
Those elements may then be re-engineered in an informed way into the
adapted genome, which still retains many of the original elements.
For example, the redesign may avoid sequences most prone to deletion
(e.g., by eliminating repeats) but also introduce various types of
extra sequences to potentially affect regulation. Subsequent adaptation
of the re-engineered genome may then allow evolution to improve the
redesigned elements without removing them, ultimately attaining a
fully modularized genome with minimal fitness cost. The bacterial and phage strains are
described in Table . All are from the collection
of I.J.M. or J.J.B. LB broth was 10 g NaCl, 10 g Bacto tryptone, and
5 g Bacto yeast extract per liter. M9 media (6.78 g NaHPO, 3 g KNPO, 0.5 g NaCl, 1
g NHCl, 1 mM MgSO4) was supplemented with 0.2% glucose
and 0.01 mM CaCl. Plates used LB broth with 1.5% Bacto
agar. Determinations of phage titers used plates overlaid with soft
agar (0.7% Bacto agar in LB) containing a suitable density of hosts.
T7αβ and its parent phages T7α and T7β were
kindly provided by Sri Kosuri and Drew Endy in November, 2005. Titers
of the stocks, which were those that had been used by Chan et al. for sequencing, were very low, but it is not
known when the loss of infectivity occurred. Phages were plated on
BL21 at 30 °C. All T7β plaques, but only a minority of
T7α and T7αβ plaques contained phages that grew
on  B (which selects for a functional  gene). A single plaque of each phage with the desired
phenotype was used to provide parental stocks for this study. host used for adaptation in M9 media host used for adaptation in broth/LB media “refactored” T7 genome (Genbank ,  into
gene , wild-type thereafter) refactored
T7 phage used to start adaptations wild-type phage used to start adaptations T7αβ with changes evolved for growth on IJ891 in
M9 glucose assess genetic stability of design elements T7αβ with changes evolved for growth on BL21 in
broth/LB assess genetic stability of design elements T7 evolved for growth on IJ891 in M9 glucose comparison of adaptation between modularized and wild-type
genomes T7 evolved for growth on BL21 in broth/LB comparison of adaptation between modularized and wild-type
genomes The purpose of the adaptations
was to select rapid phage growth. Adaptation to BL21 in LB broth used
serial transfer, as described elsewhere. Briefly, cells
from a frozen aliquot were added to 10 mL broth in a 125 mL flask,
grown for 1 h to ∼10 cells/mL, whence at least
10 phage were added. Following phage addition, cultures
were grown for 20–60 min (until an adequate density was attained),
and then an aliquot added directly to the next flask, whose cells
had been grown 1 h. Cultures were sometimes allowed to proceed to
lysis, ensuring recombination from high multiplicity infections. T7 was grown for 21.5 h (80–100 generations), T7αβ for 26 h (100–120 generations), assuming a 12–15
min generation time. Adaptations
of T7 and T7αβ used host IJ891
in M9 glucose media but were each carried out in two stages. The initial
stage was growth in a two-stage chemostat, in which actively growing
IJ891 in M9 glucose was fed continuously into a tube with phage. Phage growth in a chemostat environment can
select traits other than fast growth, so a second stage of adaptation was instituted to eliminate any
mutations not enhancing growth. Following extensive growth in the
chemostat, the final population was recombined against the starting
phage, and the recombinant pool was grown by serial transfer. Serial
transfer with IJ891 in M9 glucose used the same methods as with BL21
in LB. T7αβ was grown for 339 h in a chemostat,
then for 7 h by serial transfer following recombination with the initial
T7αβ; T7 was grown for 226 h in a chemostat,
then for 6.5 h by serial transfer following recombination with T7. Assuming a 20-min generation time in M9, the durations span
∼1000 generations and ∼700 generations. Fitness was measured in the serial transfer
environment, the main difference being that phage densities in fitness
assays were maintained at least 10-fold lower than cell density throughout
to ensure that hosts were never limiting. All measurements of evolved
phages were made on the final populations; those of initial phages
were made on lysates made from isolates. Fitnesses were calculated
from titers during a continuous serial transfer, 1 and 2 h after phage
were added to the first culture to allow attainment of an approximate
stable age distribution of infections. At transfer, a sample from the donor flask was treated with chloroform
to stop phage growth, for plating at a later time; in one case of
a phage with very low fitness, it was necessary to plate directly
from the culture rather than from samples treated with chloroform
(used with the initial T7αβ in M9). Fitness estimates
accounted for any transfer/dilution across multiple cultures during
the assay and are presented as doublings per hour, an absolute growth
rate that applies regardless of phage generation time. DNA was obtained from phage by phenol extraction
and subjected to “454” pyrosequencing at the University
of Texas Genomics Core; final populations were used to make the lysates
used for DNA extraction. Reads were analyzed by the mapping program  (). The final, evolved populations were subjected
to sequencing, and changes are reported only if they exceeded 50%
of the populations, to avoid dealing with sequencing errors associated
with the 454 technology; changes not reaching 50% would also not likely
have had high fitness. To estimate the extent to which this criterion
reflected the magnitudes of molecular evolution in the lines, the
evolved T7αβ population was reanalyzed to
provide the quantitative levels of polymorphism. Of the changes shown
in Figure  (and those given in ), all but one of the changes
were apparently fixed; the deletion starting at 6689 was at 75% frequency.
Had the frequency threshold been 20% instead of 50%, only 1 additional
change would have been reported in the refactored region (an intergenic
substitution between gene  and  at 24%). Thus, the 50% threshold did not give a misleading picture
of the evolution. Our initial isolate of T7αβ, a
clonal population, differed at a few sites from the sequences reported
in GenBank (; the
sequence of our initial isolate is provided in ). Note that the genome reference used
in  use genome
positions of our template () instead of the positions from the GenBank entries  and ..