Numerous halogenase enzymes from soil bacteria have been identified and characterized extensively, –. Two of these flavo-enzymes, PyrH,  and RebH–, chlorinate the indole ring of tryptophan in the 5 and 7 positions, respectively. Transferring these enzymes into other natural product pathways would allow site-specific incorporation of halogens onto a range of tryptophan-derived alkaloid products, provided that the downstream enzymes could accommodate the chlorinated tryptophan precursor. produces a wide variety of monoterpene indole alkaloids (). This metabolic pathway begins with the conversion of tryptophan  to tryptamine  by tryptophan decarboxylase. Tryptamine then condenses with the iridoid terpene secologanin  to form a biosynthetic intermediate strictosidine , which is subsequently functionalized in  to form over 100 alkaloids, including the anticancer agent vinblastine. Previous work has shown that when  cell culture is supplemented with a variety of halogenated tryptamines, the corresponding halogenated alkaloid analogs are produced in isolable yields,. If prokaryotic halogenases could function in the eukaryotic plant cell, and if tryptophan decarboxylase could convert halogenated tryptophan into halogenated tryptamine, then  would produce chlorinated alkaloids  (). Since RebH and PyrH do not turnover tryptamine , this strategy requires that tryptophan decarboxylase from  recognize halogenated tryptophan. Tryptophan decarboxylase () was assayed  with tryptophan  (K = 51.7 ± 9.2 μM, k = 5.1 ± 0.1 min, k/K = 0.099 μMmin), 7-chlorotryptophan  (K = 499 ± 74 μM, k = 1.6 ± 0.04 min k/K = 0.00327 μMmin) and 5-chlorotryptophan  (K = 538 ± 48 μM, k = 2.5 ± 0.08 min, k/K = 0.00455 μMmin) (). The activity of the enzyme suggested that halogenated tryptophan could be decarboxylated . When considering how to merge the prokaryotic biosynthetic machinery with the plant alkaloid pathway, we chose to transfer the halogenase enzymes into , rather than move the plant biosynthetic enzymes into a microbial host. Most of the monoterpene indole alkaloid biosynthetic genes have not been identified, making heterologous expression of this pathway impossible at this time. Moreover, we note that reconstitution of plant alkaloid pathways continues to be a challenging endeavor, . Many alkaloids use complex starting materials (such as secologanin ) that are only produced by a few specialized plants, so reconstitution of plant alkaloid pathways must also include biosynthesis of these precursors. For example, ajmalicine  (), one of the simplest of the monoterpene indole alkaloids, requires an estimated 14 discrete enzymes for biosynthesis from tryptophan  and the terpene geraniol; reconstitution of a pathway of this length constitutes a significant engineering problem. Therefore, we believe that exploring approaches in the host plant is an important aspect of alkaloid metabolic engineering efforts. To produce 7-chlorotryptophan 
, we generated an expression construct containing codon-optimized cDNA encoding the 7-tryptophan chlorinase RebH, and its required partner flavin reductase, RebF, in a plant expression vector (), both under the control of constitutive CaMV 35S promoters. For production of 5-chlorotryptophan , an expression construct encoding the 5-chlorinating enzyme PyrH, along with RebF as the partner reductase, was generated. No signal sequence was added to the halogenase genes to ensure that RebH, PyrH and RebF would produce chlorinated tryptophan in the cytosol, where it would most readily encounter the decarboxylase, also localized to the cytosol (). was utilized to generate hairy root culture of  transformed with the halogenase genes. One of the early biosynthetic enzymes, strictosidine synthase, cannot turn over 5-chlorotryptamine . Therefore, when transforming  with  and , we also introduced a mutant of strictosidine synthase (STRvm) that can convert 5-chlorotryptamine  to 10-chlorostrictosidine , . After a selection process, we cultivated the transformed root culture on standard Gamborg’s B5 plant media, and monitored chlorinated alkaloids using mass spectrometry (LC-MS). We were gratified to observe formation of chlorinated tryptophan  and  and chlorinated alkaloids in both the RebH/RebF and PyrH/RebF/STRvm hairy root lines (, ). These results indicate that RebH, PyrH and the partner reductase function productively in the plant cell environment, clearly demonstrating that the flavin halogenases are highly transportable among kingdoms. Since chlorinated alkaloid production was observed in the transformed lines, we conclude that tryptophan decarboxylase can competently turn over halogenated tryptophan substrates . Hairy roots transformed with RebH and RebF, which produce 7-chlorotryptophan , yielded a major chlorinated product at  359 (). An authentic standard of 12-chloro-19,20-dihydroakuammicine  co-eluted with this compound. Natural products containing the akuammicine scaffold display a variety of pharmacological activities–. Though the parent compound, 19,20-dihydroakuammicine  has been isolated in good yields from other plants, it is not a major alkaloid in  hairy root culture. However, when wild type  cell lines were incubated with 7-chlorotryptamine , 12-chloro-19,20-dihydroakuammicine  was also the major chlorinated product (). Therefore, the predominance of  in RebH/RebF is likely due to substrate specificity of downstream enzymes for 7-chlorotryptamine . A hairy root line transformed with the 5-chlorotryptophan  enzyme system, PyrH, RebF and STRvm, produced a variety of chlorinated alkaloids (). Two representative chlorinated alkaloids, 10-chloroajmalicine  and 15-chlorotabersonine , were identified by co-elution with authentic standards. Chlorinated alkaloid production appeared to be stable over the course of at least 6 subcultures. The alkaloid 12-chloro-19,20-dihydroakuammicine  was produced at 26 ± 4 μg per gram of fresh root weight of a representative cell line averaged over six subcultures. For comparison, wild type cell lines produced approximately 25 μg per gram fresh weight tissue of chlorinated alkaloids when the media was supplemented with 200 μM 7-chlorotryptamine . Similarly, 10-chloroajmalicine  and 15-chlorotabersonine  were produced at 2.8 ± 0.9 and 4.0 ± 1.0 μg per gram of fresh root weight, respectively, for a representative cell line averaged over 4 subcultures (). Different concentrations of KCl (3 μM – 20 mM) were added to the media, but increasing amounts of exogenous chloride salt did not significantly affect the yields of chlorinated alkaloids (). Previous reports demonstrated that RebH can utilize bromide to yield brominated tryptophan . To assess the capacity of RebH for bromination , we supplemented a low chloride cell culture media with KBr. The  halide specificity of RebH correlated with the products generated , as we observed the formation of a compound that co-eluted with an authentic standard of 12-bromo-19,20-dihydroakuammicine  () (21± 8 μg and 49± 20 μg per gram of fresh root with 10 mM and 20 mM KBr supplementation, respectively). In contrast, supplementation of the media with KI failed to yield either iodinated tryptophan or iodinated alkaloids. Again, this correlated with  studies showing that RebH does not accept iodide as a substrate (). We also measured the transcript levels of the heterologous enzymes by real time reverse transcription PCR. Production of halogenated compounds depended on the expression of both RebF and RebH or PyrH. Notably, when the strictosidine synthase mutant STRvm was not expressed in the PyrH/RebF hairy root lines, we observed accumulation of 5-chlorotryptophan  (representative cell line, 9 ± 1 μg per gram of fresh root weight) and 5-chlorotryptamine  (representative cell line, 20 ± 9 μg per gram of fresh root weight), but no downstream alkaloids were observed (). Tryptophan  does not appear to accumulate in either wild type or transformed hairy roots. However, accumulation of 7-chlorotryptophan  (50 ± 12 μg per gram of fresh root weight for a representative RebH/RebF cell line) and 5-chlorotryptophan  (8 ± 2 μg per gram of fresh root weight for a representative PyrH/RebF/STRvm cell line) was observed, suggesting that decarboxylation of chlorinated tryptophan is a bottleneck , a step that could potentially be subjected to future engineering efforts. This is consistent with the 30 fold lower catalytic efficiency of the decarboxylase enzyme for halogenated tryptophan . The morphology of the halogen producing lines were thicker and slower growing than wild type lines (). Since tryptophan serves as the precursor for other small molecule metabolites, we speculate that chlorinated tryptophan may be diverted into other pathways such as auxins. Notably, 4-chloro indole acetic acid, which is found in several species of pea, has altered activity compared to the auxin indole acetic acid, . Medicinal plants produce a wide range of complex natural products, but generate relatively few halogenated compounds; chlorinated or brominated compounds are not found among the approximately 3000 known monoterpene indole alkaloids produced by plants in the Apocynaceae, Rubiaceae and Loganiaceae families. Halogenation of natural products often has profound changes on the bioactivity of the compound, and can also serve as a useful handle for further chemical derivatization, . Despite the metabolic and developmental complexity of plant tissue, transformation of these prokaryotic genes led to the regioselective incorporation of halides into the alkaloid products of the existing plant pathway. Notably, the yield of chlorinated alkaloids in the highest producing lines (~26 μg/g fresh weight of plant tissue) is only 15 fold lower than the yield of total natural alkaloids (compounds  +  +  + ) from wild type tissue (~ 420 μg/g fresh weight of plant tissue) (). The ease with which we could engineer the successful production of chlorinated alkaloids in , a plant with limited genetic characterization, indicates that medicinal plants can provide a viable platform for synthetic biology. More detailed methods are provided in the online Methods. Structural characterization is shown in  and . Generation of Transgenic C. roseus Hairy Root Cultures The expression construct pCAMRebHRebF was transformed into  ATCC 15834 via electroporation (1mm cuvette, 1.25 kV). pCAMPyrHRebF and pCAMSTRvm were co-transformed into  ATCC 15834 via electroporation. Transformation of  seedlings with the generated  strains was performed as previously reported (). Evaluation of Alkaloid Production in Transgenic C. roseus Hairy Roots Every transgenic hairy root line that survived hygromycin selection media was evaluated for alkaloid production. Transformed hairy roots were grown in Gamborg’s B5 solid media (half strength basal salts, full strength vitamins, 30 g/L sucrose, 6 g/L agar, pH 5.7). The total chloride concentration in Gamborg’s B5 formulation is ~ 1mM. Three-week-old hairy roots were ground with a mortar, pestle and 106 μm acid washed glass beads in methanol (10 mL/g of fresh weight hairy roots). The crude natural product mixtures were filtered through 0.2 mm cellulose acetate membrane (VWR) and subsequently subjected to LC-MS analysis. Additionally, hairy roots transformed with wild-type  lacking the plasmid were also evaluated. Brominated Alkaloid Production in Transgenic C. roseus Hairy Roots A selected transformed hairy root line was grown for two weeks in low chloride solid media (67 mg/L (NH)SO, 353 mg/L Ca(NO).4HO, 61 mg/L MgSO, 1250 mg/L KNO, half strength Murashige and Skoog’s micronutrient salts and full strength Murashige and Skoog’s vitamins, 3 μM total chloride concentration). Hairy roots were transferred to the same media supplemented with either potassium bromide or potassium iodide (10 – 20 mM final concentration) and cultivated for an additional two weeks. Hairy roots were then processed and alkaloid production analyzed as described above (). Experiments were performed in duplicate..