Synthetic biology is more ambitious than conventional genetic engineering, and aims to
            design and reconstruct biological systems or even entire bacterial genomes. An essential
            technique in synthetic biology is the physical assemble of multiple small DNA fragments
            into large constructs with a defined order and orientation.
            Traditional methods rely on restriction enzyme digestion followed by ligation, and while
            this approach works well for the insertion of a single DNA sequence into a vector, as
            well as being time-consuming, it is often hard to find enough distinct restriction sites
            for the cloning of multiple DNA fragments. Two techniques,
            BioBrick™ developed at MIT and BglBrick developed at UC
                Berkeley, standardized the process of DNA assembly by using standard
            restriction sites. Biological parts were flanked by four restriction sites (two on each
            side) and the assembly products of the first round can subsequently be used in the next
            round, thus permitting the assembly of multiple parts. The BioBrick method is limited by a number of ‘forbidden
            sites'. This has resulted in the development of a series of ligation-independent
            cloning (LIC) strategies that offered sequence-independent assembly. These include SLIC
            (sequence and ligase independent cloning), In-Fusion™ (Clontech)
                technologies, the ‘Gibson' isothermal assembly
                method and CPEC (circular polymerase extension cloning). These methods are dependent on overlapping homologous sequences at
            the ends of the DNA fragments. SLIC, In-Fusion™ and the Gibson
            isothermal assembly method use a mechanism called ‘chew back and
                anneal', while CPEC relies on annealing of
            complimentary DNA regions and a single high-fidelity PCR cycle. Using
            the isothermal assembly method, Gibson and his colleagues successfully assembled three
            5-kb DNA molecules using fragments of only 40 bp overlaps. This method was also
            used to assemble a 900-kb molecule . The Gibson method
            was also effective in gene synthesis, and an entire 16.3-kilobase mouse mitochondrial
            genome was synthesized through three rounds of assembly from 600 overlapping
                60-mers. Several competing approaches using type IIs restriction enzymes have also been developed,
            such as Golden Gate cloning and Pairwise Selection Assembly
                (PSA). Since type IIs restriction enzymes cut outside of their
            recognition sequence, through proper design of the cleavage sites this approach is
                scarless. Using Golden Gate cloning, Weber  assembled a 33-kb DNA molecule from 44 individual parts in three steps.
            Blake  used PSA to reconstruct a completely synthetic 91-kb
            molecule in six rounds of assembly. In general, assembly of DNA fragments occurs on
            three scales – ‘parts to genes', ‘genes to pathway' and
            ‘pathways to genomes' – and each assembly strategy
            described above has its own advantages and disadvantages at different scales. We have developed an alternative strategy for the assembly of multiple DNA segments in
            one reaction based on φBT1 integrase-mediated recombination , termed
            site-specific recombination-based tandem assembly (SSRTA). We previously established a
            site-specific recombination system based on  phage φBT1
            integrase-mediated integration , and identified 16 pairs
            of non-compatible  and  recombination sites. The
            φBT1 integration system is highly efficient and accurate because no recombination
            can occur between  sites with different central di-nucleotides. The SSRTA method is sequence-independent, and excellent for the combinatorial
            assembly of multiple biological parts in a defined order, even with those with high GC
            contents (70%). The utility of SSRTA was demonstrated in the assembly of an entire
            epothilone biosynthetic gene cluster (62.4 kb) from ten individual parts. The recombination efficiencies of φBT1 integrase-catalyzed reactions between
                     and  sites  were over 90% in our previous
                    studies and could therefore be used for establishing a
                robust DNA assembly approach. This system contains 16 pairs of mutated recombination
                sites, the purified φBT1 integrase and a simple buffer (see Materials and
                Methods). Once the target DNA modules have been flanked by a pair of non-compatible
                     sites, multiple fragments can be assembled in one reaction
                simultaneously at 30°C  (). Because
                site-specific recombination occurs by precise breakage-joining events and do not
                involve any DNA synthesis or loss, this method is highly accurate, and no errors are
                introduced after assembly. We selected the epothilone biosynthetic gene cluster to test this SSRTA method.
                Epothilone polyketides are promising anti-cancer drugs with remarkable
                microtubule-stabilizing activity. The total length of the gene cluster is nearly
                56 kb, and consists of six open reading frames ( to )
                and ten modules, including one loading module (LM), one non-ribosomal peptide
                synthetase (NRPS) module and eight polyketide synthase (PKS) modules. Modules 3 to 6
                form a whole ORF defined as , while modules 7 and 8 form  (see Supplemental Fig. S1). EpoK, a cytochrome P450 involved in
                epoxidation of epothilones C and D to A and B, was not included in
                this work. The purified genomic DNA of the epothilone-producing myxobacterial strain
                     So0157-2 was used as the template for PCR
                amplification of the modules. Due to the high GC content (69.5%) of
                the epothilone biosynthetic gene cluster, we adopted an ‘entry clone'
                strategy to place individual modules into a series of vectors containing the
                appropriate pairs of recombination sites beforehand, instead of engineering the
                recombination sites into the 5′-terminus of PCR primers. We constructed a series of ‘entry vectors' with the apramycin resistance
                gene () flanked by a pair of recombination sites. We also put two
                    I recognition sites close to the recombination sites. After the
                vectors were digested with I, the target DNA modules were inserted into
                the ‘entry vectors' through TA cloning ().
                The whole epothilone biosynthetic gene cluster was divided into small parts to
                facilitate amplification by high-fidelity PCR (PrimerSTAR™ HS DNA polymerase,
                Takara) (Supplemental Fig. S1). Through PCR amplification and sub-cloning, we
                constructed nine independent ‘entry clones' which contained all the
                essential genes for epothilones production. The ribosomal binding site sequences
                were fused in the 5′-termus of each open reading frame (ORF) by PCR
                amplification (Supplemental Fig. S1). After linearization by restriction enzymes,
                these ‘entry clones' were ready for tandem assembly  It
                should be noted that the genes in each entry clone can be replaced by any other
                desired module. The details of the construction process are described in Materials
                and Methods, Supplemental Fig. S1 and Tables S1 and S2. Plasmid pZLE10 was designed
                to propagate the circular assembly products in , and then to
                integrate into the  genome for epothilone production (). The construction process was divided into two steps: first we combined 
                DNA sequences from five individual clones and removed the scar sequences inside the
                ORF. Then we assembled all the epothlione biosynthetic genes from seven individual
                clones in one reaction. First we tested the ability to combine  from four
                ‘entry clones' (). The plasmids
                    pTA0006-M3-, pTA0613-M4, pTA1303-M5, pTA0315-M6 and pZLE10 were
                linearized (Supplemental Fig. S2) and incubated with φBT1 integrase overnight
                (or over 8 hrs) at 30°C. As shown in , multiple
                assembly products were obtained (the correct, complete assembly product was a
                29.8-kb plasmid). The  reaction products were transformed into  strain DH10B by electroporation. After selection with apramycin and
                neomycin, resistant clones were isolated and the plasmid DNA was extracted. PCR
                analysis of the linker regions between modules and restriction enzyme digestion
                indicated that the five segments had assembled correctly (, Supplemental Fig. S3 and S4). We next explored the possibility of
                combining seven segments in a one-step reaction to generate pZLE10- (, Supplemental Fig. S2 and S4). As shown in , we obtained the assembled plasmid (62.4 kb)
                successfully. Thus, this tandem assembly system can be used to assemble at least
                seven DNA segments into a circular molecule . DNA assembly provides a means for extensively changing the genetics of entire
                biological pathways and cells. This may be useful for creating organisms capable of
                more than overproduce individual proteins – a common goal of cut-and-paste
                cloning techniques. Several successful approaches have been described that achieve
                this aim, such as BioBrick standard assembly, the
                ‘Gibson' isothermal assembly method and the Golden
                Gate assembly method. In this manuscript we have demonstrated the
                utility of the SSRTA method by reconstructing the epothilone biosynthetic gene
                cluster. Seven independent DNA fragments were assembled into a circular plasmid
                (62.4 kb) through a one-step  incubation. An ideal assembly
                method should have no forbidden sites, would be suitable for combinatorial assembly
                of different parts from standard modules, and importantly, would allow assembly of
                the parts in a defined order. The SSRTA method described here is
                based on site-specific recombination between a series of non-compatible 
                and  sites and so concerns about forbidden sites are not relevant. It is
                notable that the epothilone biosynthetic gene cluster contains ten direct repeat
                sequences larger than 100 bp, including a 554-bp direct repeat. Many
                antibiotic biosynthetic gene clusters contains such direct repeats. Homology-based assembly methods may not be appropriate in these
                cases, but SSRAT has proved successful. Furthermore, each ‘entry vector'
                could be used to build libraries of biological parts. These parts could be
                reconstructed in a defined order through combinatorial assembly (Supplemental Fig.
                S5). PCR products could also be directly used in this SSRTA method. Details of the
                pairs of non-compatible recombination sites and the sequences of PCR primers are
                described in Supplemental Fig. S6. The shortcoming of the SSRTA method is that it
                introduces scar sequences (, 42 bp) between modules after
                assembly, although scar sequences between genes may not be problematic. Synthetic biology holds promise in the development of cheaper drugs and
                ‘green' biofuels, efficient environmental remediation and targeted
                therapies for diseases. This SSRTA method provides an
                alternative way to rebuild genetic pathways and networks based on a phage-encoded
                large serine recombinase. Since nearly ten of these recombinases have been
                biochemically characterized, this method could be widely
                adopted in other systems. This would also allow applications that combine multiple
                SSRTAs. System design and construction of the ‘entry
                    vectors' A major feature of this SSRTA system is the use pairs of non-compatible
                    recombination sites. Non-compatible sites cannot recombine with each other, and
                    the stringent control that this offers is the main strength of the system (). To assemble the full-length epothilone biosynthetic
                    gene cluster (see supplemental Fig. S1) from six independent clones, seven pairs
                    of / sites are needed. We chose pairs 0, 3, 6, 7, 12, 13
                    and 15, the sequences of which are given in our previous report. These recombination sites were used to construct seven ‘entry
                    vectors', named pTA0006, pTA0613, pTA1307, pTA0712, pTA1203, pTA0315 and
                    pTA1303 (). pTA0006 was generated using primers PT1
                    (containing ) and PTF (containing
                    ) to amplify the apramycin-resistance gene
                        (), and the PCR product was inserted into pMD19-T by TA
                    cloning. Similarly, primers PTB6 (containing ) and PTP13
                    (containing ) were used to construct pTA0613; primers
                    PTB13 (containing ) and PTP7 (containing
                            ) were used to construct pTA1307; primers PTB7
                    (containing ) and PTP12 (containing
                        ) were used to construct pTA0712; primers PTB12
                    (containing ) and PTP3 (containing
                        ) were used to construct pTA1203; primers PTB3
                    (containing ) and PTP15 (containing
                        ) were used to construct pTA0315; and primers PTB13
                    (containing ) and PTP3 (containing
                        ) were used to construct pTA1303 (Supplemental Table
                    S1 and S2). The apramycin-resistance gene was cloned into the ‘entry
                    vectors' in the same orientation in each case, as shown in . Construction of the ‘entry clones' and destination
                    vector The complete epothilone biosynthetic gene cluster was divided into 17 parts for
                    PCR amplification (Supplemental Fig. S1). To clone , a 4289-bp DNA
                    fragment was amplified using primers 00a and 00b, and then inserted into pTA0006
                    by TA cloning to generate pTA0006-M0; for , a 4256-bp DNA fragment
                    was amplified using primers 01a and 01b, and then inserted into pTA0613 to
                    generate pTA0613-M1; for , a 5525-bp DNA fragment was amplified using
                    primers 02a and 02b, and then inserted into pTA1307 to generate pTA1307-M2; for
                    module 3, a 4766-bp DNA fragment was amplified using primers 03a and 03b, and
                    then inserted into pTA0006 to generate pTA0006-M3. Module 4 was divided into two
                    parts, M4a (primers 04a/ZE05, 3252 bp) and M4b (primers ZE06/04b,
                    3220 bp); these were amplified and cloned into pTA0613 separately, and
                    then combined into one plasmid to generate pTA0613-M4 by enzyme digestion and
                    ligation. Modules 5, 6, 7 and 8 were each divided into two parts. M5a (primers
                    05a/ZE07, 3607 bp) and M5b (primers ZE08/05b, 2767 bp) were PCR
                    amplified and cloned into pTA1303 separately, and then combined into one plasmid
                    to generate pTA1303-M5. M6a (primers 06a/ZE09, 2490 bp) and M6b (primers
                    ZE10/06b, 2611 bp) were PCR amplified and cloned into pTA0315 separately,
                    and then combined into one plasmid to generate pTA0315-M6. M7a (primers
                    07a/ZE11, 3506 bp) and M7b (primers ZE12/07b, 2683 bp) were PCR
                    amplified and cloned into pTA1203 separately. M8a (primers 08a/ZE13,
                    2649 bp) and M8b (primers ZE14/08b, 3188 bp) were PCR amplified
                    and cloned into pTA1203 separately. Plasmids containing genes from modules 7 and
                    8 were combined together by ligation after enzyme digestion to generate
                        pTA1203-. Module 9 was divided into three parts, M9a (primers
                    09a/ZE15, 3088 bp), M9b (primers ZE16/ZE19, 2229 bp) and M9c
                    (primers ZE20/09b, 2443 bp); they were PCR amplified and cloned into
                    pTA0315 separately, and then combined into one plasmid to generate pTA0315-M9.
                    The correct orientation of all inserts in the ‘entry clones' was
                    confirmed. To facilitate selection in the tandem assembly process, a PCR
                    fragment (primers Oxj128R/Oxj129, 1338 bp) containing the 
                    gene (conferring resistance to kanamycin and neomycin) was inserted into
                    pTA0006-M3 through I digestion and ligation (see ). The destination vector pZLE10 used for integration and expression of the
                    assembled gene cluster in  was constructed as follows. A PCR
                    fragment (primers ZE03/ZE04, 1956 bp) containing the 
                    promoter, the terminator from pIJ6021, the chloramphenicol
                    resisitance gene, and the  and 
                    sites were inserted into the pMD-19T vector (Takara) to generate an intermediate
                    plasmid. This was digested with I and II to release a
                    1962-bp fragment. Plasmid T-Bxbatt1-Bxbatt2 (B. Zhang, L. Zhang, R. Dai, M. Yu,
                    G. Zhao, and X. Ding, manuscript in preparation) was digested with I
                    and II to release a 4441-bp fragment containing apramycin and
                    ampicillin resistance genes and the replication origin of pUC19 and p15A. These
                    two fragments were ligated to generate pZLE12. pZLE12 was then digested with
                        I to release a 3713-bp fragment and plasmid pSET152 was digested
                    with I and I to release a 3402-bp fragment; these two
                    fragments were ligated to generate pZLE10 (see Supplemental Table S2). Tandem assembly of epoD and the complete epothilone biosynthetic gene
                    cluster E.
                        coli The enzymes used to linearize the ‘entry clones' for 
                    assembly procedures are described in Supplemental Fig. S2. DNA segments under
                    10 kb were isolated by 0.8% agarose gel electrophoresis in 1×TAE
                    buffer, and purified using an agarose gel DNA extraction kit (Generay); segments
                    larger than 10 kb were purified by phenol-chloroform extraction and
                    ethanol precipitation. For pZLE10- assembly, the five DNA segments
                    containing modules 3, 4, 5 and 6 and pZLE10 were incubated with φBT1
                    integrase overnight (or over 8 hrs) at 30°C. The buffer contained
                    10 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM KCl, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA
                    and 1 mM DTT. Heterologous expression, purification and preservation of
                    φBT1 integrase were described in our previous work. The
                    tandemly assembled products were purified by phenol-chloroform extraction and
                    ethanol precipitation, and analysis by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE)
                    performed on 1% agrose gels (Biolab) in 0.5×TBE buffer, with the following
                    parameters: switch time, 1–6 seconds; run time, 11 hours; angle,
                    120°; and voltage gradient, 6 V/cm. Recombination events were
                    detected by PCR analysis. The assembled products were transformed into  strain DH10B by electroporation (25 μF capacitance,
                    1.8 kV/mm, and 200 ohm resistance). Transformants were selected
                    with apramycin and neomycin. The plasmid from surviving clones were identified
                    by PCR using primers ES53/54, then isolated and purified. The plasmid was
                    identified by further PCR reactions of the linker regions between modules and by
                    restriction digestion (, and Supplemental Fig.
                    S3). Correct clones were propagated for the next round of assembly. For assembly
                    of the total epothilone biosynthetic gene cluster, the seven DNA segments
                    containing , , , , ,
                        F and pZLE10 were incubated with φBT1 integrase, and the
                    subsequent steps were as described above. L.Z., G.-P.Z. and X.-M.D. designed research; L.Z. performed research; L.Z. and
                X.-M.D. analyzed data; and L.Z., G.-P. Z. and X.-M.D. wrote the paper..