Microbial fermentation of renewable
resources into green fuels and chemicals is playing a major part in
the development of the biobased economy. The production costs of these
environmentally friendly processes have to be reduced before they
become competitive with traditional fossil fuel-based industries.
To this end, microbes other than the widely used model organisms,
such as  and , are being evaluated for
their prospective abilities to act as production hosts. Thermophilic
organisms are of particular interest due to their multiple advantages
over mesophilic organisms when being used as production hosts. For example, their ability to grow and ferment at thermophilic temperatures
reduces the cooling costs, and increase substrate
and product solubility, it reduces the
contamination risk with mesophiles, and there are examples
of using thermophiles for nonsterilized fermentations which would
reduce sterilization costs, additionally, the fermentation
process runs at the optimum temperature for enzymatic lignocellulose
degradation, allowing for efficient simultaneous saccharification
and fermentation. However, the use of nonmodel
thermophiles as production hosts is generally hampered by the lack
of well-developed genome editing tools compared to those available
for currently used mesophilic model organisms. Previous work has established basic genome editing tools for the
facultative thermophilic strain  ET 138 (referred to as ET 138 herein), allowing for the introduction
of scar-free markerless gene deletions using homologous recombination. grows
between 37 and 65 °C and efficiently utilizes both C and C sugars. Its main product is -lactate, and in order to use ET 138 as a versatile platform
host for the production of other chemicals and fuels, its  gene was deleted. No counterselection tool was used
in this process, resulting in a very laborious screening process to
obtain clean mutants. Subsequently, a -based counterselection was developed that relies on
the toxicity of high concentrations of 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β--galactopyranoside (X-gal). Using this
system, the sporulation gene  and the pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex subunit gene  were consecutively
deleted in the  mutant. The resulting triple
mutant strain was sporulation-deficient, which is desired in industrial
fermentations for safety reasons, and did not produce -lactate
and acetate. Since the  mutant was also acetate
auxotrophic, the double mutant ET 138 Δ Δ was selected as a basic platform strain
for future studies. Although the -based counterselection system significantly decreased
the time needed for mutant selection, the developed process is still
time-consuming, with the fastest possible route to gene deletion taking
approximately 2 to 3 weeks from transformation to generation of a
scar-free markerless knockout. Moreover,
the counterselection step is not stringent enough for removal of genes
that are essential for the fitness and the metabolism of the strain.
For the successfully engineered genes, only 12.5–33% of the
colonies had the mutant genotype, whereas for other genes, only wild-type
revertants and false positives were obtained, generating mostly (66–88%)
or in some cases only wild-type revertants or false positives. The large number of wild-type revertants due
to the absence or inefficiency of counterselection is a general issue
in several nonmodel organisms. This creates the need
for laborious PCR-based screening and strongly decreases throughput
of the engineering process, limiting the study of these organisms
and their development into industrial production hosts. One
of the fastest and most efficient methods currently available
for genome editing is a system based on the  Cas9 (spCas9) RNA-guided DNA endonuclease
of the type II CRISPR–Cas defense system. Jinek et al. showed that a short single guide RNA (sgRNA)
molecule can direct the spCas9 endonuclease to a desired complementary
target, called protospacer. In the presence
of the short 5′-NGG-3′ DNA motif immediately downstream
of the 3′-end of the protospacer, called protospacer adjacent
motif (PAM), spCas9 introduces a lethal chromosomal double stranded
DNA break (DSDB). The system was applied
for genome editing of human and mouse cells, paving
the road for genome editing of a wide range of eukaryotic cells. In these eukaryotes, the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) system
repairs spCas9-induced DSDBs in an error-prone manner, creating insertion/deletion
(indel) mutations. These mutations usually render the gene inactive through frameshifting
and simultaneously prevent further spCas9 recognition and subsequent
cleavage due to the alteration of the target site. Although the NHEJ
system is generally not present or not active for most prokaryotes, the ET 138 genome contains the genes for the
basic prokaryotic NHEJ-like system, consisting of DNA ligase LigD
and DNA-end-binding protein Ku. However, the functionality
of the NHEJ-like system in ET 138 is unknown. The combination
of spCas9 activity with editing templates, such
as recombineering oligonucleotides or plasmid-borne sequences for
homologous recombination, has been recently exploited for prokaryotic
genome editing. spCas9 was employed to introduce DSDBs in prokaryotic
genomes. These breaks modestly induced the recombination of a provided
rescuing/editing template into the targeted chromosome, resulting
in genetically modified cells. The edited cells avoided subsequent spCas9 targeting events, but
in many studies, the number of surviving/edited colonies was low,
with a high percentage of mixed (both wild type and mutant) or escape
mutant genotypes. The number of surviving colonies as well as the percentage
of successfully edited cells was higher in studies that allowed homologous
recombination of the editing templates to take place prior to spCas9
targeting. In this way, spCas9 was employed for stringent counterselection
of unedited genomes. For this approach, either homologous recombination
was faster than spCas9 targeting or  expression was induced after homologous recombination. Moreover, the vast majority of studies required either a multiple-plasmid
system or very tightly controlled promoters. Currently, only one plasmid, one selection marker, and no inducible
promoters are available for ET 138, limiting the options for such
systems. Many of the well-known and widely applied genome editing
tools, including CRISPR–Cas9 editing, are not amenable to thermophiles.
The enzymatic machineries of these tools have not proven to be stable
at temperatures higher than 37 °C. Whereas the native CRISPR–Cas
type I system of a thermophilic archaeon has been employed for genome
editing and chromosome-based genetic
manipulations have been reported for a few naturally competent thermophiles, no reports are available on using Cas9-based
editing in thermophilic organisms. In this study, we show that
spCas9 is inactive in ET 138 at temperatures
from 42 °C and above and we tightly control its activity by altering
the cultivation temperature rather than by using an inducible promoter.
We create a clean gene deletion, a gene disruption, and a gene insertion
by employing a plasmid-borne homologous recombination template for
introduction of the desired modifications to the genome at 45 °C,
and the nonedited cells are subsequently eliminated by spCas9 counterselection
at 37 °C. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time
that a temperature-controlled recombination/counterselection tool
has been employed for genome editing purposes, and it is the first
time that a Cas9-based editing tool has been used for engineering
the genome and the metabolism of a moderate thermophile. Expression Validation of spCas9 at
Different Temperatures Thermoanaerobacterium
saccharolyticum http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf In a parallel study, we demonstrated
that the  sgRNA loading to spCas9 requires
temperatures below 42 °C, which is the limiting step toward the  formation of the active sgRNA–spCas9 complex
(to be published). This result motivated us to evaluate the  activity of spCas9 in ET 138 at different temperatures.
We designed and constructed the modular pWUR_Cas9nt construct, which
encompasses the  gene of  (referred to as  herein) and an sgRNA-expressing module for which the spacer is predicted
not to target any site of the  genome (i.e., nt, for nontargeting). The backbone of pWUR_Cas9nt
is the pNW33n vector, which was the only available vector for  (A). The first basic requirement for
the design of the pWUR_Cas9nt was the development of promoters that
will drive the expression of the two components of the system: the  effector and its sgRNA
guide module. For many nonmodel organisms, the number of available
promoters and plasmids is very limited. ET 138 is no exception; only
two promoters have been evaluated for expression in : the heterologous P from  and the native
P. The
latter is undesired, as integration of pNW33n-based HR plasmids into
the ET 138 genome is possible and we
want to prevent crossover events between the pWUR_Cas9nt construct
and the  genome over the
promoter region. Additionally, an inducible system would be desirable.
For these purposes, we tested the  promoter (P) from . In the
genome of its native host, this promoter is induced by xylose and
repressed by glucose. To test expression in ET 138, we constructed
the pWUR_lacZ vector; we used pNW33n as the cloning and expression
vector, and we introduced P in front
of the -derived  gene, previously shown to be functional in ET 138. Low expression was observed after overnight
culture in LB2 liquid medium without an added carbon source, and strong
expression was observed with both xylose and glucose (). It is probable that the catabolite
repression mechanism of ET 138 does not recognize the  (catabolite repression element) sequence present on P, resulting in lack of transcriptional repression
by glucose in  ET 138. Although
P is not tightly controllable in , we still selected it to drive the expression
of  from pWUR_Cas9nt, maintaining the possibility
to explore the effects of different  expression levels. During all further experiments
in this study, xylose and glucose were both added to the media at
all of the culturing temperatures to ensure constant induction of  expression at all times
from P. Additionally, we placed the
sgRNA module under the control of the  phosphotransacetylase () promoter P without its RBS. It is generally
stressed that the transcriptional start site (TSS) of the promoter
driving sgRNA expression must be characterized. However, the TSS of
P that we use for the same purpose
in our study is not characterized, and since we remove only the predicted
RBS, we expect that a few nucleotides are still added to the 5′-end
of the sgRNA molecules. Even so, we hypothesized that this extended
sgRNA module will be efficiently loaded to spCas9 and that it will
not influence the Cas9 targeting efficiency and specificity, since
it is located at the PAM distal end. By verifying our hypothesis,
we would facilitate the application of our system to other nonmodel
organisms with promoters that do not have their TSS determined. We evaluated spCas9 expression and toxicity levels in ET 138 by transforming
a single batch of competent cells with the nontargeting pWUR_Cas9nt
vector and with the empty pNW33n control vector. The transformed cells
were plated on LB2 plates supplemented with chloramphenicol. We incubated
the plates overnight only at 55 °C, as previous incubation attempts
at 37 and 42 °C were not successful (data not shown). One colony
per transformation was used for sequential transfers in LB2 broth, transferring the cultures from 55 to 37 °C, with two
intermediate steps at 45 and 42 °C. We isolated total RNA from
each pWUR_Cas9nt culture after 18 h of incubation at 55, 42, and 37
°C and performed semiquantitative reverse transcription (rt)-PCR
using specific primers for the  gene. Transcription of  was observed for all tested temperatures (B). The growth of the -expressing cultures was similar to that of the pNW33n control
cultures at all temperatures (B), indicating that the expression of  is not toxic for ET 138 cells at any
of the tested temperatures. Schematic overview of the basic pWUR_Cas9nt
construct. (A) The
non-codon-optimized  gene was employed for the construction of the pWUR_Cas9nt vector,
since  and  GC content and codon usage are highly
similar. In the pNW33n-based basic construct, s was placed under the control of P. A Rho-independent terminator from () was introduced after the stop codon
of the gene. The  module is followed by an
sgRNA-expressing module that encompasses a spacer which does not target
the genome of ET 138. The sgRNA module was placed under the transcriptional
control of P from  (without its RBS), which was followed by
a second Rho-independent terminator from . The spCas9 and sgRNA modules were synthesized
as one fragment, which was subsequently cloned into pNW33n through
the BspHI and HindIII restriction sites. (B) To prevent double restriction
sites and create a modular system, five silent point mutations (C192A,
T387C, T1011A, C3126A, G354A) were introduced to the gene (depicted
as *). The depicted restriction sites are unique in the construct
and introduced to facilitate the exchange of genetic parts. The spacer
was easily exchanged to targeting spacers via BsmBI restriction digestion
or Gibson assembly. The basic construct did not contain any HR templates,
but in cases where these were added, they were always inserted immediately
upstream of the spCas9 module and downstream of the origin of replication.
(C) Total RNA was isolated from ET 138 wild-type cells transformed
with pWUR_Cas9nt or pNW33n and grown at 55, 45, and 37 °C. Six
cDNA libraries were produced with rt-PCR and used as templates for
PCR with cas9sp-specific primers that amplify a 255 bp region. The
PCR results are depicted as follows: lane 1 corresponds to the marker
(1kb+ DNA ladder, ThermoFisher), lanes 2–4 correspond to ET
138 wild-type cultures transformed with pWUR_Cas9nt and grown at 55,
42, or 37 °C, respectively, lanes 5–7 correspond to ET
138 wild-type cultures transformed with pNW33n and grown at 55, 42,
or 37 °C, respectively, lanes 7, 8, 9, 11, 12 correspond to different
negative controls, and lane 10 corresponds to the positive control,
for which pWUR_Cas9nt was used as the PCR template. (A) Sequential transfer scheme of wild-type ET 138 cultures
to
evaluate spCas9 expression and targeting efficiency at different temperatures.
ET 138 cells were transformed with the pWUR_Cas9sp1, pWUR_Cas9sp2,
pWUR_Cas9sp3, pWUR_Cas9nt, and pNW33n vectors and plated on LB2 agar
plates with chloramphenicol (day 1). After overnight (ON) incubation
at 55 °C, single colonies were restreaked on LB2 agar plates
with chloramphenicol and incubated ON at 55 and 45 °C (day 2).
Colonies from the 45 °C plates were transferred to LB2 agar plates
with chloramphenicol for ON incubation at 37 °C (day 3). The
plates from days 2 and 3 were then used for inoculation of liquid
medium (day 4); 1 colony per 55, 45, and 37 °C plate was transferred
to LB2 medium with xylose, glucose, and chloramphenicol for ON incubation
at 55, 45, and 37 °C, respectively, while one extra colony per
45 °C plate was transferred to the same medium for ON incubation
at 42 °C. (B) Results of the targeting experiment showing OD measurements from cultures of wild-type ET 138 transformed
with the three different  targeting  constructs, the nontargeting  construct, and pNW33n.
The growth of the cells with the  targeting constructs
is greatly affected at 37 °C, which is not observed for cells
containing the nontargeting constructs. Validation of spCas9 Activity at Different
Temperatures As the  genome encompasses genes for the basic prokaryotic NHEJ-like system, our first approach to construct a spCas9-based genome editing tool
focused on determining the  temperature limits
of spCas9 and the capacity of the ET 138 NHEJ-like mechanism to repair
spCas9-induced DSDBs. We chose to target  as
a first proof of principle. The  gene encodes
the orotidine 5′-phosphate decarboxylase and is part of the
operon for pyrimidine biosynthesis. Removal of the gene causes uracil
auxotrophy and resistance to the toxic uracil analogue 5-fluorootic
acid (5-FOA). It is a frequently used selection and counterselection
system in many organisms including thermophiles, and to this
end, we initially made a clean  deletion mutant
ET 138 Δ Δ Δ by adding the fused 1 kb up- and downstream  flanks to pNW33n and applying 5-FOA pressure to select
for double crossover mutants. A total of nine rounds of subculturing
on selective media containing uracil and 5-FOA were required before
pure knockouts were obtained with a knockout efficiency of around
50% (data not shown), making the process rather time consuming. Whereas
integration of pNW33-based HR plasmids in ET 138 strains occurs, likely due to the rolling circle-based replication
of pNW33n, subsequent excision of the plasmid
and identification of clean mutant strains is difficult. The speed and ease of this process could be
significantly increased by using a strong counterselection system,
such as spCas9. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf We continued our study by constructing three
vectors based on the pWUR_Cas9nt sequence, designated pWUR_Cas9sp1,
pWUR_Cas9sp2, and pWUR_Cas9sp3, each containing a different -targeting spacer (sp1–3). We transformed a single
batch of wild-type ET 138 competent cells with the three targeting
vectors, the nontargeting control pWUR_Cas9nt, and the empty vector
control pNW33n. After initial outgrowth at 55 °C on LB2 plates
without sugar, one confirmed transformant for each construct was subjected
to a sequential plating and culturing process in which the temperature
was stepwise decreased from 55 to 37 °C to induce spCas9 expression
(A). Normal
growth was observed for all cultures at 55, 45, and 42 °C, as
well as for the control cultures at 37 °C. No growth was observed
for any of the cultures with targeting sgRNA
modules at 37 °C (B). We repeated the transformation and culturing process using
the double mutant  ET138
Δ Δ strain. This strain is sporulation-deficient, it cannot
produce -lactate, and it was constructed as the basic platform
strain for further metabolic engineering work. We obtained similar
results as those for the wild-type  ET138 strain (), and we continued
our study using the double mutant strain. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf In line with the  assay data, the aforementioned
results indicate that the designed spCas9 system is active at 37 °C
but inactive and does not introduce lethal DSDBs to the ET 138 genome
at temperatures from 42 °C and above. It also indicates that
the NHEJ system in ET 138 is inactive at 37 °C or not active
enough to counteract the spCas9 activity. In addition, the sequencing
results of the pWUR_Cas9sp2 construct revealed the deletion of seven
nucleotides near the 3′ end of P (). However, the results of
the targeting experiment support our hypothesis that the uncharacterized
nature of P, and possibly the extra
nucleotides at the 5′ end of the sgRNA module, does not hinder
the targeting efficiency of spCas9. Moreover, the truncated P of the pWUR_Cas9sp2 construct clearly
expresses enough sgRNA molecules, and the observed seven-nucleotide
long deletion has no impact to the targeting efficiency of the corresponding
spCas9/sgRNA complex. The latter two observations reveal that our
system tolerates a certain level of flexibility in the 5′-extension
of the sgRNA molecule. Efficient Gene Deletion Using a HR-CRISPR–Cas9
Counterselection
System http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf Taking into account the results described so far,
we decided to develop a Cas9-based editing system for ET 138 that
exploits its efficient homologous recombination mechanism and the temperature-induced spCas9 activity
at 37 °C. The new experimental setup consists of a single plasmid
that combines the recombination template and the spCas9- and sgRNA-expressing
modules. Providing the cells with the appropriate plasmid-borne editing
template at 55 °C and then inducing the expression of active
spCas9 at 37 °C through a sequential culturing process is expected
to form a powerful homologous recombination and counterselection system.
To generate a  deletion mutant, pWUR_Cas9sp1
was selected as the targeting vector for further
experiments, which was always compared to the nontargeting control,
pWUR_Cas9nt. To both vectors, we added a fusion of the two  flanks (each 1 kb), creating the pWUR_Cas9nt_hr and
pWUR_Cas9sp1_hr vectors (i.e., hr, for homologous recombination) (A). After transforming
the four constructs (two with flanks and two without flanks) into
ET 138 Δ Δ at
55 °C, one verified transformant per construct was inoculated
into TVMY selection medium containing xylose and glucose and supplemented
with uracil (TVMY) to complement the auxotrophy in the
case of successful  deletion. After growth at
55 °C for 24 h, cells were sequentially transferred every 24
h to fresh media while gradually decreasing the culturing temperature
from 55 to 37 °C, with an intermediate transfer at 45 °C.
After three more transfers at 37 °C to allow for efficient spCas9
counterselection, cells were transferred back to 55 °C with an
intermediate transfer at 45 °C, allowing for gradual adjustment
of their metabolism. As expected, PCR on genomic DNA from the pWUR_Cas9nt
and pWURCas9_sp1 cultures showed no  knockout
bands at any culturing temperature due to the lack of a homologous
recombination template in the constructs. In line with the initial  tests, pWURCas9_sp1 cultures at 37 °C showed
almost no growth, whereas the pWUR_Cas9nt cultures at all temperatures
showed the expected growth for ET 138. PCR on genomic DNA from the
liquid cultures containing the vectors with  flanks
showed the absence of knockout bands for the pWUR_Cas9nt_hr cultures
from the first culturing step at 37 °C onward, but very strong  knockout bands for the pWUR_Cas9sp1_hr cultures for
the same culturing steps mentioned above (A). The striking difference in the density
of the knockout bands between the targeting pWUR_Cas9sp1_hr and the
nontargeting pWUR_Cas9nt_hr cultures indicates successful spCas9 activity
and  targeting by the pWUR_Cas9sp1_hr construct.
It furthermore indicates that the counterselection activity of spCas9
is already efficient from the first culturing step at 37 °C.
Growth of the pWUR_Cas9nt_hr cultures was similar to the control at
all temperatures, whereas the pWUR_Cas9sp1_hr cultures showed poor
growth in the first two culturing steps at 37 °C, but the growth
was reconstituted to control levels from the third culturing step
at 37 °C onward (). After
an upshift in the temperature, colony PCR of the 55 °C colonies
showed that 5 out of 10 tested pWUR_Cas9sp1_hr colonies were pure  deletion mutants, i.e., an editing efficiency of 50%
for our system (data not shown). The correct mutations were also verified
by sequencing. None of the 10 tested pWUR_Cas9nt_hr colonies (nontargeting
control) were  deletion mutants, demonstrating
functional spCas9 targeting. To improve the efficiency and
speed of the system, we repeated
the process for the pWUR_Cas9sp1_hr-containing strain and reduced
the number of culturing steps at 37 °C from 4 to 1 while keeping
the culturing time of each step in a window between 8 and 16 h. Moreover,
we used three different media in order to observe possible medium-dependent
variations in the efficiency of the system: TVMY selection medium
supplemented with xylose, glucose, and uracil (TVMY);
TVMY selection medium supplemented with xylose and glucose but not
with uracil (TVMY); and LB2 medium supplemented with
xylose and glucose (LB2). After the final culturing step
at 55 °C, cells were plated on selective agar of the corresponding
medium, supplemented with uracil. Colony PCR on 10 randomly selected
colonies for each medium and construct showed that 9 out of 10 colonies
were pure  deletion mutants colonies from the
culturing process on TVMY medium (B). From the process with TVMY medium, 4 of the examined colonies were pure  deletion mutants, proving the efficiency of the counterselection
tool even in the presence of an auxotrophy barrier (B). The process with LB2 medium was repeated twice, with two different pWUR_Cas9sp1_hr
containing ET 138 clones. Surprisingly, all colonies evaluated from
the LB2 medium process (40 in total) contained the wild-type  gene (data not shown). At this moment, it is unclear
as to what causes this difference between the LB2 medium
and the two types of TVMY media, and this will be addressed in future
research. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf To retain spCas9 activity, antibiotics were added
in all steps.
To allow for subsequent metabolic engineering steps, however, plasmid
curing is required. After transferring a sequence-verified  deletion mutant twice in TVMY medium without antibiotics,
cells were plated on TVMY plates without antibiotics. Colony PCR with
plasmid-specific primers showed that all eight tested colonies had
lost the plasmid. Finally, we verified the 5-FOA sensitivity and the
uracil auxotrophy of two ET 138 Δ Δ Δ cultures that originated
from two of the tested colonies ET 138 (). Schematic representation of the different homologous
recombination
and spCas9-mediated mutations described in this study. The first single
crossover event (SCO) can occur by insertion of the editing plasmid
into the chromosome either through the upstream homologous region
(UHR), as depicted here, or through the downstream homologous region
(DHR). (A) Gene deletion. A scar-less, markerless  gene deletion was established after insertion of the editing vector
into the chromosome via homologous recombination with the plasmid-borne
editing template (2 × 1 kb flanks, immediately flanking the  gene and thus removing it from start to stop codon),
after which a second SCO event results in either wild-type revertants
or edited cells. The spCas9 targeting of the wild-type cells acts
as counterselection for the  mutants. (B) Gene
knockout via insertion of stop codons and a restriction site. The
followed process was similar to the gene deletion described above.
The  restriction gene was inactivated by inserting
stop codons and a restriction site between codons 212 and 221 that
were contained in a 2 kb HR fragment that expands 289 bp upstream
and 1.65 kb downstream from the start codon of the  gene on the genome of the ET 138. Between the two stop codons, an
EcoRV restriction site was added, generating a frame shift and facilitating
the screening process. The spacer was designed to target the original
sequence without stop codons and restriction site. (C) Gene knock-in.
The followed process was similar to the gene deletion and gene knockout
processes described above. The  gene was reinserted
into mutant strain ET 138 Δ Δ. This was achieved by adding the original  gene sequence between 2 × 1 kb HR flanks. The spacer was designed
to target the area between the  stop codon and
the beginning of the adjacent rho-independent transcriptional terminator.
On the HR flanks, the region between the  stop
codon and its rho-independent transcriptional terminator was inverted,
avoiding the spCas9 targeting of edited cells. (A) Agarose gel electrophoresis showing the results from PCR on
the genomic DNA of a ET 138 Δ Δ culture transformed with pWUR_Cas9sp1_hr and sequentially
transferred to different temperatures (following the depicted temperature
sequence) for detection of  deletion mutants
in the culture mixture. The  deletion mutant
band appears from the first 37 °C culturing step (lane 3) onward.
The last 2 lanes are the negative (wild-type) and positive (Δ) controls, which correspond to 2.9 and 2.1 kb DNA fragments,
respectively. (B) Agarose gel electrophoresis showing the resulting
products from colony PCR on colonies transformed with pWUR_Cas9sp1_hr
for the detection of deletion mutants. Nine out of the 10 tested colonies
(S.C.#1 to S.C.#10) that resulted from the 3-day long editing process
in TVMY (TVMY supplemented with xylose, glucose, and
uracil) medium were deletion mutants. Four out of the 10 tested colonies
(S.C.#11 to S.C.#20) that resulted from the 3-day long editing process
in TVMY (TVMY supplemented with xylose and glucose) medium
were deletion mutants. The last 2 lanes are the negative (wild-type)
and positive (Δ) controls, respectively. Expanding the Toolbox: Knocking Out the Type
I RM System To increase the potential of ET 138 as a platform
organism for the
production of green chemicals, we aimed to improve its transformation
efficiency. ET 138 has a type I restriction-modification (R-M) system.
Methylation analysis of the PacBio genome sequencing data showed the
existence of the single motif “Cm6AGNNNNNNTGT/ACm6ANNNNNNCTG”
with N6-methyladenine (m6A) modifications (unpublished data). Our
attempts to transform different pNW33n-based constructs containing
one or multiple copies of this motif were unsuccessful or gave 3-orders
of magnitude lower transformation efficiencies compared to those with
constructs of the same size that do not contain the aforementioned
motif. We decided to knock out the  restriction
gene of the  ET138 type I
R-M system, expecting to overcome the transformation obstacle and
further expand its genetic accessibility. For knocking out the  gene, we followed a different approach compared to
the  deletion process to evaluate the efficiency
of the Cas9-based counterselection editing method in the introduction
of limited-sized modifications to the genome. Between the origin of
replication () and the  gene of the pWUR_Cas9nt vector, we introduced
a 1920 bp HR fragment that resulted from the fusion of two separate
fragments: one that is composed of the 924 bp upstream of codon 212
of the  gene (including the two first nucleotides
of the codon) and one that is composed of the 986 bp downstream of
codon 221 of the  gene. In this HR fragment,
we replaced the 25 nt part between codons 212 and 221 of the  gene, including the last nucleotide of codon 212, with
an 8 nt sequence composed of two stop codons and an EcoRV restriction
site, generating a frame shift and facilitating the screening process
(B). Since
the  gene is 2952 nucleotides (984 codons) long,
only one-fifth of it will be translated due the introduction of the
stop codons. We also introduced a spacer in the sgRNA module for spCas9
targeting of the unmodified genomes, completing the construction of
the pWUR_Cas9spR_hr editing vector. ET138 Δ Δ cells
were transformed
with the new vector and sequentially cultured as before, gradually
decreasing the temperature from 55 to 37 °C, with an intermediate
transfer at 45 °C, and then increasing it back to 55 °C.
The duration of each culturing step was within a window of 8 to 16
h. Moreover, we used two types of selection media, LB2 and TVMY. Five transformants per medium were subjected
to colony PCR, after which the PCR fragments were digested with EcoRV.
All colonies from the LB2-culturing process were successfully modified
(A), giving
100% editing efficiency, whereas only two of the colonies from the
TVMY process were modified, giving 40% editing efficiency (B). This is in contrast
with the result from the  deletion process, where
there were no modified colonies resulting from the LB2-culturing process.
This suggests that the selection of culturing medium influences the
efficiency of our editing system in a variable and gene-specific manner.
Plasmid curing was performed as before, and the correct mutations
were verified by sequencing. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf We confirmed the lack of a functional
R-M system in the newly developed
ET 138 Δ Δ Δ strain by successfully transforming the plasmid-cured
cells with vector pG2K (). In previous attempts, we did not succeed in
transforming this vector into other (+) ET 138
strains as it contains the aforementioned methylation motif in its
antibiotic resistance marker gene, the kanamycin nucleotidyltransferase
() gene derived from . In
this way, we added a new antibiotic resistance marker to the toolbox
of ET 138, and we confirmed that the ET 138 Δ Δ Δ strain
can be utilized for the expansion of the genetic parts toolbox. (A) Agarose gel electrophoresis showing the
resulting products
from colony PCR on ET 138 colonies transformed with pWUR_Cas9spR_hr
for the detection of  knockout mutants from the
3-day long editing process in LB2 medium. The 2.75 kb
PCR fragments resulting after using genome-specific primers (lanes
1, 3, 5, 7, 9) were digested with the EcoRV restriction enzyme. Each
digestion mixture was loaded next to its corresponding undigested
PCR fragment (lanes 2, 4, 6, 8, 10). All colonies evaluated were shown
to be knockout mutant cells as the restriction digestion gave the
expected bands of 1.1, 1.05, and 0.6 kb. (B) Agarose gel electrophoresis
showing the resulting products from colony PCR on ET 138 colonies
transformed with pWUR_Cas9spR_hr for the detection of  knockout mutants from the 3-day long editing process in TVMY medium. The 2.75 kb PCR fragments resulting after using
genome-specific primers (lanes 1, 3, 5, 7, 9) were digested with the
EcoRV restriction enzyme. Each digestion mixture was loaded next to
its corresponding undigested PCR fragment (lanes 2, 4, 6, 8, 10).
For the two colonies composed of knockout mutant cells (lanes 1–2
and 3–4), the restriction digestion gives the expected bands
of 1.1, 1.05, and 0.6 kb. For the three nonedited colonies composed
of wild-type cells (lanes 5–6, 7–8, 9–10), the
restriction digestion gives the expected bands of 2.15 and 0.6 kb. Metabolic Engineering Using spCas9: Knock-In of the  Gene Next, we evaluated the applicability
of our Cas9-based system in markerless gene chromosomal integrations
by knocking the 942 bp long genomic fragment between the start and
stop codons of the lactate dehydrogenase () gene
into the genome of ET 138 Δ Δ Δ. The reconstitution of
lactate production in the resulting ET 138 Δ Δ strain would allow for efficient growth
under anaerobic conditions, while retaining the advantages of a sporulation-
and R-M-deficient strain. Two versions were constructed of a
pWUR_Cas9-based vector that target the ET 138 Δ Δ Δ genome
at the same position between the  stop codon
and the beginning of the adjacent rho-independent transcriptional
terminator. HR was facilitated with 1 kb flanks (pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr1)
or 0.75 kb flanks (pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr2). For both versions, the region
between the  stop codon and its rho-independent
transcriptional terminator was inverted, avoiding spCas9 targeting
(C). Wild-type  sequence was inserted in the region between the start
and stop codons to allow it to be knocked in. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf ET138 Δ Δ Δ was transformed with the two pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr
versions, and the transformants were sequentially cultured as described
before, gradually decreasing the temperature from 55 to 37 °C,
with or without an intermediate transfer step at 45 °C, and then
increasing it back to 55 °C. Each culturing step was within a
window of 8 to 16 h. Again, we used two types of selection media,
LB2 and TVMY. The colony PCR results of
the TVMY culturing processes showed that none of the tested colonies
had the knock-in genotype. The colony PCR results of the LB2 culturing
processes with the pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr1 transformant showed that with
the additional culturing step at 45 °C, 4 out of the 20 tested
colonies had the knock-in genotype (20% editing efficiency), 15 colonies
had a mixed knock-in/wild-type genotype, and only 1 colony had the
wild-type genotype (A). When the culturing step at 45 °C was omitted, only
1 out of the 20 tested colonies had the knock-in genotype, 11 colonies
had the mixed genotype, and 8 colonies had the wild-type genotype
(B). The colony
PCR results of the LB2 culturing processes with the pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr2
transformant showed that with the additional culturing step at 45
°C, 1 out of the 20 tested colonies had the knock-in genotype
(5% editing efficiency), 7 colonies had the mixed knock-in and wild-type
genotype, and only 1 colony had the wild-type genotype (). When the culturing step at 45 °C
was omitted, none of the 20 tested colonies had the knock-in genotype,
only 6 colonies had the mixed genotype, and the remaining 14 colonies
had the wild-type genotype ().
This was the first time that we observed colonies with a mixed genotype
using our editing approach. The appearance of such colonies could
be explained by relatively inefficient Cas9 targeting when the enzyme
is loaded with a suboptimal sgRNA module, as has been described for , although the
molecular basis for this phenomenon remains elusive. Alternative sgRNAs
may lead to a more stringent counterselection, thereby improving the
editing efficiency. Additionally, the difference in recombination
efficiency at specific chromosomal sites might influence the editing
efficiency of the tool. In a recent study
that combined dsDNA recombineering with Cas9 counterselection, the
efficiency of the employed system for insertions was lower than the
efficiency for deletions, whereas longer homologous regions led to
higher editing efficiencies. Our results
confirm the influence of the HR template length and the importance
of the culturing period before the induction of counterselection.
The editing efficiency of the tool was higher when we employed the
editing construct with the 1 kb HR flanks compared to the editing
construct with the 0.75 kb HR flanks (20 vs 5% efficiency, respectively; ). Furthermore, we observed that a culturing
period with an additional intermediate step at 45 °C allows for
efficient homologous recombination and double crossover events to
occur, leading to the appearance of the mutants for which Cas9 will
select. This is in line with observations in () and supports
our findings that the efficiency of using spCas9 as a counterselection
tool is higher compared to that using spCas9 as a tool for the induction
of the cellular HR mechanism after introduction of targeted DSDBs.
In addition, it may be that the stress of decreasing the temperature
increases the efficiency of the homologous recombination mechanism. Next, we attempted to cure the
constructed  ET138 Δ Δ strain
from the pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr1 plasmid using the sequential transferring
approach in LB2 medium without antibiotic at 55 °C. However,
after the usual two transfers, none of the tested colonies had lost
the plasmid. We repeated the same sequential transferring process
but increased the culturing temperature to 65 °C, as the pNW33n
replicon might be less stable at elevated temperatures. After two transfers at 65 °C, 1 out of
8 tested colonies was confirmed to be plasmid-free by PCR and antibiotic
sensitivity, and the correct mutations were verified by sequencing.
Plasmid curing might be simplified in the future by adding an sgRNA
expressing module with a spacer against the editing plasmid to the
system. The module will have to either be under
the control of a tightly inducible promoter or cloned into a second
expression vector and transformed into the edited cells in a second
transformation round. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf Finally, evaluation of lactate production
in the resulting  ET138 Δ Δ strain under aerobic,
microaerobic, and anaerobic conditions
showed a complete restoration of lactate production to wild-type levels
(). Agarose
gel electrophoresis showing the resulting products from
colony PCR from the 3-day long  knock-in culturing
processes in LB2 medium, using ET 138 Δ Δ Δ cells
transformed with the pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr1 vector. For the colony PCR,
genome-specific primers BG8145 and BG8146 were used with the expected
size of the PCR fragment for the knock-in mutations being 3.2 kb (equal
to the size of the PCR fragment for the wild-type cells). The expected
size of the PCR fragment for the knockout (nonedited) mutants was
2.3 kb. (A) When the 45 °C culturing step was performed, the
process resulted in 4 out of the 20 tested colonies having the knock-in
genotype (20% editing efficiency), 15 colonies with mixed knock-in
and wild-type genotype, and only 1 colony with wild-type genotype.
(B) When the 45 °C culturing step was omitted, the process resulted
in only 1 out of the 20 tested colonies having the knock-in genotype,
11 colonies with mixed genotype, and 8 colonies with the wild-type
genotype. In
this study, spCas9-based genome editing was applied for the
first time to a moderate thermophile, establishing a gene deletion,
a gene knockout, and a gene insertion. A major advantage of this system
is the requirement of only one plasmid without inducible or highly
characterized promoters to drive spCas9 and sgRNA expression. Additionally,
the speed and efficiency of the genome editing process of ET 138 has
been substantially improved compared to that of the previous -based counterselection system. For the three cases
presented in this study, it took on average 1 week from transformation
to clean deletion, knock out, or knock in (including the plasmid curing
step), with an editing efficiency of 90% for the gene deletion, 100%
for the gene knock out, and 20% for the gene insertion. Over
the course of our study, we showed that spCas9 is not active  from 42 °C and above. This observation allowed
us to develop an editing system where mutants are constructed via
homologous recombination events at higher temperatures (≥42
°C) before Cas9-induced counterselection takes place at 37 °C.
The crucial factors for obtaining high editing efficiencies are giving
sufficient time for HR at elevated temperatures before starting the
spCas9-based counterselection, and the length of the HR flanks. Moreover,
we hypothesize that testing different sgRNA modules may improve the
editing efficiency of the tool. During our study, we observed gene-dependent
differences in the number of obtained mutants when repeating the same
process using different media. There is no obvious link between the
editing of a specific gene and the medium used for the editing process,
and this will be the subject of further studies. The results
of the editing approach that we developed make our
system potentially applicable for many interesting model or nonmodel
organisms with an active HR mechanism and a growth temperature range
covering 37 to ≥42 °C. It is anticipated that the approaches
reported here will expand the range of organisms for which the powerful
Cas9 counterselection tool can be used, thereby greatly increasing
engineering throughput for these organisms and allowing for both their
fundamental study and biotechnological exploitation. Bacterial Strains and Growth Conditions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf Strains used
in this study are listed in . All  strains were routinely cultured at 55
°C unless stated otherwise. TVMY medium and LB2 medium were used
as described previously. TVMY is TVMY supplemented with 0.5 g/L xylose, 0.5 g/L glucose, and 50
mg/L uracil. TVMY is TVMY supplemented with 0.5 g/L xylose
and 0.5 g/L glucose. LB2 is LB2 supplemented with 0.5
g/L xylose and 0.5 g/L glucose. Substrates were added separately as
50% autoclaved solutions after autoclaving the medium. Uracil was
added as a 50 mg/mL filter sterilized solution in 1 M NaOH after autoclaving
the medium and addition of the substrates.  strains were grown in LB medium at 37 °C. For plates, 30 g
of agar (Difco) per liter of medium was used for  in all experiments; 15 g of agar (Difco) per
liter of LB was used for . If
required, chloramphenicol was added at concentrations of 25 μg/mL
for  DH5α, 15 μg/mL
for  TG90, and 7 μg/mL
for . Genomic DNA Isolation,
Transformations, Colony PCR, Sequencing,
and Phenotypic Verification Genomic DNA from  strains was isolated using the MasterPure
Gram positive DNA purification kit (Epicenter). Heat shock transformation
of  strains was performed according
to the supplier’s protocol. Transformation of  strains was performed as described previously. Plasmids for transforming  were extracted from  via maxiprep isolation (Genomed Jetstar 2.0). For transformation
of  strains, 1 μg DNA
was used unless it is stated otherwise in the plasmid construction
sections. Potential  ET138 Δ Δ Δ colonies were randomly selected and subjected to colony
PCR using the InstaGene Matrix (Bio-Rad), Taq DNA polymerase (NEB),
and genome-specific primers BG6420 and BG6421. Potential  ET138 Δ Δ Δ and  ET138 Δ Δ knock-in colonies were randomly selected and subjected
to colony PCR using the Phire Plant direct PCR kit (ThermoFisher Scientific)
and genome-specific primers BG7881, BG7882 and BG8142, BG8143, respectively.
Purification of PCR products was performed using the Zymoclean gel
DNA recovery kit, after running them on 0.8% agarose gels. The DNA
fragments were subsequently sent for sequencing to GATC Biotech. The
DNA fragments from the potential  ET138 Δ Δ Δ colonies were subjected to EcoRV (NEB) restriction
digestion. To evaluate the 5-FOA sensitivity and uracil auxotrophy
of  ET138 Δ Δ Δ sequence confirmed strains, cells were plated on TVMY medium with
30 g/L agar and the following additions: (a) 2 g/L 5-FOA and 50 mg/L
uracil, (b) 2 g/L 5-FOA and no uracil, or (c) no 5-FOA and no uracil.
To evaluate lactate production from  ET138 Δ Δ knock-in cultures, sequence verified cells were grown overnight
in TVMY medium containing 10 g/L glucose and subsequently transferred
to the same medium and grown for 24 h, after which -lactate
specific measurements were performed using MegaZyme K-LATE kit. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf Plasmids and primers used in this
study are shown in . Q5
polymerase (NEB) was used for all PCR reactions for cloning purposes.
NEB T4 ligase was used for assembling the pWUR_lacZ, pWUR_Cas9nt,
pWUR_Cas9nt_hr, pWUR_Cas9sp1, pWUR_Cas9sp1_hr, pWUR_Cas9sp2, and pWUR_Cas9sp3
vectors. The NEBuilder HiFi DNA assembly master mix was used for assembling
the pWUR_Cas9spR_hr, pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr1, and pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr2 constructs.
All restriction enzymes were obtained from NEB. Purification of PCR
products was performed after running them on a 0.8% agarose gel using
the Zymoclean gel DNA recovery kit. To test the P promoter, a DNA fragment composed of P and the  gene was synthesized
by GeneArt and inserted into pNW33n using digestion with BspHI and
KpnI and subsequent ligation and cloning into  DH5α, creating plasmid pWUR_lacZ. The P sequence was used exactly as originally described, using the sequence until the start codon of
the corresponding gene in the original host. For the construction
of the basic, modular pWUR_Cas9nt construct,
a synthetic gene string was synthesized by GeneArt containing the
elements depicted in B except the P promoter. P was amplified from pWUR_lacZ using primers
BG6538 and BG6541. Primer BG6541 replaces the final 6 bp of P with an XbaI site, changing the final
−1 to −6 sequence from GTAAGA to TCTAGA and keeping
the total length the same as that in the original promoter. Primer
BG6538 adds a BspHI site to the start of P. The entire synthesized spCas9 module without a promoter for
spCas9 was amplified using primers BG6542 and BG6543, keeping the
XbaI and HindIII sites already present in the module. Subsequently,
vector pNW33n was digested with BspHI and HindIII, the P PCR product was digested with XbaI and BspHI,
and the spCas9 module PCR product was digested with XbaI and HindIII.
The three elements were ligated in a three-point ligation and cloned
into  TG90. The plasmid was
extracted, and the correct sequence was verified by sequencing, creating
plasmid pWUR_Cas9nt (B). For transformation of this construct to  strains, 0.1 μg of DNA was used
rather than the standard 1 μg in order to more precisely determine
the transformation efficiencies together with the targeting constructs
described in the next section. The resulting CFUs were around 3000
and 200 per μg of DNA for the Δ Δ and wild-type strains, respectively. Control transformations
with empty vector pNW33n yielded CFUs of 10 000 and 1800, respectively. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00339/suppl_file/sb6b00339_si_001.pdf To insert the three different targeting spacers into pWUR_Cas9nt
(which contains a nontargeting spacer), three sets of oligos were
annealed to create the three spacers, after which the annealed spacers
were inserted into the construct as follows. Oligo sets were BG6017
and BG6021 for spacer 1, BG6018 and BG6022 for spacer 2, BG6019 and
BG6023 for spacer 3. Each set was annealed by adding 5 μL of
10 mM oligo sets together with 10 μL of NEB buffer 2.1 and 74
μL of MQ water. Mixtures were heated to 94 °C for 5 min
and gradually cooled to 37 °C at 0.03 °C/s using a PCR machine.
Annealed oligos and plasmid pWUR_Cas9nt were digested with BspEI and
BsmBI (NEB). First, BspEI digestion was performed at 37 °C for
15 min, after which BsmBI was added and the mixture was further incubated
at 55 °C for 15 min. After gel purification of the digested products,
ligation was performed using NEB T4 ligase, and mixtures were transformed
into  TG90. All constructs were
verified by sequencing, and all were correct except spacer 2, which
was missing 7 nt from P that drives
spacer expression (). Constructs
were named pWUR_Cas9sp1 to pWUR_Cas9sp3 according to their corresponding
spacer. For transformation of this construct into  strains, 0.1 μg of DNA was used rather
than the standard 1 μg in order to more precisely determine
the transformation efficiencies. The resulting CFUs were 700–3300
and 9–300 per μg of DNA for the Δ Δ and wild-type strains, respectively.
Control transformations with empty vector pNW33n yielded CFUs of 10 000
and 1800, respectively. To insert the  flanks
into the pWUR_Cas9nt
and pWUR_Cas9sp1constructs, the already fused  flanks were amplified from a previous plasmid in which the flanks
were added as follows: flanks were cloned from genomic DNA of ET 138
using primers BG 5798, BG5799 (upstream, 958 bp) and BG580, BG5801
(downstream, 979 bp), introducing SalI and XbaI restriction sites.
The flanks were fused in an overlap extension PCR using primers BG5798
and BG5801, making use of the complementary overhangs in primers BG5799
and BG5800. Subsequently, the flanks and pNW33n were digested with
SalI and XbaI, ligated, and transformed into  DH5α. To amplify the flanks for insertion into spCas9-editing
plasmids, primers BG6850 and BG6849 were used, which both introduce
a BspHI site. The pWUR_Cas9nt and pWUR_Cas9sp1 plasmids and the amplified  flanks were digested with BspHI, followed by alkaline
phosphatase treatment of the vectors (Thermo Scientific), ligated,
and transformed into  TG90.
Since only one restriction site was used, the flanks could have been
inserted in both orientations. For both constructs, multiple colonies
were verified by sequencing, and for all constructs, the same flank
orientation was selected and used for future experiments, namely,
the downstream flank on the P side.
The resulting plasmids were named pWUR_Cas9nt_hr and pWUR_Cas9sp1_hr.
Transformation of these constructs into  Δ Δ using
0.1 μg of DNA like that for the nonflanked versions did not
yield any colonies, most likely because there is a RM recognition
site present in the flanking regions (data not shown). Transformations
performed using 5–8 μg of DNA resulted in CFUs of around
10 per μg of DNA (compared to around 700–3300 for the
nonflanked versions and 10 000 for control transformations
with empty vector pNW33n). A four-fragment NEBuilder HiFi DNA
assembly was designed and executed
for the construction of the -modifying plasmid
pWUR_Cas9spR_hr. The backbone of the vector was PCR amplified from
pWUR_Cas9sp1 using primers BG7836 and BG7837. The HR fragment upstream
of the targeted site in the  gene was PCR amplified
from the  ET 138 genome using
primers BG7838 and BG7839. The HR fragment downstream of the targeted
site in the  gene was PCR amplified from the  ET 138 genome using primers BG7840 and
BG7841. The  and
sgRNA containing fragment was PCR amplified from the pWUR_Cas9sp1
vector using primers BG7842 and BG7843. Two 4-fragment NEBuilder
HiFi DNA assemblies were designed and
executed for the construction of the -restoration
plasmids pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr1 and pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr2. The backbone of
both vectors was PCR amplified from the pWUR_Cas9sp1 vector using
primers BG8134 and BG7837. The HR fragment upstream of and including
the  gene was PCR amplified from the  ET 138 genome using primers BG8135 and
BG8137 for the pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr1 vector and primers BG8135 and BG8136
for the pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr2 vector. The HR fragment downstream of the  gene was PCR amplified from the  ET 138 genome using primers BG8138 and BG8139 for the pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr1
vector and primers BG8138 and BG8140 for the pWUR_Cas9spKI_hr2 vector.
The  and sgRNA
containing fragment of both vectors was PCR amplified from the pWUR_Cas9sp1
vector using primers BG8141 and BG7842. RNA isolation was performed
by the phenol extraction based on van Hijum et al. Overnight 10 mL cultures were centrifuged at 4 °C
and 4816 for 15 min and immediately used for RNA
isolation. After removal of the medium, cells were resuspended in
0.5 mL of ice-cold TE buffer (pH 8.0) and kept on ice. All samples
were divided into two 2 mL screw-capped tubes containing 0.5 g of
zirconium beads, 30 μL of 10% SDS, 30 μL of 3 M sodium
acetate (pH 5.2), and 500 μL of Roti-Phenol (pH 4.5–5.0,
Carl Roth GmbH). Cells were disrupted using a FastPrep-24 apparatus
(MP Biomedicals) at 5500 rpm for 45 s and centrifuged at 4 °C
and 10 000 rpm for 5 min. 400 μL of the water phase from
each tube was transferred to a new tube, to which 400 μL of
chloroform–isoamyl alcohol (Carl Roth GmbH) was added, after
which samples were centrifuged at 4 °C and 18 400 for 3 min. 300 μL of the aqueous phase was transferred
to a new tube and mixed with 300 μL of the lysis buffer from
the high pure RNA isolation kit (Roche). Subsequently, the rest of
the procedure from this kit was performed according to the manufacturer’s
protocol, except for the DNase incubation step, which was performed
for 45 min. Integrity and concentration of the isolated RNA were checked
on a NanoDrop 1000. rt-PCR was performed using SuperScript III
reverse transcriptase kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. For synthesis of the first-strand cDNA, 2 μg of RNA
and 200 ng of random primers were used. After cDNA synthesis, the
products were used as a template for PCR using spCas9-specific forward
and reverse primers BG6237 and BG6232, resulting in a 255 bp product.
Products were visualized on a 2% agarose gel that had been run for
20 min..