Computation
depends on memory, and the ability to clear previous
memory storage imposes a lower
limit on the energetic costs of computation (Landauer’s Principle). Memory effects have been explored in biological computation as well. In dividing cells from bacteria to metazoa, phenotypic memory has
been well-established as an important factor in both natural and synthetic
contexts, and strategies for engineering it with gene circuits have been developed. While memory can arise from a variety of sources, one important mechanism is via inheritance of
protein concentrations. Most naturally occurring proteins in bacteria,
and synthetic networks lacking specific degradation tags in any cells,
can have a strong effect on memory because protein degradation is
dominated by dilution from growth, and growth rate can have a global
effect on gene expression. Expression
levels of proteins have been shown to affect the dynamics of bacterial
signaling in some contexts but not others. Expression costs in natural and synthetic circuits can also create
a growth feedback loop where expression or production of a toxic agent
creates a metastable or bistable population growth dynamic with different
growth rates between subpopulations of cells. In nonlaboratory
environments, the effects of growth arrest on synthetic circuits may
be an important factor; determining how to engineer appropriate generational
phenotypic information transfer is an important challenge. Many
classic and modern studies in
bacteria have characterized mechanisms and characteristics
of growth arrest and modulation of proliferation in bacteria. As bacterial cells spend most of their time
in a growth-arrested state, the residual protein content from previous
environments may have a strong effect on resumption of growth. The
well-known stochasticity of gene expression in single cells, combined
with a dynamic loss of growth-mediated dilution during the transition
to growth arrest, creates the possibility of a distribution of memory
levels in growth arrested populations. As cells enter growth arrest,
fluctuations in protein concentrations could become frustrated, quenched
at levels far from the previous steady state. Thus, in common with
kinetic trapping in protein assembly, multiallelic optimization in evolution, and glass formation in physics, competing
dynamics stand to lock transient fluctuations in place. This effect
then leads to random configurations with potentially diverse phenotypes
on resumption of growth, similar to cases of bet-hedging studied in
the past. Such an effect could have implications for
computation in living matter, and stands to have important practical
consequences in the evolution and synthetic biology of gene networks. Here we characterize conditions that affect the accumulation of
long-lived proteins during growth arrest and analyze their implications
for survival of information during the growth arrest transition. We
hypothesized that the competing time scales of protein dilution and
growth arrest would dominate the level of phenotypic molecular memory
from the previous environment. Mathematical models demonstrate the
existence of a critical time scale of growth arrest, below which memory
is an important factor and beyond which it is effectively erased.
Considering the unpredictable nature of future environments and potential
differential fitness effects of surviving proteins, we determined
the optimally flexible memory level of cells (i.e., highest information
transfer with the least mean residual protein) based on timing and
cooperativity of the growth arrest rate. As a result of these analyses,
we arrive at two novel conclusions about computation and memory in
growing cells with long-lived components. First, there is a parameter
manifold that distinguishes high-memory and memoryless regimes depending
on the suddenness of the growth arrest transition. Second, an almost-memoryless
regime represents a flexible phenotype where residual information
from the previous environment can be retained, but easily discarded,
depending on the phenotypic needs in the future environment. The flexible
phenotype can arise if the growth arrest transition is sufficiently
switchlike and the initial distribution of protein sufficiently skewed.
This result suggests a strategy for encoding flexible synthetic phenotypic
memory by designing programmed cellular growth arrest with appropriate
parameters, which may be useful for synthetic biology in contexts
outside of the laboratory. We
begin with a simple mean-field mathematical model of protein
concentration, ⟨⟩, in the presence
of competing time scales of first-order loss and growth arrest, cellular
growth being driven by extrinsic (i.e., non-) stresses.
While protein synthesis is capable of continuing after growth arrest
in bacteria, many naturally occurring
gene expression events are halted as part of the regulated transition
into growth arrest. We therefore restrict consideration
to the case where synthesis has already stopped, and ask what effect
remaining growth has on protein concentrations and information transfer
across growth arrest transitions. For this protein (or ensemble of
proteins degraded at identical rates), we havewhere  represents the initial degradation rate (the growth
rate
of the cell in the previous, faster-growing environment),  ∈ [0,1] represents a decreasing function of time,
and δ represents the rate of growth-independent protein degradation,
absent active enzymatic degradation of , δ
≪ (). In principle,  could fluctuate nonmonotonically
between [0,1] to represent arbitrary dynamical changes from alterations
in protein synthesis and degradation as well, but here we analyze
the dynamics of entering a longer-lived growth arrest state. Cellular growth arrest traps long-lived molecules
at concentrations
strongly dependent on initial conditions. (a) Illustration of the
growth arrest process quenching cytoplasmic protein degradation at
present levels. In the model, the cell has already stopped producing
more of the protein (red), and subsequent growth lowers its cytoplasmic
concentration until growth has ceased. (b) We consider three models
of growth arrest with Hill functions: gradual arrest ( = 1), steeper arrest ( = 2), and instantaneous
arrest ( → ∞, a Heaviside step function).
(c) Resulting predicted mean-field protein dynamics for the three
arrest models at various arrest rates . Protein
concentrations represent fraction of initial concentration, . Parameter δ = 10 for these plots. We have some initial protein concentration, (0)
= . The goal is to identify the possible
outcomes of protein concentrations at various time scales. Experiments
have shown that batch cultures of  can stop growing at a variety of speeds, depending on the stressor. Growth rates of single cells undergoing growth
arrest appear to be dominated by the extrinsic conditions as well, suggesting that a deterministic forcing function
is an acceptable approximation. To capture a wide variety of deterministic
growth transition dynamics, let us exploit the convenient Hill function: . Here
parameter  represents
the halfway point of growth arrest, and  determines
the sharpness of the loss rate (a). Then the solution to  is, in the most general case, of the formwith ,  > 0, where  is
the ordinary hypergeometric function. Three cases of  are informative for intuitive purposes:  = 1,  = 2, and  → ∞ (a). They correspond
to gradual loss of growth, intermediate steepness of growth, and a
fast switch between the highest growth rate and complete growth arrest.
These cases also simplify , creating familiar closed-form functions:where θ is the Heaviside step
function.
We can see by inspection of  and of their nondimensionalized graphs () that there is a distinct
growth arrest rate regime where the concentration of  is frozen in arbitrary concentrations that are sensitive to the
rate of arrest before eventual growth-independent protein loss has
a significant effect (b–d). (In the interest of studying time scales on which
residual protein concentrations are capable of persisting in growth
arrested cells, hereafter we assume that nongrowth-mediated protein
degradation is negligible: δ → 0). On that time scale,
more gradual growth arrest transitions soften the edges of the high-memory
regime. Generally, as the transition becomes less sharp, the quenching
parameter  must be larger for memory to form, corresponding
to a shorter time to reach the growth-mediated protein half-life.
In terms of growth arrest physiology, this means that a gradual downregulation
of growth-limiting factors in response to stress will reduce memory
compared to more extreme events. What are realistic
parameters that could result in controllable
protein memory? That is, given a known concentration of initial protein,
what arrest parameters are necessary to attain either effective memory
extinction or residual protein at a certain concentration? http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00229/suppl_file/sb5b00229_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00229/suppl_file/sb5b00229_si_001.pdf In
the discrete growth rate switch after the growth arrest transition
( → ∞), we arrive at the frozen protein
concentration * = e. For the case of  = 2, we similarly have * =  e. Therefore,
parameters selecting for sufficiently large * can
be clearly chosen for  ≥ 2. There is no mathematically
clear threshold for the frozen concentrations with  = 1 because gradual loss of protein concentration continues indefinitely. We can get an estimate for when each case is approaching a high-memory
state by taking the logarithmic sensitivity of () to  ():For  → 0,  → −∞
with  (memoryless regime). For  → ∞,  ≈ 0 for all  (“perfect”
memory regime). The transition between the regimes occurs when  ≈ . Here, there is an initial transient with an eventual slowing down
of protein dynamic sensitivity, settling to a sensitivity near the
ratio / in the case of  = 1 (). When this loss rate is lower than the fluctuation rate
of the environment, phenotypic memory is a significant factor. This
result is also precisely the sensitivity of frozen protein concentrations
to changes when the instantaneous switch to growth arrest occurs, , in the case of  → ∞. Then for a given characteristic time scale τ, the threshold
for the high memory regime is approximated byand we can
find it precisely only with implicit
equations. For instance, in the case of  →
∞, and assuming τ > 1/, we have  = /) where  is the product logarithm,
or the Lambert  function: the inverse of () = e. Analytical
prediction of exact time evolution of a gamma-distributed
protein in an infinite, deterministically growth arresting population.
(a) Example of the distribution evolving over time. Parameters: α
= 10, β = 10,  = 1,  → ∞,  = 1, δ = 0. (b) Comparison
of probability distribution dynamics for different orders () of growth arrest. All other parameters are the same as
in panel a. Probabilities are normalized so that red is the maximum
probability over all time, and blue is the minimum. Another way to view the kinetics of protein survival is to consider
a constant number of proteins, , in
an initial cell volume Ω, and follow the (deterministic)
growth of cell volume. Mathematically, this is equivalent to , with δ = 0 and
protein concentration asConsider  to
be a random variable in an initial distribution, (), that is well-characterized, parametric,
and has a multiplicative scaling rule. Because the time evolution
of the system is deterministic, we can exploit multiplicative scaling
to analytically derive time evolution of the distribution and its
entropy. For example, if the protein is initially in a gamma distribution,  ∼ Gamma(α, β) and  ∼ Gamma(α,). The distribution over time is then simply () ∼ Gamma(α,β/Ω()) (). This
is a biologically relevant model of protein concentrations because,
in many parameter regimes, protein distributions in bacteria and other organisms are well-approximated
by gamma distributions (though other parametrizations, such as log-normal
and Fréchet distributions, have been suggested as well). We now explore the implications of various
growth arrest rates assuming an initial gamma distribution. We can compute the relative entropy, or Kullback–Leibler
divergence, without the need for special
functions in the entropy term itself after cancellation of terms,
and avoiding some of the problems given by the standard entropy in
a continuous probability density function. The divergence is asymmetric:In words, this equation gives the divergence
of information over time, in units of bits. In practice, the divergence
is often symmetrized, but that is unnecessary because we are concerned
with irreversible divergence from an initial condition with time.
For brevity, we refer to the divergence at a given time as (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00229/suppl_file/sb5b00229_si_001.pdf For the gamma distribution
we have a divergence ofwhere the 0 subscript indicates
the initial
condition, ψ is the digamma function, and Γ is the gamma
function. Because α is constant
with time, and canceling the β terms,  simplifies toThe three specific growth models
considered
above ( = 1, n = 2,  →
∞) give the following solutions:Various limits make  more intuitive. For example, choosing time
units of /ln 2 = 1, for  → ∞ and  > 1/,
we get , and so for slow (later) growth arrest,
the divergence is approximately α/ bits while
for fast (immediate) growth arrest it approaches 0.  graphs the divergence for a selection of parameter
values. Divergence
of information during the growth arrest process. In
an infinite population, a gamma distribution of proteins relaxes for
10 units of time as the growth arrest rate parameter, , is scanned. Parameter δ = 0 in all cases (see main
text): (blue) mean protein,  ×
⟨⟩; (green) K-L divergence, , for α = 0.1, β = 1000; (light green)  for α = 1, β = 100; (orange)  for α = 10, β = 10. (red) K-L divergence for α
= 100, β = 1. (a)  = 1; (b)  = 2; (c)  → ∞. Distribution properties and divergence of protein concentrations
during growth arrest. (a) Example distributions with identical initial
mean = 100. (b) For a given growth arrest rate parameter , the shape parameter, α, necessary for maximal divergence, *. Black line,  =  for
reference. (c) Mean protein concentration  × ⟨⟩ and shape parameter α
for various maximal divergence thresholds * for
the case of  → ∞. The shape parameter of the gamma distribution scales
the divergence
of information between initial and final states (). Populations undergoing sharper growth arrest
transitions that have more highly skewed distributions of proteins
(i.e., smaller α) have a small divergence (e.g., less than 1
bit) for a larger part of the growth arrest rate parameter space (, a). Then it should be possible to choose a shape parameter
(i.e., choose a shape of the protein gamma distribution) that simultaneously
minimizes the divergence and the protein concentration. Clearly, because
these quantities do not have the same units, comparing them directly
depends on the goal of the application: choosing a threshold amount
of relative entropy and a threshold concentration of protein is necessary.For divergence threshold *, the shape parameter
is (for  > 1/ and  → ∞):which has a nearly linear relationship with  (b). Plotting this with the mean protein concentration parametrically
over  illustrates the shape needed to attain a divergence
no larger than various threshold levels (* = 0.1,
1, 5 bits; c). Thus, distributions of cells rarely expressing a protein, but
doing so in bursts, appear to maximize the flexibility of cellular
populations. We have characterized relaxation kinetics of a
cellular protein
distribution subject to deterministic growth-mediated dilution as
growth stalls, representative of many cases in natural or synthetic
systems after protein synthesis has been halted. The results predict
that proteins can become trapped at an arbitrary concentration depending
on the relative time scales of dilution and growth arrest, assuming
that growth-independent protein degradation is negligible. Such an
effect provides the potential for phenotypic memory, useful for creating
computation in single cells across growth rate transitions, but erasable
with a brief period of growth. Our results suggest that slight
cooperativity in the growth arrest
rate (with a Hill coefficient ≈ 2) should be sufficient to
trap protein concentrations for arbitrary amounts of time in the absence
of other degradation effects. A possible limitation of this
analysis is the deterministic nature
of the growth arrest transition in the models. While stress is often
associated with stochastic induction of growth arrest mechanisms, and cell volumes can fluctuate, changes
in cell volume over time show reversion to the mean, and extrinsic stresses can simultaneously arrest cell populations. This suggests that our approximation is useful,
even if it does not capture some aspects of fluctuations. In , important new characteristics of the
relationship between protein synthesis and growth arrest have recently
been revealed. When growth arrest is strongly induced via a specific
mechanism, it appears to be accompanied by a burst of expression of
genes relevant to the particular stress. Furthermore, stationary phase bacteria are capable of having protein
synthesis induced even after growth arrest, with resulting linear
accumulation of expressed protein, but
the patterns of what naturally present genes are subject to this phenomenon
has yet to be established. Thus, it will be pressing in further studies
to explore the competition between protein synthesis and degradation
during growth arrest as well. While a standard entropy measure was
sufficient to be revealing about information transfer in this study,
cases with competing synthesis and degradation processes may require
a more sophisticated information measure, such as transfer entropy, to handle nonmonotonic dynamical transitions. The different time scales of loss of protein mass and information
that can be attained suggest a method for applying a cost/benefit
relationship to arrive at a maximally flexible protein memory strategy,
by creating skewed distributions and inducing sharp transitions to
growth arrest. Systems with bursty gene expression (known to occur
in many bacterial subsystems) in sufficiently large
populations should be able to meet these criteria. Populations that
use bet-hedging survival strategies likely
already conform to these requirements. Exploiting this principle could
potentially be useful for programming memory without excessive cost,
and for improving fitness in fluctuating environments where previous
memories may no longer be beneficial. Studies have shown the importance
of fitness in synthetic circuits with long memory for their evolutionary
stability, underscoring the potential
utility of optimized protein memory. Most studies in bet-hedging
have emphasized the role of skewed
phenotypic distributions in preparing for uncertain future environments. Our results suggest that one important aspect
of bet-hedging is its effect on memory: the ability of a cellular
population to be responsive to the previous environment if it recurs,
yet also to eliminate the residual cost if it is unnecessary. A previous
study found that the  sporulation decision switches between memoryless and high-memory
states, suggesting that the strategy
of minimal memory with maximal information transfer has precendence
in evolution. Mathematical analysis and
simulations were performed with Mathematica
10.2 (Wolfram Research)..