Ribosomally
synthesized and
posttranslationally modified peptides (RiPPs) are ubiquitous natural
products found in all branches of life. The resulting compounds are
chemically diverse, and their biological activities are equally varied.
For example, some RiPPs are cofactors, while others are secreted antibiotics,
cytotoxins, or quorum sensing molecules, among many other activities. Despite the many types of possible posttranslational
modifications (PTMs) in RiPPs, RiPP pathways share some nearly universal
features. First, the natural products are encoded
on a precursor peptide, which is ribosomally translated. Within the
precursor peptide, a core peptide represents the sequence of the active
natural product. Recognition sequences (RSs) often flank the core
peptide, where they direct enzymes that modify the core, and are often
found on a leader peptide, which serves several different purposes. Ultimately, the leader peptide and the RSs are
proteolytically cleaved, leaving the core that results in the mature
natural product (Figures  and ). It has long been known that RiPP biosynthetic machinery can
tolerate
mutations in the core sequence, enabling the engineering of novel
“unnatural natural products.” This factor, coupled with the great variety of PTMs, makes the RiPPs
good candidates for synthetic biology. The ultimate goal is to be
able to gain control of PTMs so that they are portable; leading to
the ability to design highly derived peptide materials in organisms
and . The field is still a long way from
achieving this goal. We have selected a highly plastic RiPP
platform, in which nature
already models aspects of this exchange. These are cyanobactin pathways,
often found in symbiotic bacteria within marine animals. For example,
there are about 50 known natural products produced by the  cyanobactin pathway. Within
this pathway, the enzymes are essentially identical, and yet, the
sequences represented in the natural products are highly diverse. The resulting compounds are found in great abundance in the animals,
and work on their coevolution with animals clearly shows that the
selection for these diverse products is at the level of the whole
animal. Thus, identical enzymes modify
many different hypervariable precursor peptides with diverse sequences,
with selection operating at the level of the final product. Previously,
we showed that only the core peptides are hypervariable, while the
remainder of the precursor peptides remains identical, providing a
mechanism by which this diversity can be achieved. It
should be emphasized that the hypervariable regions are truly variable
and do not just have a point mutation here or there. Sequences with
0% identity across the 6- to 8-amino acid lengths of the products
can be accepted and processed by the pathway. Here, we have named
this phenomenon, where pathways are identical in their native contexts
but the substrates and products evolve, “substrate evolution”.
This name does not imply that the substrates are better (faster) substrates
for the enzymes, but instead captures the process observed in nature. In addition to , the related  pathway is found in symbionts of animals, where it is responsible
for synthesizing an additional 12 known cyanobactin compounds. Beyond the native compounds produced by  and , we have reported an additional
20 unnatural derivatives that we synthesized in  using recombinant technology. In both  and , the core
peptide sequences are hypervariable, while all other elements of the
pathway remain identical. Interestingly, when comparing  and  across multiple samples, there
is a position where crossovers
occur.  and  are identical
in their 5′ and 3′ regions, but there is a swap in the
middle section of the pathways that encodes different functionality.
For example,  products are heterocyclic at Ser
and Thr, while  products are prenylated in these
positions. The swap between  and  involves an exchange of genes that encode
these different modifying enzymes. The natural swap in function, along
with the natural ability to encompass potentially millions of derivatives,
makes the cyanobactin pathways ideal for understanding how to achieve
the synthetic biology goal of creating a designer posttranslational
toolkit. Cyanobactins are initially encoded on a precursor peptide,
represented
by PatE. In many cyanobactins, PatE and its homologues are modified
by a heterocyclase such as PatD to produce thiazoline and oxazoline
rings from Cys and Ser/Thr residues. Subsequently,
a PatA-like protease cleaves the N-terminal sequence of PatE, and
a PatG-like protease removes the C-terminus and performs a macrocyclization
reaction to yield an N–C circular product. Further tailoring, such as prenylation by LynF-like enzymes and
oxidation by PatG oxidase domain-like enzyme, is also possible (Figures  and ). A recent study
revealed C-terminal methylation of linear products as a further modification
in this compound series. Therefore, when
a cyanobactin pathway accepts a new substrate, it efficiently passes
through not only one, but through all of the enzymatic steps in the
pathway. Previously, we showed that the macrocyclization of
cyanobactins
is accomplished using a series of “recognition sequences”
(RSs), here named RSII and RSIII. When these
sequences are present, two proteases recognize them and collaboratively
excise and macrocyclize extremely sequence diverse substrates  and . We also previously
proposed that a third recognition sequence (RSI) element directs the
heterocyclization events. Here, we show
that this RSI is indeed the primary element responsible for recruiting
heterocyclases, which then modify extremely diverse core peptide sequences.
More importantly, we show that these RSs act independently of surrounding
context, and therefore provide rules for their portability and application
in creating new compounds. This result has implications in applying
RiPP machinery for advances in synthetic biology. Typical cyanobactin precursor
peptide is shown containing leader
sequence (green), core peptide sequence (blue), and recognition sequences
RS (red) that flank the core. The core sequence eventually matures
into the final natural product after proteolytic removal of the rest
of the precursor. In a subset of pathways, additional PTMs occur on
the core sequence. There are three classes of RS for the PTM enzymes:
RSI that directs heterocyclases as defined in this study, and RSII
and RSIII that direct the N-terminal and C-terminal protease/macrocyclase,
respectively. The structure of the natural products prenylagaramide
(left) and trunkamide (right) is shown with the heterocycle modification
in trunkamide circled in blue. Expression
and Purification of Diverse Cyanobactin Enzymes and
Substrates Supporting Information Figure S2 Cyanobactin gene clusters have been grouped into
four distinct genotypes that produce distinct and varied natural products
with different PTMs. Here, we further examined the
previously described  and  pathways, which fall into cyanobactin Genotype I and produce the
patellamide and trunkamide cyanobactins. We focused on TruA/PatA N-terminal
proteases, which are 95% identical and PatD/TruD heterocyclases, which
are 88% identical. To explore biosynthetic pathways that had not been
previously analyzed, we expressed precursor peptides from the following
pathways: the  pathway (produces the aestuaramides), which also occupies Genotype I but only exhibits
on average 60% protein sequence identity with  pathways; the  pathway (produces the prenylagaramides), which is in Genotype II and is highly divergent
from other pathways; and the  pathway, which is in Genotype IV and the chemotype of
which was unknown at the time we initiated this study. In addition to / enzymes, we expressed protease  and heterocyclase , both from the  pathway that produces the cyanothecamides. ThcA was expected to
perform N-terminal proteolysis, and ThcD was expected to transform
Cys and/or Ser/Thr residues into thiazoline and oxazoline, respectively.
Multiple precursor peptides are present in each pathway, and only
1 or 2 from each set of precursors were selected for study, as designated
by the different numbers. A series of engineered precursor peptides
was also made that were a hybrid of two or more pathways (described
later), further adding to the substrate diversity of this study. A
detailed list of all substrates used in this study is given in Table . Proteins were expressed in  as His-tagged constructs and purified using standard methods (). Biochemical
Analysis of  Pathway Enzymes The  pathway was characterized to add to the
repertoire of the previously studied  and  pathways. ThcE4 () was chosen as the precursor
peptide substrate. Putative heterocyclase ThcD and putative N-terminal
protease ThcA were used in enzymatic assays. Using optimized reaction
conditions, ThcD was incubated with ThcE4 () and the
reaction was analyzed by MS methods. High-resolution FT-ICR ESI MS/MS
(FTMS) has previously been used to localize the position of heterocyclization. The method identifies sites of
dehydration via the 18 Da mass difference, and further, it is possible
to determine the type of dehydration (whether reverse-Michael or cyclodehydration)
by fragmentation pattern. The ThcD/ThcE4
reaction was digested with chymotrypsin to yield easily detectable
fragments. MS/MS analysis showed that all heterocycles were thiazolines
derived from Cys and clearly localized them to SDSLYGGES, where  stands for thiazoline ring modification
(Figures A and ). Detailed analysis of MS spectra is given in . ThcA was incubated both with the ThcE4 precursor peptide
and with
the product of the ThcD reaction, which is presumably its native substrate.
In both cases, ThcA was active, as observed by SDS-PAGE (Figure B inset). In addition, ESI-MS analysis showed that
the precursor peptide was cleaved at the RSII encoded by AVLAS (Figure B). This RSII is homologous to the previously described
PatA RSII sequence of GL(V)E(D)AS. Since
the C-terminal core sequence boundary could be easily assigned based
on the C-terminal conserved Cys residue, determination of this RSII helped assign the boundary of the ThcE4
core sequence. Figure  shows a schematic representation
of both of these PTMs of heterocyclization and N-terminal proteolysis
of ThcE4. Biochemical characterization
of  pathway enzymes.
(A) ThcE4/ThcD: FTMS spectra of chymotryptic digests ASSCDCSLY and
GGCESCSYEGDEAE of ThcE4 modified by ThcD. Each [M+2H] mass peak corresponds to the peptide sequence given in a gray box,
and a heterocycle PTM is indicated by a  (in
red) within the sequence. (B) ThcE4/ThcA: Deconvoluted ESI-MS spectrum
of the ThcE4/ThcA reaction. The [M-H] mass peak
7098.0 Da is unmodified ThcE4 (His-tag removed) and 4915.0 Da corresponds
to the leader after ThcA proteolysis at the AVLAS RSII site. The inset
shows SDS-PAGE visualization of the same reaction, where the left
lane is ThcE4 only and the right lane is ThcE4 in presence of ThcA.
The smaller band in the right lane indicates the ThcA cleaved product.
A schematic representation of results is shown where (X) represents the 38-residue leader sequence before RSI, RSII (red)
and core (blue) sequences. Efficient Heterocyclase Activity Is Driven by RSI Supporting Information Figure S4 Supporting Information Figure S5 Before
exploring the portability of RS elements, we first needed to identify
the heterocyclase RS. It was previously speculated that a LAELSEEAL-like
sequence that is conserved in pathways carrying heterocycles is a
recognition element for this modification. By contrast, when a pathway lacks heterocycles, the corresponding
LAELSEEAL-like sequence is absent. A similar
element is also seen in non-cyanobactin RiPP families such as bottromycins and YM-216391 (). To test this hypothesis,
a series of substrates was either synthesized or heterologously expressed
that contained intact leader sequence, various fragments thereof,
or mutations in the putative RSI (Table , ). These substrates
were used in tandem with heterocyclases ThcD, TruD, and PatD. While
TruD/PatD share high identity, the newly characterized ThcD is about
60% identical to both enzymes. The native substrates of each enzyme
are very different from each other, although in all cases the putative
RSI element is well conserved. Reactions were analyzed by a combination
of techniques as detailed in . Briefly,
precursor peptide modification was followed by SDS-PAGE and ESI-MS.
The synthesized peptides – could
be analyzed by HPLC, followed by ESI-MS and/or MALDI-MS. In certain
cases, FTMS was used to further confirm the identity of products.
Substrates – had core sequences
from  and  precursors. Supporting Information Figure S6 Supporting
Information Figures S7–S9 and Table S2 Supporting Information Figure S10 Supporting Information Figure
S12 Full-length precursor peptides  (TruLy1, chimera of
TruE1 leader up to its first core cassette fused to LynE core) and  (TruLy2, chimera of TruE2 leader up to its first core cassette
fused to LynE core) containing all RSs were reactive with ThcD, TruD
and PatD (). In comparison, a short substrate () containing only
a core peptide sequence was not reactive with any enzyme (data not
shown). Short substrates containing RSIII ( and ) were slowly reactive, with reactions reaching only a little
more than 50% completion with ThcD after 24 h, although reactions
with TruD were comparatively faster (). Reaction progress
was judged from comparison of HPLC traces of the substrate and product
peaks relative to each other. By contrast, synthetic substrate , which included RSI, was highly reactive (), with reactions complete
within 15 min with ThcD (Figures  and ). These results showed
that although RSI was not absolutely essential for enzymatic reaction,
the inclusion of RSI led to a reaction that was >150 times faster
with respect to the time taken for reaction completion. Note that
modification of  was even faster than full-length precursors –, which showed roughly 70% reaction
completion after 3 h (), but the comparison should be treated with caution for
reasons including differences in solubilities and the presence of
multiple heterocyclizable residues in the precursor. We proposed
that the slow reactivity of  and  might
be caused by poor enzyme recognition due to the absence
of RSI. Obtaining good kinetic data is challenging with this series
because of the limits of substrate solubility. Therefore, to test
this hypothesis, we used competition experiments (see ) in which the fastest substrate  underwent
reaction with ThcD in competition with substrate , which
contains RSI, and -, which lack RSI (Figure A). All substrates were maintained at the same concentrations
in these reactions, and it was seen that despite the efficiency of  the full-length substrate  inhibited modification
of , such that no product was seen after the 15-min
time point. In contrast, the RSI-lacking substrates – did not inhibit this reaction (Figures C and ). These data indicated that RSI was likely responsible
for efficient binding of core peptide to the enzyme. Supporting Information
Figure S14-A Supporting Information
Figure S14-B Supporting Information Figure S15 Supporting Information Figure S16 To confirm that RSI was solely responsible for this effect
and
not other elements embedded in the substrate or leader peptide, a
series of full-length precursors (–) was constructed. RSI motifs were aligned using WebLogo (), and it was seen that three Glu and three Leu
residues were the most conserved. Since the microcin B17 leader peptide
is known to adopt a helical conformation, a model of the RSI residues using a helical wheel arrangement was
drawn, and it was seen that the conserved Glu and Leu residues were
on opposite faces of the helix (). Hence, the Glu residues were simultaneously
converted into Ala residues in triple mutant . The (3[Glu→Ala])
mutant  could still be heterocyclized () although with reduced efficiency
since only up to double dehydration was observed in comparison to
wild-type TruLy2 () that showed triple dehydration.
Since the TruLy2 mutants were harder to purify, the Leu to Ala mutations
were made in a different precursor that carried the same leader peptide
as TruLy2 but carried  core instead (substrate ). In contrast to , the (3[Leu→Ala])
mutant  was no longer an efficient substrate (). These results
indicate that a Leu-rich hydrophobic patch may serve a critical function. Supporting Information
Figure S17 Peptide  is a derivative of a natural precursor
peptide PagE6 from the non-heterocyclizing  family
that lacks the RSI element intrinsically. To make it a potential substrate
for heterocyclases, we introduced a Cys residue in the requisite position
(with  RSII and RSIII). In addition, peptide  was made, in which RSI was inserted into the backbone of
peptide  (Table ). Our results
showed that , which lacked RSI, was not a substrate
for heterocyclases, although it carried a heterocyclizable residue
(only a minor product peak was seen that equaled <10% of product
even after 18-h reactions), while , which carried RSI
insertion, was fully competent for reaction and essentially equal
to other full-length precursors (). This demonstrates the portability of RSI to import
heterocyclization in a completely non-native core peptide sequence. In addition, competition experiments similar to those described
earlier were performed using ThcD and competent substrate  versus –. Only substrate  with intact RSI competed with , while the
RSI mutants – did not (Figures  and ). This further reiterated that RSI is responsible for efficient
heterocyclization. Supporting Information Figure S11 (A) Summary of reactivities
of substrates – with ThcD, TruD,
and PatD. Full-length precursors – and substrate  that
lacks most of the leader, but contains RSI, were reactive with all
tested enzymes. By contrast,  that lacked any RS was
unreactive and – that lacked both
leader and RSI was a very slow substrate. (B) Using the same assay
conditions containing 2 μM ThcD and 200 μM substrate  or , a time-course was followed. Substrate  was completely modified to give product (1264.16 [M+2H]) within 15 min of reaction (ESI-MS on left), whereas  was very slow, and the reaction was far from complete even
after 21 h (HPLC trace on right). Similar results were obtained with
substrate , and an expanded reaction time-course is
given in . Supporting Information Figures S13 and
S18 Competition reactions:
(A) Substrates  and  (containing RSI), – (lacking
RSI) and – (RSI mutants) were
made to compete with ThcD (2 μM) reaction on substrate , which has RSI but lacks the leader before it. Only  and  inhibited modification of , while – and – did not. All substrates were maintained at concentrations
of 50 μM (in reactions with , ,
and –) or 200 μM (in reactions
with –) under the same assay conditions.
(B) MALDI-MS of competition with  and , which completely inhibit modification of . The mass
of 2566 corresponds to [M+Na] of . (C) On
the left is ESI-MS of competition with , which does
not inhibit modification of  (product mass 1264.11 [M+2H]), and substrate  is unmodified (1121.58 [M+H]). On the right is MALDI-MS of competition with  that does not affect modification of . The mass peak
of 2548.38 corresponds to [M+Na] of  product,
while only a minor peak of unmodified  was observed
(2566.35 [M+Na]). Similar results were obtained from competition
with , , and , which is
shown in  along with necessary controls. Sequences of All
Peptide Substrates
Used in This Study Substrates  and – are native precursor
peptides from
different pathways. Substrates – and – were expressed as His-tagged
constructs. Substrates – were
mutated (green highlights) to probe RS requirements. The shorter substrates – were synthesized chemically on resin.
Succeeding lines within a single substrate have been used to represent
multiple cores. Where required, dashes have been used to align sequences
into the specific regions of RSI (yellow), RSII–RSIII (red)
and core (blue). Substrates , , and  were used for heterologous production of cyanobactins in . Leader Peptide Coevolves with Cyanobactin
Modification Enzymes To find out the extent of conservation
of non-RS elements of the
leader sequence, we constructed phylogenetic trees of cyanobactin
precursor peptides. We speculated that such an analysis might help
us to identify important non-RS elements, if any, which could make
portability of PTMs a physiologically and synthetically relevant process.
Previously, the hypervariability of core peptides made the tree-building
process difficult. This led us to construct trees composed solely
of the leader peptide in the absence of the hypervariable cores, both
with and without RSI (Figures  and ). Surprisingly, in
both cases, the tree topology was identical and split precursor peptides
into two groups. Group I peptides contain RSI, and Group II peptides
lack RSI. As expected, Group II peptides are derived from pathways
that also lack heterocyclases. Note that presence or absence of RSI
did not define this branch point since trees made either way were
identical. Supporting Information Figure S20 Furthermore, within Group I, the
tree topology is similar to that
made using cyanobactin heterocyclase sequences (). These observations suggested that the heterocyclases and leader
sequences are coevolving, and because of this relationship, we speculated
that heterocyclases might prefer their cognate (or native) leader
sequences. In that event, not only RSI, but also the remainder of
the leader peptide may be needed to enable portability of heterocyclization
PTM. To understand this, we took a different approach, where instead
of carrying out exhaustive mutations of the leader sequence, we took
advantage of the diversity of cyanobactin biochemical components we
already had in our hands, as described below. Supporting Information
Figure S19 Phylogenetic tree of cyanobactin precursor peptide leader sequences.
Group I pathways carry RSI, heterocycle PTM and the corresponding
heterocyclase enzyme, whereas Group II pathways lack the same. Only
a subset of peptides is shown here, with the ones used in this study
highlighted in yellow. See  for a complete tree with all known cyanobactin precursors. Noncognate Leaders Do Not
Hinder Heterocyclase Reactivity To test the requirement of
cognate leader peptide sequence, ThcD,
TruD, and PatD were assayed with a series of both native and non-native
substrates from Groups I and II (Figure ).
Group I included the native substrates of these three enzymes, ThcE4
(), TruE2 (), and PatE (), in addition to LynE () from a different Group I
pathway, and TruLy 1 and 2 () and (),
which contain  leaders and hybrid - cores and were designed in our lab as robust
substrates for TruD. Group II included PagE6 () from
the  pathway, which is divergent from all of the
other pathways used in this study. Since the PagE6 core lacked heterocyclizable
residues, a Pag/Tru chimera (), which carries a Pro
to Cys mutation and RSI, was used. To our surprise, instead of exhibiting selectivity
for cognate
leaders as would be expected from the phylogenetic analysis, all heterocyclases
were active on all substrates as long as RSI was present (Figure ). Detailed product characterization is given in
Figures S21–24 and Tables S3–S7 (see ). As has been reported earlier, TruD
was chemoselective for Cys and PatD differed in that it could modify
Ser/Thr residues as well. ThcD as characterized
in this study resembles TruD in chemoselectivity. Differences in precursor
peptide sequences, and even hybrids of different types of precursors,
did not alter chemoselectivity or regioselectivity of the resulting
products. Supporting Information
Figure S25 Precise kinetic measurements of heterocyclization
reactions are
complex due to the solubility issues alluded to above and distributive
processing by the enzymes, such that the substrate is released from
the enzyme after each residue is heterocyclized. Despite these factors,
we performed a semiquantitative analysis, wherein the amount of enzyme
was varied and reaction completion after an 18-h time-point was monitored
based on the SDS-PAGE band-shift (). Substrates  (LynE),  (TruLy1), and  (TruE2) were analyzed in this way
because of the clear visibility of their band-shifts due to heterocyclization.
TruD and ThcD were essentially identical in apparent reactivity, whereas
our PatD enzyme preparation was relatively less efficient, such that
a higher amount of enzyme was required to allow reaction completion
at the same time-point. Supporting Information Figure S26 Supporting Information Figure S27 Additionally, experiments were performed
in which reactions of  with TruD and ThcD were competed
with substrates  (TruLy1),  (TruLy2 RSI
mutant), and  (PagE6), using the same methods that
were employed earlier
to define RSI. As determined by SDS-PAGE analysis () and confirmed by MS (), only  carrying intact RSI could compete with .
Taken together, these results showed that the native leader peptide
was not necessary for reactivity and that leader sequences with <50%
sequence identity are recognized by all three heterocyclases as long
as RSI is present. Native leader peptide is not required
for cross-selectivity of
cyanobactin PTM enzymes. Substrates were grouped based on the type
of leader, where Group I are from heterocyclase containing pathways
and Group II are from those without. Heterocyclases ThcD/TruD/PatD
and proteases PatA/ThcA are reactive with both native and non-native
substrates  as long as RSI or RSII is present.
TruA reactivity was analyzed  only on substrates  and . (X) represents leader peptide
where n is the number of residues before RSI. Dashes have been used
to align sequences to the color-coded RS and core regions. Regioselectivity
of each individual enzyme is shown by specific symbols at the modified
residues. Nonfilled symbols represent partially characterized PTMs
(). Importance of RSII and Insignificance of
the Native Leader Peptide
for N-terminal Proteolysis Supporting Information Figure S2 Supporting Information Table S8 We wished to see if the above
observation with RSI could also be extended to RSII. Beyond PatD-like
heterocyclase proteins, the reactivity of PatA and PatG is essential
in cyanobactin maturation. PatA and relatives
act on full-length heterocyclized precursor peptides. Here, we examined
the cross-reactivity of RSII elements with PatA-like proteases. Despite
the comparatively lower sequence identity of PatA and ThcA (), both could
recognize GVDAS-like RSIIs (Figures  and , ) in native and non-native
substrates. The reactivity of TruA was examined  (see below). It processed both substrate , which carried
native leader, and substrate , which carried a Group
II non-native leader. In short, the proteases require RSII for activity,
which exhibits the same portability as observed for the heterocyclase
RSI. Finally, PatG and relatives act after N-terminal proteolysis
on short substrates carrying the AYDGE-like RSIII. The RSIII-protease
interaction has already been extensively studied. Therefore, with this study and resting on
previous work, the selectivity requirements for the major PTM enzymes
in the cyanobactin family have been explored. Next, we aimed at testing
the portability of all RSs in the context of the complete cyanobactin
pathway . Portability of RSs to Produce
Cyanobactins Supporting Information Figure S29 Supporting
Information Figure S29 The above results with
heterocyclases and proteases implied
that conserved elements within precursor peptides are virtually interchangeable.
Therefore, it should be possible to swap PTMs by importing enzymes
and their RSs into preexisting precursor peptides. To test this hypothesis
in the context of a whole pathway , we formed
hybrid precursor peptides comprising sections of ,  and  precursors (). These were
coexpressed with our previously described  production
vector in  (). The resulting
cyanobactin products were extracted from the  cell pellet and analyzed by ESI-MS (see ). Robust expression of patellins from the parent  pathway served as internal controls for cyanobactin expression. Unfortunately,  and  core
sequences did not lead to detectable products. This could be for any
number of reasons, including toxicity to ,
degradation , etc. Two of the designed precursors
did lead to cyanobactin products. The first precursor contained the
TruE2 leader peptide (TruLy2; ), while the second contained
the same TruE2 RSs as , but fused to the PagE6 leader
instead (Pag/TruLy; ). A TruLy2 mutant () was also made, carrying a (3[Glu→Ala]) mutated RSI sequence.
Our results showed that, irrespective of leader, the  pathway processed both  and  (Figure ) to produce the macrocyclized product TFPVPTVC.
In comparison, the mutant  failed to produce compounds,
as would be expected from the earlier established  result that the substrate  could not compete with
full-length precursors. In the context of the whole  pathway in , where  precursors
were present as internal controls (producing patellins), the mutant  was not expected to be a substrate. Both nonprenylated and
prenylated forms of the compound TFPVPTVC were observed, indicating
that the TruF group of prenyltransferase PTM enzymes were also active. Production
of cyanobactins from engineered peptides in . Hybrids of TruE2 and LynE with core peptides TFPVPTVC
and ACMPCYP were made. The latter was not detected, but expression
of the cyclic TFPVPTVC product was robust. Expression was maintained
even when PagE6 leader (purple) replaced the native TruE2 leader.
Product formation was abolished when the RSI-mutated precursor was
used. Here, we experimentally
define RSI, which
we previously proposed to exist based upon extensive sequence analysis.
In the presence of an RSI, peptides are efficiently heterocyclized,
while in its absence heterocyclization is extremely inefficient or
completely abolished. In native cyanobactin precursors lacking RSI,
introduction of the element from other pathways enables access to
the RS and efficient heterocyclization. Mutations to RSI lead to a
greatly diminished enzyme activity when the acidic side of this helical
sequence was modified, while activity was abolished on the hydrophobic
side of the helix. These results indicate that potentially the hydrophobic
helical face is crucial for the interaction with the enzyme. Taken
together, we show that RSI is necessary for the efficient reaction
required . It was recently proposed
that the sequence identified as RSI here is not responsible for recognition
but instead is required just in order to access interior Cys residues. This interpretation does not provide a good
evolutionary rationale to maintain RSI because the native substrates
of TruD lack interior Cys residues within single cassettes. The results
here clearly disprove that idea, showing definitively that RSI is
required for efficient synthesis under native conditions. While a
slow reaction occurs , this is likely not
relevant to the natural reaction. These add to the previously
known RSII and RSIII in cyanobactin
biosynthesis. Although these were previously known, here we add to
the understanding of RSII function, showing that different sequences
can be interchanged. Here, we also show how RSI, RSII, and RSIII function
in the context of whole pathways. Previously, precise elements involved
in recognition have been determined for individual enzymes and precursor
peptides largely through mutagenesis studies in the lanthipeptides
and several microcins. Additional advances include the  use of leader peptides and core peptides, rather
than the normal fusion products found in nature. This has been especially
advantageous, with the covalent fusion of leader peptides with enzymes,
providing robust catalysis of, for example, lanthionine bond formation. On the other hand, the lack of importance of
the leader has also been demonstrated with the Balh heterocyclases . Here, we hoped
to learn how switching leader peptides would enable
us to recruit PTM enzymes. Instead, and to our surprise, we found
that quite different leader sequences were still fully functional
with noncognate enzymes, and that those leader sequences could be
swapped with no impact on activity. The only critical sequences are
the three short RS elements, which are necessary to obtain products.
The finding that RS elements recruit PTMs has implications for RiPP
engineering. Such elements are inherently interchangeable and will
thus afford a simple method for mixing different types of PTMs in
a rational manner. Importantly, these noncognate enzymes enabled
us to change the
pattern of PTMs, leading to the introduction of unnatural modifications . By combining these enzymatic elements at will,
novel compounds can be synthesized. Here, we demonstrate the synthesis
of some of these compounds  by combining
PatA and PatD-like enzymes with various substrates. We provide the
first example of how this might be applied  using a swap where a wholly unnatural precursor peptide still is
functionally modified in the context of the  pathway,
validating the ability to functionally swap cassettes. On the basis
of this technological advance, work is underway in the lab to synthesize
libraries of derivatives, which will be reported in due course. The
underlying technology, however, should be applicable to other types
of RiPP pathways for which recognition elements have been defined. We used the observation of natural “substrate evolution”
and real-time pathway crossovers to inspire the creation of portable
synthetic biology tools. Although very precise substrate evolution
has still been described only in cyanobactins found within coral reef
animals, it is likely that this will be found in many other RiPPs
as well, as shown by initial evidence in some other pathway types. Not all RiPPs exhibit this feature, as others
that have been studied exhibit fairly narrow substrate selectivity,
where more than a small number of mutations are not accepted in the
final products. The accumulation of natural RiPP pathways in which
substrate evolution is occurring will thus be very valuable in achieving
the long-term goal of precisely controlling posttranslational modifications
and small peptide design. The ThcA, ThcE4, ThcD, TruLy2, and
Pag/Tru genes were obtained from GenScript and cloned into the pET28
vector between NdeI and XhoI sites for protein expression and/or into
our previously described pRSF-lac vector between NdeI and KpnI sites for compound expression in . The mutants 3[Glu→Ala], 3[Leu→Ala] and
the RSI deletion mutants of TruLy2 and Pag/Tru constructs were made
by site-directed PCR mutagenesis. Protein Expression, Purification,
and Synthesis Precursor
peptides ThcE4, LynE, PagE6, TruLy2 and Pag/Tru along with their mutants
were made by overexpression (3 h at 37 °C with 1 mM IPTG induction)
to drive the protein into inclusion bodies, in R2D-BL21 cells in 2xYT
medium. Purification was performed by Ni-NTA affinity chromatography
under denaturing conditions. ThcD and ThcA were expressed under similar
conditions as the precursor peptides except that milder expression
conditions were used (18–21 h at 18 °C with 0.1 mM IPTG
induction), and the proteins were purified using native conditions.
All proteins were dialyzed, aliquoted, flash-frozen, and stored at
−80 °C till used. Enzymes were additionally stored in
10% (v/v) glycerol. The precursor peptides TruE2, PatE, TruLy1, and
the enzymes TruD, PatD, and PatA were made as described previously. The synthetic substrates – were
made at the University of Utah Peptide Synthesis Core Facility. For characterization of  pathway enzymes, ThcE4 (30 μM) was incubated with
0.4 μM of ThcD in optimized additive mixtures containing 50
mM Tris buffer pH 7.5 along with 7.5 mM DTT, 4 mM MgCl, and 1 mM ATP in a final reaction volume of 50 or 100 μL.
The N-terminal cleavage assay was carried out by incubating 40 μM
of ThcE4 with 6 μM of ThcA in optimized additive mixtures containing
50 mM Tris buffer pH 7.5 along with 4 mM DTT and 10 mM CaCl in a final reaction volume of 50 or 100 μL. In certain cases,
cleavage assays were performed after heterocyclization by adding protease
to the ThcD/ThcA reaction mixture while maintaining the same final
concentration as detailed above. Assays performed in absence of enzyme
and/or absence of ATP were used as negative controls. The reactions
were incubated at 34 °C for 18 h in a MJ Research Minicycler.
Each reaction was done at least in triplicate and was quenched by
immediately freezing at −80 °C until used for SDS-PAGE
and MS analysis. Precursor Peptide Assay Conditions and Product
Characterization Reactions were carried out under conditions
similar to ThcE4 assays
as given above, with 25–50 μM peptide and 0.5–2
μM heterocyclase or 5 μM protease, for 18 h at 34 °C,
unless otherwise specified. Products were analyzed in two steps. First,
preliminary results were obtained by visualization of modification
on SDS-PAGE. Second, reactions were analyzed by ESI-MS, which indicated
the number of dehydrations (in case of heterocyclization) or a smaller
molecular weight mass (in case of proteolysis). In most cases, identity
of the product was further confirmed by high-resolution FTMS and MS/MS
fragmentation pattern. See  for detailed interpretation of MS data. Synthetic Substrate Assay
Conditions and Product Characterization Reaction conditions
were identical to those for precursor peptide
assays, except that up to 200 μM substrate was used with 2 μM
heterocyclase, for 18 h at 34 °C, unless otherwise specified.
Reactions were quenched with 1 M guanidine hydrochloride, centrifuged,
and the supernatant was analyzed by RP-HPLC on a LaChrom Elite System
(Hitachi). A 214MS C4 5 μ column (Grace-Vydac) was used and
run on a linear gradient from 99% of buffer A (HO/0.1%
TFA) to 100% ACN over 45 min with a flow rate of 1 mL min. Because of the presence of Tyr residues in – a 276 nm UV absorbance maximum was clearly observed for
the starting substrate. Thiazoline modification introduces an additional
254 nm shoulder, such that product formation
can be easily detected. Further confirmation was provided ESI-MS and/or
FTMS. Note that for substrate , it was difficult to
attain HPLC separation of substrate and product peaks. Hence, reactions
were followed by ESI-MS and/or MALDI-MS. Samples to be analyzed by
MALDI were desalted and concentrated using C18 Zip-Tips (Millipore).
See  for detailed
interpretation of MS data. Competition Reaction Assay
Conditions and Product Characterization Identical reaction
conditions were maintained for each competition
reaction series. For competition of  with precursor
peptides , , and –, 50 μM of each substrate was used, since attaining
higher concentrations of precursor peptide was difficult, and the
reactions were followed by MALDI-MS. For competition of  with synthetic peptides –, 200
μM of each substrate was used, and the reactions were followed
by ESI-MS. For competition of precursor peptides  with
other precursor peptides , , and , 25 μM of each substrate was used, and reactions
were followed by SDS-PAGE and ESI-MS at increasing time points. All
enzymes were used at a concentration of 1 μM, unless otherwise
specified. Comparison
of modified peptide
with unmodified peptide on SDS-PAGE was used to visualize PTM modification,
since heterocyclized peptides showed greater mobility and cleaved
peptides resulted in a smaller band in most cases. 18% gels were used
to analyzed 15 μL of each reaction by standard SDS-PAGE conditions.
In all cases, MS methods confirmed results seen on SDS-PAGE gels. ESI-MS and FT-ICR analyses
were performed at the University of Utah Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Core facility. ESI was done using a Micromass Quattro-II (Waters),
and analysis of spectra was carried out using predicted masses obtained
from Monoisotopic Mass calculator. FT was performed following cleavage
of heterocyclized peptide by chymotrypsin or PatA protease, using
a LTQ FT Ultra Hybrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed
both manually using predicted masses from Monoisotopic calculator
and using Mascot from Matrix Science. MALDI-TOF samples were mixed
with 1-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (10 mg mL in
50:50 water: methanol with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) and analyzed
using a Micromass MALDI micro MX (Waters) using an automated targeting
protocol. Construction of Phylogenetic Trees Supporting Information Figure S19 Alignments were
done based on ClustalW2 output results. The precursor peptide sequences
shown in  along with the known/predicted N-terminal protease recognition sequences
RSII were obtained from previously published studies and our present analysis of the  pathway. MEGA5.1
was used to construct the Maximum Likelihood phylogenetic tree using
the JTT model. Expression of Hybrid Precursor Peptides in This was based on our previously described  pathway-based expression system. A two-plasmid
system was coexpressed in , one plasmid carrying
the precursors for expression of patellins 2 and 3, and the other
carrying the engineered hybrid precursor. The hybrids created for
this study were obtained from GenScript before subcloning into our
previously described pRSF-lac expression vector. Single colonies were
picked to make seed cultures, and at least five seed cultures were
pooled the next day and inoculated into optimized 2xYT medium supplemented
with antibiotics. Cultures were grown for 5 days, after which the
cells were harvested. Their acetone extract were isolated, dried,
redissolved in methanol, and analyzed by LC/ESI-MS using an Agilent
Eclipse C column (4.6 mm × 150 mm, 5 μm) on
a Waters Micromass ZQ mass spectrometer. Robust expression of patellins
2 and 3 served as internal controls..