Expanding the chemistry of
life is an essential component in synthetic biology. Dominant among frontier applications is the site-specific incorporation
of nonstandard amino acids (NSAAs) into proteins. Introducing NSAAs
engenders proteins with new functional and structural features that
are not possible with the canonical 20 amino acid building blocks. For example, proteins with unique chemical handles
for precise conjugation can be generated to enable next generation
antibody-drug conjugate therapeutics. In
another exemplary illustration, incorporating a uniquely reactive
NSAA for site-specific conjugation of polyethylene glycol resulted
in a modified human growth hormone with increased potency and reduced
injection frequency. Furthermore, recent
breakthroughs showing the direct synthesis of phosphoproteins and selenoproteins showcase the utility of NSAA incorporation. To date, more than 70
NSAAs have been site-specifically incorporated into proteins in , yeast, and mammalian cells. To achieve this, orthogonal suppressor tRNA (o-tRNA)/aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase (aaRS) pairs as well as ribosomes have been evolved to
reinterpret the genetic code in response to nonsense or quadruplet
codons. Importantly, these o-tRNA/aaRS pairs are
designed to operate parallel to and independent of the cell’s
endogenous machinery. To expand the genetic lexicon, the amber
(TAG) stop codon, one
of three nonsense codons, is typically reprogrammed as a sense codon
for the incorporation of NSAAs. This is called amber suppression. An engineered tRNA/TyrRS pair derived from  has been used most extensively to incorporate NSAAs in response
to the amber codon in . More recent demonstrations of the technology have used
variants of the pyrrolysine system, tRNA/PylRS from  species, which naturally recognizes the nonsense amber
codon. A challenge for amber suppression
is the fact that evolved o-tRNAs must outcompete the endogenous release
factor 1 (RF1). It is known that the presence of RF1 can result in
the production of truncated proteins, particularly when multiple site-specific
incorporations are desired, resulting in low yields of the target
protein product. To address this limitation,
recent studies have sought to create RF1 deletion strains. In one
approach, RF1 deletion was enabled by creating gain of function mutations
in release factor 2 that allow it to recognize the TAG stop signal. In another approach, efforts to reassign the
TAG codon to the TAA synonym can enable RF1 deletion. This was initially
achieved for seven essential genes using a bacterial artificial chromosome. More recently, precise chromosome manipulation  is enabling genomically recoded organisms (GROs)
with TAG nonsense codons reassigned. These efforts have shown utility
for improving suppression efficiency for site-specific NSAA incorporation . (or cell-free)
protein synthesis (CFPS)
is emerging as a powerful technology platform for site-specific incorporation
of NSAAs. The driving
force behind this recent growth is 3-fold. First, a technical renaissance
has enabled high-yielding (>1 g/L) and long-lasting (>10 h in
batch
operation) protein production. Second,
cost-effective energy generation systems by mimicking the  cytoplasmic environment and optimization of extract activity, codon usage, and redox folding
conditions have enabled microscale to manufacturing scale (100 L),
achieving linear scalability over a 6 orders of magnitude range in
volume. These developments are covered
in detail in two recent reviews. Third, the
open nature of CFPS platform brings an unprecedented level of control
and freedom of design compared to  systems. For example, new components (natural and non-natural)
can be added or synthesized and can be maintained at precise ratios.
In contrast to  systems, there are no transport
limitations for getting NSAAs into the cell and there is flexibility
for reprogramming the genetic code because cellular viability need
not be maintained, noting that this reprogramming must not significantly
affect the ability of the organism to grow and provide the necessary
components for CFPS using bacterial extract. To this point, a benefit
is that not all components necessary for genetic reprogramming need
to be produced in the same strain. For example, the open nature of
CFPS could address growth problems by adding purified orthogonal synthetase
into the reaction and enabling  expression
of orthogonal tRNA. Over the past
decade, several groups have demonstrated the power
of using crude extract CFPS systems for site-specific incorporation
of NSAAs. In one exemplary illustration, Albayrak and Swartz demonstrated
a modular and efficient cell-free platform that yields up to 0.9–1.7
mg/mL of a modified (., containing a NSAA) soluble
superfolder green fluorescent protein (sfGFP) in which the o-tRNA
and the modified protein are produced simultaneously. Notably, CFPS yields were higher than comparative studies . Other examples include
efforts to (i) leverage cell-free systems to avoid solubility and
transport limitations typically encountered  in the incorporation of the tyrosine analog -propargyloxy--phenylalanine (pPaF) as well as -azido--phenylalanine for demonstrating a one-step, site-specific
direct protein–protein conjugation using copper(I)-catalyzed
azide–alkyne [3 + 2] cycloaddition, (ii) explore drug discovery by site-specific tagging with NSAA, and (iii) enhance enzyme activity through NSAAs
otherwise difficult with natural amino acids. Despite the fact that CFPS expression systems offer advantages
and open new opportunities for NSAA incorporation, competition between RF1 in the extract and o-tRNAs remains
a limitation. RF1-deficient CFPS systems
have been constructed by removing RF1 tagged with chitin-binding domains and by using an RF1-deleted strain enabled by
reassigning seven amber codons to their synonymous TAA. However, extracts from GROs lacking RF1 have
not been attempted. In this article, we describe the development
of a CFPS platform
from a genomically recoded  strain lacking
RF1 (encoded by , called . The goal was to characterize suppression
efficiency in the presence and absence of RF1 and assess the ability
to introduce NSAAs, pPaF or -acetyl--phenylalanine
(pAcF), at single and multiple sites (Figure ). For characterization purposes, we further compared our S30 crude
extract based CFPS platform to the PURE (rotein
synthesis sing ecombinant lements) translation system lacking RF1. In both the PURE system and extract based CFPS approach,
we demonstrate that removal of RF1 increases the amount of full-length
modified NSAA-containing protein more than 250%, providing benefits
for incorporating NSAA at multiple in-frame positions. Scheme of cell-free protein
synthesis reaction incorporating nonstandard
amino acid to investigate the effect of RF1. Cell extracts containing
transcription and translation machinery are prepared from  or  strains.
Plasmid DNA template of sfGFP containing single or multiple amber
codon sites, orthogonal tRNA/aaRS, NSAA, T7 RNA polymerase, and other
cofactors are added as necessary to activate the cell-free protein
synthesis (CFPS) reaction. Supporting Information Figure S1 In anticipation of completion of fully recoded GRO wherein
all occurrences of the stop TAG codon are reassigned to the synonymous
TAA codon, we created pilot strains having either seven essential
genes (,,,,,, and ) or these
genes plus an additional six genes (, , , , , and  recoded to create the strains  or , respectively. Next, we introduced the gene that confers resistance
to spectinomycin () into the  locus to create RF1 knockout strains
( and ). While the  had a severe growth
phenotype, the  grew nearly twice
as fast, providing a suitable RF1 deletion chassis strain for this
work. The TAG codon reassignment to TAA of the six additional genes
in  strain might allow better
fitness in the cell growth by alleviating natural suppression pressure. The doubling time for  and the parent  was 64.6 ± 0.9 min
and 47 ± 2 min, respectively, in 2xYTPG media (Figure ), and in LB, 74.8 ± 1.2 min for  and 50.3 ± 0.7 min for  (). The  chassis strain grows slower than the  because there is only partial recoding of the genome. Growth rate comparison of  and  strains. Growth of  and  in 2xYTPG medium
at 34 °C in 96 well plates. Each data point is the average of
ten replicate wells from two independent cultures. RF1 Deletion Enhances pPaF Incorporation
in CFPS The
impact of RF1 deletion on NSAA incorporation in CFPS reactions was
assessed in S30 crude cell extract CFPS reactions. The o-tRNA was
expressed constitutively under the control of  promoter in extract source strain during cell growth as described
previously. Following extract preparation,
we used the PANOx-SP CFPS system developed by Jewett and Swartz to quantitatively test the incorporation of
pPaF into sfGFP with an in-frame amber codon at position 132 (sfGFP132pPaF).
Initially, we carried out a series of optimization experiments in
extracts from  to examine the effects of temperature,
incubation time, and pPaFRS concentrations on CFPS (Figure ). Combined transcription and translation reactions
were carried out in 15 μL batch reactions. Figure a shows wild-type sfGFP and sfGFP132pPaF synthesis at 30 and
37 °C throughout the batch reaction duration. For sfGFP132pPaF,
we additionally added 0.5 mg/mL pPaFRS (see Figure b for optimization) and 2 mM pPaF. Active protein synthesis yields, as assessed by fluorescence, were
approximately 2.5-fold higher at 30 °C for both wild-type and
modified sfGFP. Our data are consistent with previous results, which
have shown advantages for sfGFP folding and NSAA incorporation at 30 °C
as compared to 37 °C. Because sfGFP synthesis was most productive
in 20 h batch reactions at 30 °C, all further CFPS reactions
were carried out using these conditions. We next compared sfGFP132pPaF
synthesis in extracts from  with and without
RF1 () (Figure , Table ). As a control, active wild-type
sfGFP as assessed by fluorescence
was synthesized at equivalent levels, indicating similar protein synthesis
activity (Figure a). Strikingly, extracts
from  synthesized active sfGFP132pPaF
yields more than 2.5-fold from 71 ± 6 μg/mL to 190 ±
20 μg/mL when compared to RF1-present  extracts (suppression efficiency: 53% in the RF1-deficient vs 21%
in the RF1-present) (Figure a, Table ). This result highlights significant benefits for
using RF1-deficient strains. Upon closer examination, we observed
that much of this benefit is due to an increase in full-length modified
sfGFP synthesis. Specifically, introduction of C-leucine
into the CFPS reaction allowed us to use autoradiograms to show that
the ratio of full-length to truncated form of sfGFP132pPaF in the
absence of RF1 was ∼8:2 (Figure b,
Table ), whereas the ratio in the presence
of RF1 was ∼2:8 (Figure b, Table ). As a control, only full-length wild-type sfGFP
was synthesized regardless of the presence or absence of RF1 (Figure b). Total protein and soluble sfGFP synthesis yields
quantified using C-leucine incorporation into trichloroacetic
acid-precipitable radioactivity were consistent with the above analysis.
When RF1 is present during protein biosynthesis, the o-tRNA competes
with RF1 and in turn reduces the incorporation
efficiency of NSAA. This results in the major portion of synthesized
proteins being truncated (Figure b, Table ). However, when RF1 is absent, the o-tRNA must
only compete against natural suppression mechanisms, and thereby the majority of protein produced with pPaF
is full-length (Figure b, Table ). Hence, our RF1-deficient CFPS system enhances incorporation
of NSAA into a protein. Optimization of pPaF
incorporation. (a) Time course sfGFP synthesis
in extracts derived from  illustrates
the effect of temperature on CFPS (pPaF = 2 mM, pPaFRS = 0.5 mg/mL,
temperature = 30 and 37 °C for 20 h). Wild-type sfGFP (wt-sfGFP)
was produced from pY71-sfGFP plasmid, modified sfGFP with pPaF at
single amber site corresponding at E132 (sfGFP132pPaF) was produced
from pY71-sfGFP-E132amb, and no plasmid was added as a control (no
plasmid). (b) pPaF incorporation using pY71-sfGFP-E132amb plasmid
with 0.1 to 2 mg/mL of pPaFRS at 2 mM pPaF. Each data point is the
average of three independent reactions, and one standard deviation
is shown. Effect of RF1 deletion of production of sfGFP
with single site
pPaF incorporation. (a) sfGFP synthesis in the presence or absence
of RF1 in cell-extract based CFPS system at 30 °C for 20 h. Wild-type
sfGFP (wt-sfGFP) was produced from pY71-sfGFP plasmid, modified sfGFP
with pPaF (sfGFP132pPaF) was produced from pY71-sfGFP-E132amb with
2 mM pPaF and 0.5 mg/mL pPaFRS, and no pPaFRS (sfGFP132amb/no pPaFRS)
or pPaF (sfGFP132amb/no pPaF) was added. At least three independent
reactions were performed for each sample, and one standard deviation
is shown. (b) Autoradiogram of C-leucine labeled proteins.
FL indicates full-length sfGFP (27.1 kDa), and TR indicates truncated
sfGFP at E132 (14.8 kDa). Yield of Native and Modified Proteins The extract-based CFPS reaction
was performed at 30 °C for 20 h. Total and soluble protein yields
were calculated from liquid scintillation counting of TCA precipitated
radioactive C-labeled protein. Soluble proteins were
obtained from the supernatant of the CFPS samples after centrifugation. Active protein yield was calculated
by measuring fluorescence. Suppression efficiency is the ratio
of the active modified protein yields to the active native protein. Percentages of full-length
and truncated
proteins were determined by the densitometry of protein bands in autoradiogram. RF1-Deficient CFPS System
Increases pPaF Incorporation at Multiple
Sites We next assessed the impact of RF1-deficient extracts
on the incorporation of pPaF at multiple different sites in sfGFP.
For these experiments, we built sfGFP constructs with 1, 2, 5, and
10 amber sites in loop regions (Figure a),
so as to avoid deleteriously impacting fluorescence. Then, we compared CFPS yields in the presence or absence
of RF1 as determined by fluorescence. Consistent with  NSAA incorporation data, we observed
that increasing the number of amber incorporation sites decreased
the sfGFP yield, regardless of the presence or absence of RF1 (Figure b). Yields of sfGFP with E132, N212, or T216 replaced
by pPaF (single site NSAA incorporation) were two to 6-fold higher
in the absence of RF1 (Figure b). In addition,
multiple site incorporations were much more efficient in the absence
of RF1; we observed a 10-fold increase in the modified protein yield
with two incorporation sites and a 12-fold increase with five incorporation
sites (Figure b). For constructs with 10 TAG
replacements, fluorescent protein was not detected (Figure b). Taken together, our results highlight the critical
importance of RF1-deficient extracts for synthesizing proteins bearing
NSAAs at single as well as multiple different sites. Multiple site pPaF incorporation
is enabled by RF1 deletion extracts
and improved by  o-tRNA synthesis. (a) pPaF
incorporation sites are shown in sfGFP using Pymol. Single site incorporation
was performed with amber codons at positions E132, N212, and T216,
two site incorporation at N212 and T216, five site incorporation at
D36, K101, E132, D190, and E213, and ten site incorporation at D36,
K101, D102, E132, D133, K140, D190, V193, E213, and D218. (b) sfGFP
synthesis with single and multiple site pPaF incorporation in the
presence or absence of RF1 with or without optimized o-tRNA (o-tRNA) at 30 °C for 20 h with 2 mM pPaF and 0.5 mg/mL pPaFRS.
(c) Linear DNA templates for producing different types of o-tRNAs
under the control of T7-promoter. In order to create transzyme, hammerhead
ribozyme sequence was added between T7 promoter and o-tRNA sequence.
Sequence differences between o-tRNA and o-tRNA are shown
in red nucleotides. (d) pPaF incorporation with different types of
o-tRNAs (10 ng/μL) to synthesize sfGFP132pPaF using BL21(DE3)
extract with 2 mM pPaF and 0.5 mg/mL pPaFRS. (e) Optimization of DNA
concentration of transzyme o-tRNA in pPa incorporation
using BL21(DE3) extract. At least three independent reactions were
performed for each sample, and one standard deviation is shown for
parts b, d, and e. Synthesis of Optimized o-tRNA Enhances
pPaF Incorporation Previously, it has been shown that o-tRNA
concentration in CFPS is limiting for NSAA incorporation. To address this issue, Albayrak and Swartz recently
developed a novel approach for  synthesis
of the o-tRNA in the reaction, which significantly improves suppression
efficiency. Their key advance was the
direct addition of a transzyme construct to the reaction mixture.
In this construct, the hammerhead ribozyme was fused to o-tRNA. Once
synthesized, the transzyme cleaves itself liberating active o-tRNA
(., 5′–OH tRNA transcript starting
with the proper nucleotide). To test
the impact of the transzyme approach in our system, we constructed
linear o-tRNA templates by PCR amplification with or without hammerhead
ribozyme for the original o-tRNA and
an optimized o-tRNA (o-tRNA) that was evolved to enhance
the efficiency of NSAA incorporation (,) (Figure c). To protect possible degradation
of linear DNA template for the o-tRNA, 500 bp of sequence upstream
of the T7 promoter was added during amplification (Figure c). After generation of the PCR amplicons, we examined
modified protein synthesis with pPaF by cotranscribing o-tRNA or o-tRNA and sfGFP from the linear DNA template and the plasmid,
respectively. To prove that the transzyme construct was functionally
active, we first used BL21(DE3) cell extract that does not contain
any o-tRNA. Transzymes of o-tRNA and o-tRNA enabled
the synthesis of the modified protein, while nontranszymes did not
make the modified protein (Figure d) due to
a lack of active tRNA formation without correct cleavage after transcription. As a control, the modified protein was not produced
when no DNA template for o-tRNA or o-tRNA was added
(Figure d). In addition, o-tRNA resulted in more protein yield than the original o-tRNA (Figure d), which is consistent with a previous report and the fact that the o-tRNA is
a better suppressor tRNA than the original o-tRNA when in competition
with translation termination by RF1. We further showed that modified
sfGFP yield could be increased by increasing the amount of the linear
DNA encoding the transzyme o-tRNA up to 10 ng/μL
(Figure e). We then used transzyme o-tRNA in single and multiple
site pPaF incorporation in the  extracts with
or without RF1 to measure if extra o-tRNA increases
the modified sfGFP yield. Indeed, the addition of 10 ng/μL o-tRNA DNA template to CFPS reactions increased pPaF incorporation
into sfGFP in the presence of RF1, having a more pronounced effect
on multiple site incorporation (Figure b).
In RF1-deficient extracts,  o-tRNA synthesis resulted in a 2-fold higher yield in modified protein
synthesis with two and five incorporation sites, although it did not
show increased protein yield at single site incorporations in the
absence of RF1 (Figure b). Our results suggest
that o-tRNA concentrations are limiting in RF1-deficient extracts
only for multisite incorporations. More broadly, our results highlight
efficiency advantages with RF1-deficient extracts for incorporating
multiple NSAAs into the same polypeptide. Another possibility is that
there is competition with natural suppressors, which we discuss in
detail below. Quantitative Mass Spectrometry Data Discovers
High Suppression
Efficiencies for RF1-Deficient Extracts While synthesis of
sfGFP132pPaF is increased more than 2.5-fold in RF1-deficient extracts,
we curiously observed a significant increase in the amount of active
sfGFP synthesized in the absence of pPaFRS or pPaF in RF1-deficient
extracts (Figure a). These data imply mis-incorporation
in the absence of RF1 when components of the orthogonal translation
system are not added, which has also been observed  in an RF1-deletion strain. It is known
that the ribosome can stall due to incomplete mRNA, rare codons, and at specific
peptide sequences. To bypass this issue,
natural suppressor mechanisms exist to rescue ribosomes ( SsrA-mediated peptide
tagging) or noncognate tRNA interactions
can install an incorrect amino acid, the latter of which we hypothesized
was occurring in our system. This is because in the absence of both
RF1 and a component of the orthogonal translation system (., pPaF), the ribosome is expected to stall at in-frame
amber codons. If this occurs, a canonical amino acid may be mis-incorporated
to rescue the stalled ribosome. Previous studies reported that tyrosine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, and glutamine are misincorporated at amber codon. In addition,
our previous  work has shown direct genetic,
Western blot, and mass spectrometry evidence for different types of
natural mechanisms in the  strain. Supporting
Information Figure S2a Supporting Information Figure S2b We therefore used top-down (TD) mass spectrometry
(., MS analysis of intact proteins) to detect
and provide semiquantitative information on the incorporation of pPaF
into sfGFP. In typical proteomic workflows involving enzymatic digestion,
truncations and mis-incorporated amino acid residues are difficult
to detect, since information on intact protein length and sequence
is lost. The TD methodology used here not only provides confirmation
of single amino acid incorporation but is also capable of identifying
truncations and mis-incorporation events at the same time. Specifically,
intact sfGFP generated by CFPS was analyzed by nanocapillary LC-MS
without prior sample purification. We observed that, for the samples
without pPaFRS, glutamic acid (E) was incorporated at amber codon
corresponding to position at E132 () and N212 of sfGFP (). The CFPS reaction contains
more than 150 mM glutamate as it is used as the dominant anion in
the system. Thus, it appears that this high concentration relative
to the other amino acids (2 mM) as well as the fact that the near
cognate GAG codon assigned to glutamic acid tRNA is
only a single bp different from the TAG amber codon allows for the
natural suppression of the amber codon. Supporting Information Figure S2a The above results could
suggest that we additionally observe mis-incorporation
when the entire orthogonal translation system is present when RF1
is absent. However, this is not the case. In the presence of all units
of the orthogonal translation, NSAA incorporation is the major driving
force of translation for amber codon suppression. Indeed, pPaF was
correctly incorporated approximately 99% in sfGFP216pPaF (Figure a) and more than 90% of the time in sfGFP132pPaF
(). Hence,
the presence of all orthogonal translation components promotes site-specific
NSAA incorporation by outcompeting natural suppression mechanisms.
We also analyzed site-specific pPaF incorporation at two amber sites
in sfGFP (sfGFP212pPaF216pPaF). We did not observe any mis-incorporation
(Figure b). We further analyzed site-specific pPaF incorporation at five
different
amber sites per sfGFP (Figure c). Increasing
the number of pPaF incorporation sites decreased active protein synthesis
yields (Figure b). Likewise, correct pPaF
incorporation efficiency to the multiple amber sites was decreased.
There are 32 possible combinations with five incorporation sites in
pPaF incorporation. We observed that less than 10% of the protein
contained pPaF-incorporated at all five positions (D36, K101, E132,
D190, and E213). The remaining 90% included various modified proteins
with different numbers of pPaF incorporated (Figure c). Supporting Information
Figure S2b We next asked if we observed a positional dependence
of nonsense
suppression efficiency in extracts from the RF1-deletion strain. Previously
it has been shown that the specific location of an amber codon in
the gene sequence has an impact in total protein yield and suppression
efficiency. Given the complexity of our
data when trying to incorporate five NSAAs per sfGFP, we chose to
focus on only single and double pPaF incorporation. When we altered
the amber position, we observed a significant positional effect. For
example, only half of the modified protein sfGFP212pPaF contained
the correct pPaF incorporation, whereas the other half of the protein
was mis-incorporation of E (). In the case of sfGFP132pPaF190pPaF, approximately
20% of the modified sfGFP comprised pPaF-incorporated at both sites,
while 60% contained pPaF-incorporated at only one of two amber sites
(data not shown). Taken together, our mass spectrometry data highlight
that extracts from RF1 deletion extracts provide advantages for site-specific
NSAA incorporation. However, further strategies will be necessary
to avoid natural suppression efficiencies, with one obvious step being
the completion of a completed recoded organism. Mass spectrometry analysis of pPaF incorporation
at single and
multiple amber sites in sfGFP shows high NSAA incorporation in RF1
deletion extracts. (a) pPaF incorporation was examined to the single
amber site corresponding to the position of T216, (b) the two amber
site corresponding to the positions of N212 and T216, and (c) the
five amber site corresponding to the positions of D36, K101, E132,
D190, and E213. Theoretical modified protein peaks of multiple site
pPaF incorporation are shown. pPaF Incorporation in PURE System We next studied the
effect of RF1 on pPaF incorporation in PURE translation system by adding 2 mM pPaF, 0.5 mg/mL pPaFRS, and 4.5
ng/μL linear DNA for o-tRNA. Corroborating the
results in our extract-based system, the yield of the modified sfGFP
with pPaF in the absence of RF1 was increased as compared to the system
in the presence of RF1 in PURE CFPS (41 ± 3 μg/mL vs 19
± 4 μg/mL, respectively). We subsequently confirmed by
autoradiography that this was due to fewer truncated products in the
absence of RF1 (Figure a). Furthermore, we
tested the effect of RF1 by adding different amount of RF1 in PURE
reaction. As the amount of RF1 is increased, production of full-length
modified sfGFP132pPaF was decreased, and the truncated protein was
increased (Figure b). Thus, the presence of
RF1 inhibits NSAA incorporation in response to amber codon, and RF1
may be removed to improve protein synthesis yield containing NSAA.
We directly compared our crude S30 extract system to the PURE translation
system lacking RF1 in terms of the modified protein synthesis yield
and the production cost. We observed that our S30 extract based approach
produces about 5 times more protein (190 ± 20 μg/mL in
extract based CFPS vs 41 ± 3 μg/mL in PURE) and is more
cost-effective (less than $0.05/reaction in extract based CFPS vs
more than $10.00/reaction in PURE) than the PURE translation system
lacking RF1. pPaF incorporation in the PURE translation system. (a)
Autoradiogram
of radioactive labeled proteins. Wild-type sfGFP was produced from
pY71-sfGFP plasmid, modified sfGFP was produced from pY71-sfGFP-E132amb
with or without pPaFRS in the presence of pPaF. (b) Effect of RF1
concentration in pPaF incorporation. RF1 was diluted to /, /, and / of the amount that manufacturer suggested. FL indicates full-length
sfGFP (27.1 kDa), and TR indicates truncated sfGFP at E132 (14.8 kDa). To demonstrate the benefit of RF1-deficient
extracts for CFPS more broadly, we extended our approach to another
NSAA, namely pAcF. pAcF serves as a bio-orthogonal handle and has
recently been incorporated into proteins and functionalized to engender
more potent and stable human growth hormone and to improve the activity of antibody-drug conjugates. The suppressor o-tRNA used for pPaF incorporation
is compatible to pAcF. Thus, we used
same cell-extract with the addition of pAcF and pAcFRS to examine
pAcF incorporation. Based on the final yield of modified sfGFP after
a 20 h CFPS reaction, pAcF incorporation at a single site (sfGFP132pAcF)
was about 20% higher in RF1-deficient extracts (Figure ). While the overall % increase was lower than pPaF, our data
consistently show that removing RF1 is beneficial for CFPS of proteins
containing NSAAs. Supporting Information Figure S3a and b Genetic code expansion
is a promising means in protein engineering
to develop new functional and structural biomolecules. In this study, we utilized CFPS to systematically examine
NSAA incorporation in response to the amber codon in cell-free translation
systems lacking RF1. We showed that omitting RF1 enhances NSAA incorporation
at single site, as well as multiple different sites, in a single protein.
Moreover, RF1 deletion enables a significant shift from truncated
to full-length product, which provides advantages over previously
reported systems. Furthermore, we were able to easily modulate components
of the orthogonal translation system to levels that might otherwise
be toxic to cells in order to maximize NSAA incorporation. The production
of orthogonal components often causes impaired cellular fitness . For example, we observed impairment of cell growth
upon maximizing pPaFRS or pAcFRS overproduction (). This fitness impairment
can be avoided using CFPS technologies. Although we show that deleting RF1 is critical to enhance
NSAA
incorporation, the overall protein synthesis yields presented here
are lower than those published recently by Albayrak and Swartz. We hypothesize that this is because the strain
used in that study had been subjected to more than a decade of strain
engineering efforts to stabilize reaction substrates. Indeed it is
well-known that strain modification is a powerful tool for increasing
CFPS yields. For example, stabilization
of amino acid substrates by deleting genes related to substrate depletion, stabilization of DNA by deleting genes encoding
endonuclease I, and reduction of protein
degradation by disrupting proteases enabled
high-yield protein synthesis in CFPS systems. In addition to eliminating
deleterious pathways, activating beneficial pathways may improve protein
production, as shown that adding elongation factors to CFPS reactions
increased protein synthesis rates and yields. Because the parent  strain has
not been previously optimized for CFPS, we expect that future efforts
to design and construct synthetic genomes that upon cell lysis lead
to improved extract performance will increase synthesis yields of
proteins bearing NSAAs. For example, multiplex automated genome engineering
(MAGE) could be used to make numerous
genomic changes upregulating positive effectors and downregulating
negative effectors both individually and in combinations insofar as
these genomic changes do not have a deleterious effect on the growth
of the organism. Looking forward, additional strain engineering
efforts could also
be pursued to reduce and remove natural suppression mechanisms. As
described above, in the absence of some orthogonal translation components,
we observe glutamate incorporation at the amber codon in RF1 deficient
extracts from a partially recoded strain (13 of 321 amber sites in
the genome). We hypothesize this phenotype is caused by the fact that
the strain lacking RF1 induces natural suppression mechanisms during
cell growth prior to extract generation to help deal with ribosomal
pausing at amber sites present in the genome. Replacing the remaining
amber codons in the genomes (, the fully recoded  strain) should reduce natural suppression mechanisms,
as was observed . In summary, we described a novel CFPS platform derived from
the
RF1-deficient strain  with advantages
for improved amber suppression. While it is still early in the development
of crude extract based CFPS system derived from RF1 deficient strains,
our advances, along with the potential for future strain engineering,
suggest promise for future efforts to generate sequence-defined proteins
or polymers with many NSAAs at high yields and purity. Indeed, we
anticipate that RF1 deficient chassis strains will achieve greater
than 1g/L yields in the upcoming years, becoming a significant player
on the stage with other CFPS technologies for synthesis of unnatural
biopolymers with high efficiency and high fidelity. pAcF incorporation. sfGFP synthesis with pAcF (2 mM) and
pAcFRS
(0.5 mg/mL) in the presence or absence of RF1 in CFPS system at 30
°C for 20 h. Wild-type sfGFP (wt-sfGFP) was produced from pY71-sfGFP
plasmid; modified sfGFP with pAcF (sfGFP132pAcF) was produced from
pY71-sfGFP-E132amb; and no pAcFRS was added (sfGFP132amb/no pAcFRS).
Three independent reactions were performed for each sample, and one
standard deviation is shown. GRAPHIC-d2527e1245-autogenerated The bacterial strains
and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table . We used  (a modified EcNR2 strain),, and BL21(DE3) strains for making S30 cell extract
and BL21(DE3) for producing the orthogonal amino acyl tRNA synthetases.
Chloramphenicol (25 μg/mL) was used for preculturing , spectinomycin (20 μg/mL) for preculturing  knockout mutant, and kanamycin (50 μg/mL), chloramphenicol
(25 μg/mL), and tetracycline (20 μg/mL) for maintaining
plasmids as necessary. Strains and Plasmids
Used in This
Study genotype/relevant
characteristics EcNR2 (Cm, Ap) with 13 TAG termination reassignments
to TAA at ,,,,,,,,,,,, and fhuA2 [lon]
ompT gal (λ DE3) [dcm] ΔhsdS
λ DE3 = λ sBamHIo ΔEcoRI-B int::(lacI::PlacUV5::T7
gene1) i21 Δnin5 pY71-sfGFP with amber codon at E132 pY71-sfGFP with amber codon at N212 pY71-sfGFP with
amber codon at T216 pY71-sfGFP with amber codon at N212 and T216 pY71-sfGFP with amber codon at D36, K101, E132, D190, and E213 pY71-sfGFP with amber codon at D36, K101, D102, E132, D133,
K140, D190, V193, E213, and D218 Km, , C-terminal
6x histidine tag Km, , C-terminal
6x histidine tag Ap, Cm, Km, Sp, and
Tet are ampicillin,
chloramphenicol, kanamycin, spectinomycin, and tetracycline resistance,
respectively. Overnight cultures of  and  strains grown in Luria–Bertani
(LB) at 250 rpm at 34 °C were diluted
to an OD of 0.05 at 600 nm in LB and 2xYTPG media (16 g/L tryptone,
10 g/L yeast extract, 5 g/L NaCl, 7 g/L KHPO, 3 g/L KHPO, and 18 g/L glucose; adjusted
pH to 7.1 with KOH). 100 μL of the diluted cultures was added
in 96-well polystyrene plates (Costar 3370; Corning Incorporated,
Corning, NY). OD was measured at 15 min intervals for
15 h at 34 °C with fast shaking mode on a Synergy2 plate reader
(Biotek, Winooski, VT). Growth data of each strain was obtained from
ten replicate wells with two independent cultures. BL21(DE3) strains
containing pY71-pPaFRS or pY71-pAcFRS were incubated at 37 °C
in LB with different concentrations (0 mM, 0.01 mM, 0.1 mM, or 1 mM)
of isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) (Sigma, St. Louis,
MO) in 96 well plates. Growth data of each strain was obtained from
six replicate wells with three independent cultures. cell
extracts were prepared from  and  strains containing pDULE-o-tRNA. Cells were grown in a BIOSTAT C-plus
fermentor (Sartorious AG, Goettingen, Germany) to OD at 600 nm of
3.0 in 10 L of 2xYTPG media at 34 °C. Cells were pelleted by
centrifuging for 15 min at 6000 × g at 4 °C, washed twice
with cold S30 buffer (10 mM tris-acetate pH 8.2, 14 mM magnesium acetate,
60 mM potassium acetate, 1 mM dithiothreitol), and stored at −80 °C. Thawed cells were suspended
in 1 mL of S30 buffer per gram cells and lysed in EmulsiFlex-C3 homogenizer
(Avestin, Manheim, Germany) with a single pass at pressure of 20 000
to 25 000 psi. Cell debris and insoluble components were removed
by two rounds of centrifugation for 30 min at 30 000 ×  at 4 °C. The clarified samples were incubated for
80 min at 120 rpm at 37 °C to optimize the extract activity and
centrifuged for 15 min at 15 000 ×  at
4 °C. The supernatant was flash-frozen using liquid nitrogen
and stored at −80 °C until use. Total protein concentration
of the extracts was approximately 50 mg/mL, as measured by Quick-Start
Bradford protein assay kits (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). pPaF and pAcF were used to examine
NSAA incorporation. pPaF was synthesized as described previously, and pAcF was purchased through Chem-Impex International
(PN 24756; Wood Dale, IL). Stock solutions (500 mM) of pPaF and pAcF
in 0.5 N NaOH were prepared. Working concentration of pPaF or pAcF
was 2 mM in CFPS reaction. Adding the same volume of 0.5 N NaOH to
CFPS reactions did not affect protein synthesis efficiency. Supporting Information
Table S1 Supporting Information
Table S1 Supporting Information Table S1 Amber codons were introduced at
the corresponding positions of E132, D190, N212 in sfGFP using inverse
PCR with TAG insertion primers () on pY71-sfGFP plasmid. PCR was performed using Phusion
High-Fidelity DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) at
98 °C for 30 s, with 30 cycles of 98 °C for 10 s, 60 °C
for 30 s, and 72 °C for 3 min, and a final extension of 72 °C
for 5 min followed by ligation and DpnI digestion. The constructed
plasmids were electroporated in to BL21(DE3) competent cells. In order
to introduce two TAGs in , an amber codon was
added at the codon corresponding to N212 on pY71-sfGFP-T216amb, resulting
in pY71-sfGFP-2amb. sfGFP with five amber sites (corresponding to
positions D36, K101, E132, D190, and E213) or ten amber sites (corresponding
to positions D36, K101, D102, E132, D133, K140, D190, V193, E213,
and D218) was synthesized through GenScript (Piscataway, NJ) and cloned
into pY71 vector using  and I restriction sites to construct pY71-sfGFP-5amb and pY71-sfGFP-10amb.
pAcFRS gene was amplified from pEVOL-pAcF using pAcF-NdeI-f and pAcF-I-r primers () and cloned into pY71 vector using  and I sites to construct pY71-pAcFRS. All constructs
were confirmed by DNA sequencing using pY71-f and pY71-r primers (). o-tRNA synthetases were
purified as described previously with
modifications. BL21(DE3) harboring pY71-pPaFRS or pY71-pAcFRS was
grown in 1 L LB to OD at 600 nm of 1.0 at 250 rpm and 37 °C.
pPaFRS and pAcFRS were produced by adding 0.2 mM IPTG for 3 h. Cells
were harvested at 5000 ×  for 30 min at 4 °C,
washed with S30 buffer, and stored at −80 °C. The frozen
cell pellet was thawed in loading buffer (300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole,
50 mM NaHPO, 5 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0)
and lysed using a homogenizer at 20 000–25 000
psi. After clarification by centrifuging at 16 000 ×  at 4 °C for 30 min, the supernatant was loaded into
a 1 mL Ni-NTA column using a BioLogic DuoFlow FPLC system (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA). The column was washed with wash buffer (300 mM NaCl,
50 mM imidazole, 50 mM NaHPO, 5 mM Tris–HCl,
pH 8.0), and His-tagged proteins were eluted with 250 mM imidazole
in wash buffer. The eluent was dialyzed three times for 2 h each using
6000–8000 MWCO dialysis tubing (Spectrum, New Brunswick, NJ)
with 10 volumes of phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) for pPaFRS and the aaRS-buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0,
150 mM KCl, 15 mM MgCl, and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol)
for pAcFRS. The proteins were concentrated
using Amicon Ultracel YM-3 centrifugal filter (Millipore, Billerica,
MA). Protein purity was confirmed by 4–12% NuPAGE SDS-PAGE
(Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). Concentrations were determined
by Quick-Start Bradford protein assay kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). CFPS reactions were performed testing
for incorporation of pPaF and pAcF using a modified PANOx-SP system. Briefly, 15 uL of CFPS reaction in a 1.5 mL
microcentrifuge tube was prepared by mixing the following components:
1.2 mM ATP; 0.85 mM each of GTP, UTP, and CTP; 34.0 μg/mL folinic
acid; 170.0 μg/mL of  tRNA mixture;
13.3 μg/mL plasmid; 100 μg/mL T7 RNA polymerase; 2 mM
each of 20 standard amino acids; 0.33 mM nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD); 0.27 mM coenzyme-A (CoA); 1.5 mM spermidine; 1 mM putrescine;
4 mM sodium oxalate; 130 mM potassium glutamate; 10 mM ammonium glutamate;
12 mM magnesium glutamate; 33 mM phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP); 2 mM pPaF
or pAcF; 0.1 to 2 mg/mL pPaFRS or pAcFRS and 27% v/v of cell extract.
The sample was incubated for 20 h at 30 °C unless noted otherwise. Quantification of the Synthesized sfGFP Supporting Information Figure
S4 Total and soluble
protein yields were quantified by determining radioactive C-Leu incorporation using trichloroacetic acid (TCA). Radioactivity of TCA-precipitated samples was
measured using liquid scintillation counting (MicroBeta2, PerkinElmer,
Waltham, MA). Active sfGFP protein yields were quantified by measuring
fluorescence. Two microliters of CFPS reaction was added in the middle
of the flat bottom of 96-well half area black plates (Costar 3694;
Corning Incorporated, Corning, NY). sfGFP was excited at 485 nm while
measuring emission at 528 nm with a 510 nm cutoff filter. The fluorescence
of sfGFP was converted to concentration (μg/mL) according to
a standard curve (). Radioactive S-Met
was added in CFPS reactions. 2.5 μL of each reaction was loaded
on 4–12% NuPAGE SDS-PAGE gel after denaturing the sample. The
gel was soaked in Gel Drying Solution (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) for
30 min, fixed with cellophane films, dried applying heat for 1 h in
GelAir Dryer (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), and exposed overnight on Storage
Phosphor Screen (GE Healthcare Biosciences, Pittsburgh, PA). Autoradiogram
was scanned using Storm Imager (GE Healthcare Biosciences, Pittsburgh,
PA) and analyzed using Quantity One software (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Construction of Linear DNA Templates for Expressing o-tRNA Supporting
Information Table S1 Supporting Information Table S1 Supporting Information Table S1 DNA oligomers of o-tRNA and optimized o-tRNA bearing a T7 promoter
with or without hammerhead ribozyme (Figure c), were synthesized via gBlocks (Integrated DNA technologies, Coralville,
IA). DNA sequences of o-tRNA and optimized o-tRNA (Figure c) were obtained from plasmid pDULE-o-tRNA and pEVOL-pAcF, respectively. The hammerhead ribozyme sequence (Figure c) was added between the T7-promoter and o-tRNA
sequence. The gBlock fragments were amplified
using T7-PCRamp-f and T7-PCRamp-r primers (), cloned into pY71 plasmid using II and I restriction sites, and confirmed
by DNA sequencing using tRNA-seq-f and tRNA-seq-r primers (). Linear DNA
templates of original or optimized o-tRNA were generated by PCR amplification
using T7tRNA500-f and T7tRNA-r or T7tRNAopt-r primers (). NSAA incorporation was examined
in the PURE system using PURExpress ΔRF123 Kit (New England
Biolabs, Ipswich, MA). The reaction components of PURExpress with
and without RF1 were mixed with 5 μg/mL sfGFP plasmids, 2 mM
pPaF, 0.5 mg/mL pPaFRS, and 4.5 ng/μL linear DNA template of
optimized o-tRNA in a 10 μL reaction. The reaction was incubated
for 20 h at 30 °C. To
confirm pPaF incorporation
at corresponding amber codon positions, mass spectrometry analysis
was performed with purified sfGFP with NSAA incorporated. Full-length
sfGFP was purified using C-terminal strep-tags and 0.2 mL gravity-flow
Strep-Tactin Sepharose mini-columns (IBA GmbH, Gottingen, Germany).
Eluted protein samples were concentrated using Microcon centrifugal
filter columns YM-10 (Millipore, Billerica, MA). The semipurified protein was analyzed
by nanocapillary LC-MS using a 100 mm × 75 μm ID PLRP-S
column in-line with an Orbitrap Elite (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA).
All MS methods included the following events: (1) FT scan, / 400–2000, 120 000 resolving
power and (2) data-dependent MS/MS on the top 2 peaks in each spectrum
from scan event 1 using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD)
with normalized collision energy of 25, isolation width 50 /, and detection of ions with resolving
power of 60 000. All data were analyzed using QualBrowser,
part of the Xcalibur software packaged with the ThermoFisher Orbitrap
Elite..