A central
goal of synthetic biology is to control cellular behavior in a predictable
manner. Natural cellular behavior is governed
by the expression of specific sets of genes needed for survival in
different environments or developmental life stages. Genetic networks—webs
of interactions between cellular regulatory molecules—are responsible
for dynamically turning these genes on at the right time and place
and, in effect, are the circuitry that implement behavioral programs
in cells. Because of this, a central focus
of synthetic biology has been to control cellular behavior by engineering
genetic networks from the bottom up. Historically, work on engineering genetic networks has focused on
combining sets of regulatory proteins to control their own expression
in patterns that implement behaviors such as bistable memory storage, oscillations, layered logic gates, advanced signal processing, and spatial control
of gene expression. More recently, noncoding
RNAs (ncRNAs) have emerged as powerful components for engineering
genetic networks. There are now examples
of engineered ncRNAs that regulate nearly all aspects of gene expression, some as a function of intracellular molecular signals. In addition, new RNA structural
characterization tools are enabling the engineering and optimization
of these mechanisms. There are even large libraries
of orthogonal RNA regulators, and there have been initial successes
in engineering small genetic networks out of RNA regulators. RNA genetic networks have several potential advantages over
their protein counterparts. First, networks
constructed from RNA-based transcriptional regulators propagate signals
directly as RNAs, thus eliminating intermediate proteins and making
them potentially simpler to design and implement. Second, tools based on qPCR and next-generation sequencing
have the potential to characterize the species, structural states,
and interactions of RNAs across the cell at a level of depth and detail
not possible for proteins. Finally, since
the speed of signal propagation in a network is governed by the decay
rate of the signal, RNA networks have
the potential to operate on time scales much faster than proteins.
However, the design principles for engineering RNA circuitry are still
in their infancy, and we have yet to fully test and verify these potential
benefits. This is in part due to the slow nature of the current design-build-test
cycle for engineering genetic networks  that
takes on the order of days even when testing circuits in bacteria
with short doubling times. Recently, cell-free protein synthesis
systems have been developed into a platform to rapidly characterize
the outputs of genetic networks. Cell-free reactions often consist of three components: cell extract
or purified gene expression machinery, a buffer/energy mix optimized
for gene expression, and DNA that encodes the genetic network (Figure ). Fluorescent proteins are generally
used as reporters, thus monitoring fluorescence over time allows the
characterization of circuit dynamics. Because of their simplicity,
cell-free reactions reduce the time for testing a constructed genetic
circuit design from days to as little as an hour. Since these systems do not require selection markers or DNA replication
to maintain circuitry constructs, there are no limitations on DNA
circularization or on plasmid origin of replication and antibiotic
compatibility. This flexibility allows for faster,
multiplexed generation of circuit constructs, further reducing design-build-test
cycle times. Since cell-free reactions lack a membrane, DNA encoding
different regulators can be added at any time during the reactions,
enabling the rapid characterization of network response as a function
of perturbations that are extremely difficult or even impossible to
do inside cells (Figure ). Additionally, there is increasing evidence that these  characterizations correlate to  results, including comparable rates of RNA degradation. Cell-free systems thus have intriguing
potential to serve as an intermediate layer to rapidly prototype circuit
design and response before porting the designs to the more complex
environment of the cell. In this work, we adapt an  cell-free transcription–translation (TX-TL)
system for characterizing RNA genetic networks.
Since this system was initially developed and optimized to test protein-based
circuits, we start by validating the
functionality of RNA transcriptional attenuators in TX-TL and characterize the effect of different TX-TL
experimental conditions including DNA concentration and batch-to-batch
variation. We then show that a double-repressive RNA transcriptional
cascade functions in TX-TL with characteristics that match its  performance. The ability
to spike in DNA encoding the top level of this cascade during the
reaction allowed us to directly probe the response time of this RNA
network. We found that the response time of this RNA cascade is ∼5
min per step of the cascade, matching our expectation of quick signal
propagation due to the fast kinetics of RNA degradation. We then show
that this response time can be tuned by either changing the temperature
or effectively changing the threshold required for transcriptional
repression by using tandem attenuators. To create a bridge to circuitry that we can implement and test , we show that we can use TX-TL to characterize the
response time of similar cascades that use RNA regulators responsive
to theophylline to activate the cascade
(Figure ). The success of these experiments
led to the forward design of a new RNA network motif, the single input
module (SIM), which is responsible for staging the successive expression
of multiple genes in natural pathways. After characterizing the functionality of the individual SIM components
in TX-TL, we transfer the final RNA-SIM circuit to , and show that this network dynamically stages the expression of
two fluorescent reporter proteins , solidifying
the use of TX-TL for engineering RNA genetic circuits. Schematic of the TX-TL design-build-test cycle
for RNA circuits. Potential circuit designs are rapidly characterized
in TX-TL by combining DNA-encoded RNA circuit components (colored
circles) with the TX-TL reaction components. Overall circuit performance
is monitored via the expression of fluorescent proteins enabling circuit
designs to be rapidly benchmarked within a 2–3 h period. In
addition, the openness of the TX-TL system allows characterization
of circuit response via the addition of DNA encoded RNA regulators
during the reactions. After multiple iterations of the design-build-test
cycle, optimized circuit designs can be transformed into  and tested for  functionality. RNA Transcriptional
Cascades Function in TX-TL Supporting Information
Figure S1 Supporting Information Figure S1 In order to assess the feasibility
of using TX-TL for characterizing RNA circuitry, we first tested the
basic functionality of the central regulator in our RNA cascade, the
pT181 transcriptional attenuator (Figure , Att-1). The pT181 attenuator lies in the 5′-untranslated
region of a transcript, and functions like a transcriptional switch
by either allowing (ON) or blocking (OFF) elongation of RNA polymerase. The OFF state is induced through an interaction with an antisense
RNA (AS-1), expressed separately in our synthetic context (). By transcriptionally fusing the pT181 attenuator
to the super folder green fluorescent protein (SFGFP) coding sequence,
we are able to assess functionality of the attenuator by measuring
SFGFP fluorescence with and without antisense RNA present (). Supporting Information
Figure S2A To characterize antisense-mediated
transcriptional repression in TX-TL, we first titrated concentrations
of the pT181 attenuator (Att-1) reporter plasmid to determine an appropriate
level of SFGFP output for our experimental setup. As expected, we
observed a greater fluorescence output with increasing attenuator
reporter plasmid concentration (). As noted in previous work with TX-TL, excessive
amounts of input DNA can lead to resource competition and resource
limitation within the reaction, which can confound circuit characterization. We found that an attenuator plasmid concentration of 0.5 nM (which
corresponds to about one copy of plasmid into one  cell) struck a balance between fluorescence signal and DNA concentration,
and this concentration was used in subsequent experiments. Supporting Information Figure S3 and Tables S3–4 To
test basic repression of the attenuator, we then characterized reactions
that contained 0.5 nM of the attenuator reporter plasmid, and either
8 nM of the antisense-expressing plasmid (+), or 8 nM of a control
plasmid that lacked the antisense coding sequence (−) (). As expected, we observed a substantial difference in the fluorescence
trajectories between the (+) and (−) antisense conditions,
with the (+) antisense condition resulting in an overall lower fluorescence
output over time (Figure A). We note that
in these experiments, we never observed a constant steady-state fluorescence
signal due to the fact that SFGFP is not degraded (or is not diluted)
in the TX-TL reaction during the time scale of the experiment (i.e.,
because SFGFP is not degraded, we always observed an increase in fluorescence
over time even in the (+) antisense repressive condition). Because
of resource depletion effects that accumulate over time in TX-TL reactions, especially after 1–2 h of incubation,
end points of these fluorescence trajectories can give misleading
quantifications of repression. Since the action of the antisense RNA
ultimately affects the rate of transcription of the attenuator, we
sought a way to quantify antisense repression by comparing the rates
of SFGFP expression. Plotting the time
derivative of the fluorescence trajectories allowed us to directly
quantify the effective rate of SFGFP expression in the (+) and (−)
antisense conditions as a function of time (Figure B). To further quantify antisense-mediated repression from
these experiments, we computed a time average of the regions of constant
maximum SFGFP production rate for each condition (Figure B boxed regions). We used maximum rate to reduce
the confounding effects of resource depletion, which can cause production
rates to go down over time (Figure B). Using
these rates, we determined that with 8 nM of antisense RNA plasmid,
we achieve 72% repression (Figure C), which
is comparable to the 85% steady-state repression level previously
observed . Supporting Information Figure
S2B–D In order
to move toward characterizing RNA circuitry in TX-TL, we needed to
confirm the functionality of an orthogonal attenuator/antisense pair.
We used a mutant pT181 attenuator/antisense pair (Att-2, AS-2) that
had previously been shown to be perfectly orthogonal to the wild type
attenuator . To
test orthogonality in TX-TL, we performed reactions containing one
of the two attenuator reporter plasmids at 0.5 nM, and one of the
two antisense plasmids (AS-1 or AS-2) or the no-antisense control
plasmid at 8 nM. For both attenuators, we found results consistent
with those from  experiments—cognate antisense RNAs caused repression, while
noncognate antisense yielded SFGFP expression rates that were within
the error of the no-antisense conditions (Figure D, rate plots ). We thus confirmed the orthogonality of the two
attenuator/antisense pairs in TX-TL. Supporting Information Figure
S2B–D Supporting
Information Figure S2C Interestingly, we observed
that the region of maximum SFGFP production occurs at different times
for different combinations of antisense-attenuators in the reaction.
In particular, reactions with cognate (repressive) antisense-attenuator
pairs have maxima that occur around 40 min, while reactions with noncognate
(orthogonal), or just attenuator–reporter plasmids, have maxima
that occur near the end of the reactions at ∼100 min (Figure B, ). Furthermore, cognate pairs show a decrease in
SFGFP production rate for ∼40 min after the maxima is reached
(Figure B, ). One reason for this decrease in production
rate could be due to resource depletion caused by the cognate RNA–RNA
interaction. Another reason could be from slow degradation of Att-1-SFGFP
transcripts that escape attenuation at the start of the reaction.
In fact, previous work has shown that the half-life in TX-TL of deGFP
mRNA monitored by the malachite green aptamer is approximately 18 min. Independent
of a specific cause of this effect, using maximum SFGFP production
rate gives us a conservative estimate of attenuator repression that
we use below. The orthogonality of the two antisense-attenuator
pairs allowed us to characterize a double-repression RNA transcriptional
cascade in TX-TL (Figure E). The bottom level of the cascade (L1) consists of an SFGFP
coding sequence controlled by the pT181 attenuator’s (Att-1)
interaction with its antisense (AS-1). AS-1 transcription is in turn
controlled by the mutant antisense (AS-2), via a mutant attenuator
sequence (Att-2) present upstream of AS-1 on the middle level of the
cascade (L2). AS-2 is transcribed from the top level of the cascade
(L3) (Figure E). Supporting Information Figure S2E Supporting Information Figure S2F Previous work encoded
L2 and L3 of the cascade on a high-copy plasmid (ColE1 origin, ∼200
copies/cell), and L1 on a medium copy plasmid (p15A origin, ∼15
copies/cell), and showed that the double repression cascade yielded
a net activation of SFGFP expression at steady-state . Since there are no plasmid incompatibilities
in TX-TL, we were able to use three separate plasmids for L1, L2,
and L3 to characterize cascade function. Since three DNA elements
are needed for the cascade, we first performed titrations of L2 versus
0.5 nM of L1 in order to find conditions that allowed us to observe
repression without severe resource depletion (). We found that 4 nM of
L2 caused a 72% repression, with no greater repression observed with
higher concentrations of L2. To test the full cascade, we titrated
different amounts of L3, from 10 nM to 18 nM, keeping the total amount
of DNA in the TX-TL reaction constant with the addition of a control
plasmid to approximately control for resource usage across conditions
(). We
found that L3 activates SFGFP expression with a rate that matches
that of just L1 (Figure F). This result
proved that RNA circuitry functions in TX-TL reactions. Stated another
way, these experiments demonstrate that the RNA circuitry tested only
requires the machinery from the cytoplasmic extract contained in the
TX-TL reaction. Furthermore, the flexibility of TX-TL allowed us to
systematically validate the functioning of each level of the cascade
by adding successive levels one at a time. This is in contrast to
the previous  work where complex controls
were needed to validate cascade performance since L2 and L3 were encoded
on the same plasmid. Finally, we note
that all of these experiments were performed at 29 °C, whereas
the RNA transcriptional regulation and circuitry had only been previously
tested at 37 °C, thus confirming its function over a range of
temperatures. Supporting Information Figure S2 Characterizing
RNA transcriptional attenuators and circuits in TX-TL. (A) Fluorescence
time courses of TX-TL reactions containing the pT181 attenuator reporter
plasmid at 0.5 nM, with 8 nM antisense plasmid (+) or 8 nM no-antisense
control plasmid (−). (B) SFGFP production rates were calculated
from the data in (A) by calculating the slope between consecutive
time points. Boxes represent regions of constant SFGFP production.
Blue and red shaded regions in parts A and B represent standard deviations
of at least seven independent reactions performed over multiple days
calculated at each time point. (C) Average SFGFP production rates
were calculated from the data in boxed regions in part B. Error bars
represent standard deviations of those averages. The (+) antisense
condition shows 72% attenuation compared to the (−) antisense
condition in TX-TL. (D) Orthogonality of the pT181 attenuator (Att-1)
to a pT181 mutant attenuator (Att-2). Average SFGFP production rates
were calculated as in part C. Plots of SFGFP production rates can
be found in . Bars represent each attenuator at 0.5 nM with 8 nM of no-antisense
control plasmid (blue), pT181 antisense plasmid (AS-1, red), or pT181
mutant antisense plasmid (AS-2, purple). (E) Schematic of an RNA transcriptional
cascade. L1 is the same pT181 attenuator (Att-1) reporter plasmid
used in parts A–D. In the plasmid for L2, the pT181-mut attenuator
(Att-2) regulates two copies of the pT181 antisense (AS-1), each separated
by a ribozyme (triangle). The L3 plasmid
transcribes the pT181-mut antisense (AS-2). (F) Average SFGFP production
rates for the three combinations of the transcription cascade depicted
in part E. L1 alone (blue bar) leads to high SFGFP production. L1+L2
(red bar) results in AS-1 repressing Att-1, thus lower SFGFP production.
L1+L2+L3 (purple bar) results in a double inversion leading to high
SFGFP production. Total DNA concentration in each reaction was held
constant at 18.5 nM. In parts D and F, error bars represent standard
deviations from at least seven independent reactions performed over
multiple days. Ideal TX-TL Batch Characteristics for Circuit
Testing Supporting Information Figure S4 There is known to be batch-to-batch variation in
TX-TL preparations. In order to assess
the impact of batch-to-batch variation on RNA circuit characterization,
we tested three different extract/buffer preparations by adding a
range of concentrations of the no-antisense control plasmid to 0.5
nM of the L1 plasmid. Since extra control DNA causes resource competition,
this experimental design allowed us to assess the maximum amount of
DNA per reaction that each batch could support. As shown in Figure , we observed several important features. First,
for a fixed concentration of L1 and control DNA, we observed significant
differences in the fluorescence time courses between the batches (Figure A). The end point fluorescence of batch 2 is more
than twice that of batch 1 and 3. Second, batch 2 reaches constant
SFGFP production faster than batch 1 and 3 for all conditions tested
(). Third,
batch 1 had a lower fluorescence output than batch 3, but both reached
constant SFGFP production at approximately the same time over all
conditions. In terms of DNA loading effect, in all of the batches we
see an increase in production rate when adding 5 nM of control plasmid
(Figure B). For batches 1 and 3, production
rates remained constant up to the maximum concentration of control
DNA tested (20 nM). The production rate for batch 2 increased with
the addition of 10 nM control DNA and then decreased for 15 and 20
nM control DNA (Figure B). Supporting Information Figure S3 Supporting Information Figure S5 Supporting Information Figure S5 Supporting Information Figure S3 We hypothesize
that the increase in production rate for all batches upon adding 5
nM control DNA is due to competition effects from the RNA degradation
machinery (RNases). The control DNA has the same promoter as the attenuator
and antisense plasmids from which an RNA terminator is made (). While this
RNA does not affect the attenuator in a mechanistic way, it does provide
a decoy for RNases and could cause a decrease in degradation rate
of the attenuator-SFGFP mRNA, and thus an overall increase in SFGFP
production. The further increase in production rate from 5 to 10 nM
control DNA in batch 2 suggests that different batches have different
amounts of RNase machinery. To test this hypothesis, we added 0–250
ng of total yeast RNA to 0.5 nM of L1 plasmid in the three buffer/extract
batches (). The yeast RNA would provide a decoy for the RNases but should
not sequester the bacterial translation machinery in TX-TL. As shown
in , we
observed an increase in production rate with the addition of yeast
RNA for all batches. This increase was more pronounced for batch 2,
which responded to a lower concentration of yeast RNA, while it took
a higher concentration of yeast RNA to see an effect for batches 1
and 3. These results support our conclusion from the control DNA experiments
that there is batch-to-batch variation in RNase machinery concentration
that contributes to the DNA loading effect. Because of this loading
effect, we found it important to use an appropriately constructed
control DNA when designing comparative experiments (). Additionally, these
results show the importance of screening TX-TL extract and buffer
batches to best match the needs for circuitry characterization. For
our RNA attenuator circuitry, we chose a batch that struck a balance
between high production rate for better signal/noise and invariance
to DNA loading effects for testing circuitry with multiple components.
We therefore used batch 3 in all further experiments. Supporting Information
Figure S4 Assessing batch-to-batch variation. (A) Fluorescence time courses
of TX-TL reactions in three different extract and buffer preparations
with 0.5 nM L1 and 15 nM no-antisense control DNA. Shaded regions
represent standard deviations of at least 11 independent reactions
over multiple days calculated at each time point. (B) Average maximum
SFGFP production rates for the same three buffer and extract preparations
from reactions with 0.5 nM L1 and 0, 5, 10, 15, and 20 nM no-antisense
control DNA. Plots of maximum SFGFP production rates from which these
were calculated can be found in . Error bars represent standard deviations from at
least 11 independent reactions. Characterizing
the Dynamics of RNA Circuitry with TX-TL Supporting Information Figure S6 One of the potential
advantages of RNA over protein circuitry is a faster response time
due to the relatively fast degradation of RNA molecules. The flexibility of TX-TL allowed us to directly
measure the response time of the RNA transcription cascade (Figure ). Since TX-TL is an open system, we designed an
experiment that involved spiking in the DNA encoding L3 of the cascade
into an ongoing reaction that was already expressing L1 and L2. We
define the response time of this circuit, τ, as the time it
takes to turn ON SFGFP production after spiking in L3. In order to
determine τ, TX-TL reactions were setup with 0.5 nM L1 and 4
nM L2 following our earlier results (Figure ). This reaction was allowed to proceed for 25 min, at which time
( = 0) we spiked in 14 nM of either L3, or our no-antisense
control plasmid. Fluorescence trajectories showed that the L3 spike
caused a noticeable deviation from the control trajectory ∼20
min after the spike (Figure B). By using Welch’s  test to find the point at which the two trajectories differed
significantly (, ), we were able to quantify the
response time over multiple experimental replicates to be 18.2 ±
6.0 min (Figure B). Supporting Information
Appendix 1 Supporting Information Figure S7 We can estimate τ by considering
the three molecular events that need to occur to turn ON SFGFP production:
(i) AS-2 needs to be transcribed from L3, (ii) the concentration of
AS-2 needs to build up in order to repress the transcription of AS-1
via an interaction with Att-2, and (iii) any existing AS-1 must be
degraded. Using a simple ordinary differential equation model of the
expression of each level of the RNA cascade, we can derive an expression
for the response time ():where  and  are the degradation rates
of AS-2 and AS-1, respectively, and α is the maturation time
of SFGFP. Since ln(2)/ is the half-life of each
antisense species, we find that the response time is a sum of half-lives
of the intermediate RNA signals, similar to a related analysis of
response times of protein circuitry. The importance
of antisense degradation rates for estimating circuit response times
led us to determine approximate RNA degradation rates in our TX-TL
batch. To do this, we used the fluorescent malachite green RNA aptamer
as a representative small RNA (45 nucleotides), which allows a convenient
fluorescence based assay to measure its abundance. By spiking in purified malachite green aptamer and ligand
in TX-TL reactions and observing fluorescence decay, we measured its
half-life in TX-TL batch 3 to be 2.7 ± 0.44 min at 29 °C
(). While
RNA degradation rates are structure and length dependent, this value
is close to a previously determined half-life of the pT181 antisense
RNA (91 nucleotides) of 5 min . Using this value and a 5 min maturation time
for SFGFP, we can estimate τ from
eq  to be 15 min, in close agreement with our
experimental observation. Supporting Information Figure S7 Supporting Information Table S2 In , RNA degradation
is primarily controlled by the RNA degradasome, a multiprotein complex
that degrades RNA species. Since RNA
degradation is enzymatic, we expect its rate to increase with increasing
temperature, and thus expect increasing temperature to decrease τ.
To test this, we repeated both the malachite green degradation and
DNA spike experiments with reactions running at 37 °C and determined
the malachite green aptamer half-life to be 1.4 ± 0.08 min () and τ
for the RNA cascade to be 14.6 ± 4.8 min (Figure C). This response time is in remarkable agreement to our 15
min estimate of τ from eq , which was
derived from antisense degradation rates measured at 37 °C . While the average
response time at 37 °C was lower than that at 29 °C, the
difference between the two averages was not statistically different
due to the large error bars on the measurements ( = 0.1694, ). These results represent the first measurement of RNA circuitry
response times. Furthermore, they confirm our expectation of a quick
response time that is dependent on the degradation rates of the intermediate
RNA species in the network. Our simple estimate shows that for circuits
constructed from the attenuation system, we can expect the response
time to be ∼5 min for each step in the circuit. This is in
stark contrast to an analogous protein-mediated cascade, which has
been shown to have a response time of ∼140 min as measured . In fact, because protein
degradation is typically very slow, the response times of protein-mediated
circuitry is often set by the rate of cell division, which is the
dominant source of protein decay. Determining cascade response
time. (A) Schematic of spike experiment. L3 (or the no-antisense control
plasmid) was spiked into an ongoing L1+L2 TX-TL reaction at time,  = 0 (represented by dashed box). Concentrations of DNA
used are indicated beside the levels. (B) Normalized fluorescence
curves combining three separate experiments performed at 29 °C
with a total of 8 replicates over multiple days. An L1 (0.5 nM) +
L2 (4 nM) reaction was setup for 25 min at which point L3 (14 nM,
puple curve) or no-antisense control DNA (14 nM, red curve) was spiked
into the reaction and time reset to 0. Inset shows the response time
of the circuit to the addition of L3; defined as the time at which
the L3 spike curve is statistically different from the L1+L2 curve
(τ = 18.2 ± 6.0 min). (C) Normalized fluorescence curves
combining three separate experiments performed at 37 °C with
a total of 11 replicates over multiple days. The same experiment was
setup as in part B except that the L1+L2 reaction ran for 20 min prior
to the addition of L3. τ = 14.6 ± 4.8 min. Shaded regions
represent standard deviations calculated at each time point. Cascade
Response Time Can Be Tuned by Using Tandem Attenuators The
success of the cascade response time measurements led us to begin
the forward design of an RNA version of the single input module (SIM). The SIM is a network motif in which a single
regulatory molecule controls the expression of multiple outputs (Figure A). In nature, SIMs are used to regulate the genes
of biosynthetic pathways and stress response systems so that they
are expressed in the order at which they are needed. The SIM provides this temporal regulation by encoding different
regulatory thresholds of each gene. As the master regulator increases
in concentration, it successively traverses these thresholds and thus
activates genes at different times (Figure A). Supporting Information Table
S1 Supporting Information Appendix 1 The ability to configure
tandem attenuators upstream of a coding sequence provides a mechanism to adjust the threshold at which the
RNA cascade responds to antisense concentrations (Figure B). Since tandem attenuators are more sensitive
to antisense RNA concentration, we hypothesized
that the response time of a cascade with tandem attenuators in L1
(Att-1-Att-1) would be slower than that of the single attenuator cascade—that
is, it would take a longer time for AS-1 to decay below the threshold
required for repressing the Att-1-Att-1 attenuator, thus causing a
longer response time (Figure A). We repeated
the L3 spike experiment with the Att-1-Att-1 cascade at 37 °C
and determined the response time to be 19.4 ± 5.0 min (Figure C, ). This response time was statistically significant from
the single Att-1 cascade at 37 °C ( = 0.0303,
Figure C) and again matched the estimation
of 20 min based on a modified version of eq  that takes into account the different threshold of the tandem Att-1-Att-1
(). We
thus showed that the Att-1-Att-1 tandem attenuator could be effectively
used to tune cascade response time, making it suitable for its use
as a component in designing an RNA SIM. Supporting Information Appendix 1 Determining the response time to tandem attenuators. (A)
Schematic of a single input module (SIM). Colored circles represent
nodes of the circuit, a repression cascade in which two genes (purple
circles) are temporally controlled by a single species (blue circle).
Temporal control is accomplished by varying thresholds of action (β, β′) for the intermediate cascade
species (green circle). Plots are schematic response curves for the
spike experiment described in Figure . The
regulatory species (blue) is added in at  = 0. This
species shuts off production of the intermediate species (green) once
threshold β is reached at time δ (see ). The final genes are activated after time τ and τ′
once the intermediate species falls below the thresholds β and β′, respectively. (B) Schematic of spike experiment. Experimental
setup was analogous to Figure A except that
L1 contains tandem pT181 attenuators (Att-1-Att-1). (C) Normalized
fluorescence curves combining three separate experiments performed
at 37 °C with a total of 12 replicates over multiple days. L1
(0.5 nM) + L2 (4 nM) reaction was setup for 20 min at which point
L3 (14 nM, purple curve) or no-antisense control DNA (14 nM, red curve)
was spiked into the reaction and time reset to 0. Inset shows the
response time of the circuit to the addition of L3 (τ = 19.4
± 5.0 min). Shaded regions represent standard deviations calculated
at each time point. Theophylline Responsive
Antisense Provides a Bridge to Move RNA Circuitry Supporting Information Table
S1 While the tandem attenuator cascade provided a necessary
component of the RNA SIM, we have thus far been probing circuit response
time by spiking in antisense RNA via a DNA plasmid—a perturbation
not possible in an  experiment. We therefore
changed L3 to encode the theophylline-responsive antisense RNA developed
by Qi et al., which has previously been
shown to only attenuate transcription in the presence of theophylline . The response time probing experiment was adjusted
so that either theophylline (2 mM in the reaction) or water (as a
control) was spiked into each TX-TL reaction containing L1, L2, and
aptamer-L3 (Figure A). The response time was
then calculated by comparing with (+) and without (−) theophylline
fluorescence trajectories in the same way as described previously.
This was done for both the single (Att-1) and tandem (Att-1-Att-1)
versions of the cascade resulting in response times of 59.3 ±
7.3 min and 45.2 ± 11.7 min respectively (Figure B–C, ). Supporting Information Figure S9 Supporting
Information Figure S9A Supporting Information Figure S9B Notably, both response times are greater than what we observed
in the DNA spike experiments (Figures , ). To verify this was not an issue due to theophylline
toxicity, we first tested if theophylline was toxic to the basic TX-TL
reactions (). While there was a 20% decrease in SFGFP production rate from our
L1 (Att-1) construct with 2 mM theophylline (), it did not increase the response time
of the core RNA cascade, as determined by spiking in theophylline
with L3 DNA to mimic the experiments in Figure  (). Supporting Information Figure
S8 Interestingly, we also observed that the response time for the Att-1
cascade was longer than that of the Att-1-Att-1 cascade in the theophylline
spike experiments. We attribute this to the dip in the Att-1 fluorescence
trajectory with (+) theophylline seen between 0 and 45 min (Figure B, ), which is not present in the Att-1-Att-1 (+) trajectory
(Figure C). In the theophylline spike experiments,
we hypothesize that the presence of unbound aptamer-AS-2 that builds
up in concentration during the prespike reaction competes with AS-1
for RNA degradation machinery, or causes general resource depletion
effects, which slows overall reaction rates. Because of the high concentration
of aptamer-AS-2 used in these experiments (14 nM), the aptamer-AS-2
RNAs would be present in a higher concentration than AS-1. This could
cause a bottleneck in RNA degradation that would lead to a dip in
the fluorescence trajectory. The SFGFP production rate could transition
from a slow to a fast phase once the excess unbound aptamer-AS-2 is
cleared from the reaction allowing AS-1 to be degraded and the cascade
to be fully activated. In addition, resource depletion caused by the
extra 14 nM of aptamer-AS-2 DNA in the prespike incubation period
could lower overall production rates leading to a longer than expected
response time. We note that we do not observe the dip in the Att-1-Att-1
cascade, which could be due to the overall lower SFGFP expression
from the Att-1-Att-1 construct and the noise of the experiments. Supporting Information
Figure S10 To test these ideas, we performed an experiment in which the aptamer-L3
DNA and theophylline (or water as a control) were cospiked into ongoing
TX-TL reactions at the same time (). While this experiment does not provide a bridge
to cells as we are spiking in a DNA construct, it does remove the
dip from the with (+) theophylline curve, bringing the Att-1 response
time down to 41.9 ± 16.9 min. This result supports our hypothesis
of either a bottleneck in RNA degradation or depletion of TX-TL resources
leading to the dip in Figure B. Supporting Information Figure
S10 Even
without the confounding trajectory dips, the response times of the
theophylline-mediated (Att-1 and Att-1-Att-1) cascades are still much
slower than the nontheophylline-mediated cascades. The DNA/theophylline
cospike experiment () eliminated any experimental setup differences leading
to the slower than expected response times. From eq , we see that the response time is governed by the degradation
rates of the two intermediate species. It could be that structural
differences caused by the aptamer sequence or bound ligand alters
the stability of the aptamer-AS-2 RNA enough to account for these
observed differences. However, the ability to observe cascade activation
upon addition of theophylline provided the necessary bridge to move
forward with the RNA SIM construction and characterization . Determining the response time to a theophylline regulated cascade.
(A) Schematic of experiment. L3 of the cascade in Figures A and A has been replaced
with AS-2 fused to a theophylline aptamer from Qi et al. AS-2-theo is only active in the presence of
theophylline. Theophylline was spiked into an ongoing L1 + L2 + aptamer-L3
TX-TL reaction at  = 0 (represented by dashed box).
(B) Single attenuator (Att-1) cascade. Normalized fluorescence curves
combining three separate experiments performed at 37 °C with
a total of 12 replicates over multiple days. L1 (Att-1, 0.5 nM) +
L2 (4 nM) + aptamer-L3 (14 nM) reaction was setup for 20 min at which
point theophylline (final concentration 2 mM, puple curve) or ddHO (red curve) was spiked into the reaction and time reset
to 0. Inset shows the response time of the circuit to the addition
of theophylline (τ = 59.3 ± 7.3 min). (C) Tandem attenuator
(Att-1-Att-1) cascade. Normalized fluorescence curves combining three
separate experiments performed at 37 °C with a total of 9 replicates
over multiple days. L1 (Att-1-Att-1, 0.5 nM) + L2 (4 nM) + aptamer
L3 (14 nM) reaction was setup for 20 min at which point theophylline
(final concentration 2 mM, puple curve) or ddHO (red curve)
was spiked into the reaction and time reset to 0. Inset shows the
response time of the circuit to the addition of theophylline (τ
= 45.2 ± 11.7 min). Shaded regions represent standard deviations
calculated at each time point. Our success in demonstrating different response times using
single and tandem attenuators in TX-TL led us to design an RNA SIM
and characterize its function . To construct
the SIM, we combined the single and tandem attenuator cascades in
a single circuit controlling the expression of two different fluorescent
proteins, red fluorescent protein (RFP) and SFGFP, respectively (Figure A). Supporting Information Figure S11A Supporting
Information Figure S11B The first step in implementing the proposed RNA
SIM was to develop a three-plasmid version of the cascade. To do this,
we placed L1 on a low copy pSC101 backbone with kanamycin resistance,
L2 on a medium copy p15A backbone with chloramphenicol resistance,
and L3 on a high copy ColE1 backbone with ampicillin resistance (). A steady
state test of this circuit in  TG1 cells showed
68% attenuation with L1+L2 present, and recovery of 68% of the L1
only signal with the full cascade present (). Differences between these attenuation
and recovery levels, and those observed in TX-TL (Figure F) could be due to plasmid concentrations not obeying
the same DNA concentration ratios that we used in TX-TL. However,
our observation of recovery upon adding L3  was sufficient to measure the response time of the circuit. Supporting Information Figure S12A To construct the SIM in the three-plasmid architecture, we placed
a single pT181 attenuator in front of the RFP coding sequence followed
by tandem pT181 attenuators in front of the SFGFP coding sequence
on the same pSC101 backbone, each under the control of its own promoter
(). This
plasmid was cotransformed into  TG1 cells
along with the L2 and aptamer-L3 plasmids to complete the SIM motif.
After overnight growth of replicate colonies, cultures were split
in pairs and subcultured in minimal media for 4 h until logarithmic
growth was reached. At this point, theophylline was added to one of
the subcultures from each colony to a final concentration of 2 mM.
RFP and SFGFP fluorescence was then monitored every 10 min for a total
of 90 min (see Materials and ). RFP
and SFGFP fluorescence trajectories for the with and without theophylline
conditions are shown in Figure B. From these
curves, we calculate a response time of 41.7 ± 13.4 min for Att-1-RFP
and 40.0 ± 9.5 min for Att-1-Att-1-SFGFP. On the surface,
the Att-1 and Att-1-Att-1 response times are similar. However, after
correcting for the slower maturation time of RFP compared to SFGFP
(42 min and 5 min, respectively), we find the Att-1-Att-1 element is activated
35 min later than the Att-1 element according to the SIM design. We
verified this finding by switching the protein reporters between the
Att-1 and Att-1-Att-1 regulators. In this orientation, L1 contained
Att-1-SFGFP and Att-1-Att-1-RFP constructs (Figure C, ). Using
this L1 we would expect to see a distinctive difference in the response
times since the slower maturing protein monitors the slower responding
Att-1-Att-1 element. The experiment was repeated in the same manner
as above and we calculated a response time of 42.5 ± 10.6 min
for Att-1-SFGFP and 72.7 ± 20.5 min for Att-1-Att-1-RFP (Figure D), again providing evidence of a functioning SIM. Supporting Information Figure S11B Comparing the two SIM versions allows a further check on SIM function.
In fact, the Att-1-Att-1-RFP response time (Figure D) is approximately 30 min longer than Att-1-Att-1-SFGFP response
time (Figure B) as we would expect from the
longer maturation time of RFP compared to SFGFP. However, the Att-1-SFGFP
response time (Figure D) was slower than expected,
and was within error of the Att-1-RFP response time (Figure B). This could be due to the increase in the Att-1-SFGFP
(−) theophylline fluorescence trajectory (Figure D) causing a longer calculated response time. This increasing
background trajectory could be due to incomplete repression of L1
by L2 under the (−) theophylline condition, which we observed
in the incomplete repression of Att-1-SFGFP by L2 at steady state
(). On
the other hand, the Att-1-Att-1 constructs would not be affected in
the same way since Att-1-Att-1 offers tighter control. In future applications, the OFF level of the
RNA SIM could be improved by using Att-1-Att-1 vs Att-1-Att-1-Att-1
constructs or ribosome binding site (RBS) optimization of the protein
output to reduce leak. The constructs used in this work were developed
for high protein expression, thus a strong RBS was used, however,
RBS tuning has been shown to improve the antisense-attenuator OFF
state. Despite the Att-1-SFGFP
inaccuracy, the two orientations of the SIM confirm that we observe
a clear difference in response time between the Att-1 and Att-1-Att-1
components of the RNA SIM in . This network
motif allows for temporal control of two genes in response to a theophylline
signal, and could have applications in a variety of contexts where
this level of control could be useful such as optimizing metabolic
pathways. RNA single input module (SIM) functions . (A) Schematic of the network motif. L1 contains Att-1-RFP and Att-1-Att-1-SFGFP.
Expression of both proteins is controlled by AS-1 in L2, which in
turn is controlled by the interaction of Att-2 with its antisense
AS-2-theo (aptamer-L3). AS-2-theo is a fusion with the theophylline
aptamer, which is only active when the aptamer is in the bound state. All three plasmids were cotransformed into  TG1 cells. Plasmid origins are noted by the cascade
levels. Theophylline is added to one of the split cultures once in
logarithmic growth at which point time was set to zero (represented
by dashed box). (B) Normalized fluorescence time courses for cultures
with (+) and without (−) theophylline at 2 mM. Response time,
τ, was calculated by determining the time at which the (+) and
(−) curves were statistically different. τ (RFP) = 41.7
± 13.4 min. τ (SFGFP) = 40.0 ± 9.5 min. (C) Schematic
of the network motif in (A) with fluorescent reporters switched in
L1. L1 for this network contains Att-1-SFGFP and Att-1-Att-1-RFP.
L2 and aptamer-L3 remain the same. (D) Normalized fluorescence time
courses for cultures with (+) and without (−) theophylline
at 2 mM. τ (SFGFP) = 42.5 ± 10.6 min. τ (RFP) = 72.7
± 20.5 min. Shaded regions represent standard deviations calculated
from 12 independent transformants at each time point. In
conclusion, we have demonstrated the utility of TX-TL reactions for
rapidly prototyping and characterizing RNA circuitry. Each of the
TX-TL experiments performed took a matter of hours to complete, and
if DNA constructs are already available, several experiments can be
completed with TX-TL in a single day. This is a significant speed
up of the biological design-build-test cycle and demonstrates the
power of TX-TL as a bridge to engineering fully functioning genetic
circuitry that operates . In addition
to establishing TX-TL reactions as a way to characterize RNA circuitry,
we have also used it to directly measure circuit response times with
DNA spike experiments. With these experiments, we provide the first
evidence that RNA circuits can propagate signals at time scales set
by their degradation rates and showed that this leads to circuit response
times on the order of 15–20 min. This is nearly 6 times faster
than circuits constructed from stable proteins, which have response
times set by the cell doubling time. Thus, RNA
circuitry shows enormous speed up compared to protein circuitry, which
could become even more important in designing circuitry that needs
to operate in slowly dividing cells. We also showed how TX-TL
reactions could be used to systematically prototype components for
larger circuit designs. Part of our success in constructing a SIM
and verifying its function  was the result
of the ability to use TX-TL to characterize its individual subparts
and confirm that tandem attenuators could be used to tune circuit
response time. This led to the construction and characterization of
the first RNA SIM in , demonstrating that RNA
circuitry can be used to create temporal programs of gene expression. One goal of the TX-TL system is to serve as a molecular breadboard
that would help guide circuit design . While more and more studies are showing correlations
between TX-TL and  characterization it is important to investigate the differences relevant to each
circuit component. Here, we have uncovered some important guidelines
for using TX-TL to prototype RNA circuitry: (i) A key component that
varies batch-to-batch are RNase activities, which affect degradation
times and RNA circuit performance. Therefore, it is important to design
appropriate controls when adding multiple constructs to a reaction
and screening of extract batches might be necessary. (ii) A single
TX-TL reaction is resource limited; therefore, it is ideal to minimize
total DNA input. This resource limitation may lead to differences
in performance when compared to an  environment,
and one might consider supplementing or replenishing necessary buffer
components. (iii) TX-TL serves as a great platform for optimizing
individual circuit components and DNA concentration ratios. This characterization
can be transferred to copy numbers and promoter design for  constructs, though more work needs to be done to
make this transfer process precise and predictable. Supporting Information Figure S10 In addition,
while we clearly observed functioning RNA cascades in TX-TL and , there are differences in the response times measured
in these two contexts. In particular, the  Att-1-RFP response (Figure B) was ∼35
min faster than the TX-TL Att-1-SFGFP response (), after correcting for protein
maturation rate. Similarly, but to a lesser extent, the  Att-1-Att-1-SFGFP response time (Figure B) was faster than the TX-TL response time (Figure C) by ∼5 min. Since the response times are
related to RNA degradation rates (eq ), this
suggests that the cellular degradation machinery is more abundant
or faster, or processes such as cell doubling are contributing to
additional degradation rate increases that allow  circuitry to operate faster. More work needs to be done to quantitatively
translate TX-TL circuit performance into predictions for  circuit function. Finally, we note that the initial
portions of this work establishing TX-TL for characterizing RNA circuitry
were performed at the inaugural Cold Spring Harbor summer course in
Synthetic Biology in July–August 2013. During this intensive
two week course, four of us (V.S., K.J.S., S.A.K., and C.P.F.), who
had little to no prior experience in performing TX-TL reactions or
engineering RNA circuitry, were able to confirm the functioning of
the RNA cascade and prototype a version of the RNA SIM. The rapid
time scale of TX-TL experiments for characterizing genetic circuitry
and its simple experimental design thus
provide an ideal tool to teach the next generation of synthetic biologists
in a cutting-edge research setting. Plasmid Construction
and Purification Supporting Information
Table S3 A table of all the plasmids used in this
study can be found in , with key sequences found in . The pT181 attenuator and antisense plasmids, pT181
mutant attenuator and antisense plasmids, and the no-antisense control
plasmid were constructs pAPA1272, pAPA1256, pAPA1273, pAPA1257, and
pAPA1260, respectively, from Lucks et al. The theophylline pT181 mutant antisense plasmid was construct pAPA1306
from Qi et al. The second level of the
cascade was modified from construct pAPA1347 from Lucks et al. The double attenuator and SIM constructs were
created using Golden Gate assembly. Plasmids
were purified using a Qiagen QIAfilter Plasmid Midi Kit (Catalog number:
12243) followed by isopropanol precipitation and eluted with double
distilled water. TX-TL Extract and Buffer Preparation Cell extract and reaction buffer was prepared
according to Shin and Noireaux and Sun
et al. In brief,  BL21 Rosetta cells were grown to an OD600 of 1.5, pelleted via centrifugation,
and washed with a buffer at pH 7.7 containing Mg-glutamate, K-glutamate,
Tris, and DTT. Lysis was performed via bead-beating, followed by centrifugation
to remove beads and cell debris. The resulting supernatant was incubated
at 37 °C for 80 min and then centrifuged, to remove endogenous
nucleic acids. The supernatant was dialyzed against a buffer at pH
8.2, containing Mg-glutamate, K-glutamate, Tris, and DTT. The extract
was then centrifuged, and the supernatant flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen
and stored at −80 °C. The cell extract for Batch 1 had
a protein concentration of 37 mg/mL, and its expression was optimized
via the addition of 4 mM Mg and 20 mM K. For Batch 2: 29 mg/mL protein,
4 mM Mg, and 80 mM K. Batch 3: 29 mg/mL protein, 2 mM Mg, and 80 mM
K. The reaction buffer was prepared
according to Sun et al., and consists
of an energy solution (HEPES pH 8 700 mM, ATP 21 mM, GTP 21 mM, CTP
12.6 mM, UTP 12.6 mM, tRNA 2.8 mg/mL, CoA 3.64 mM, NAD 4.62 mM, cAMP
10.5 mM, folinic acid 0.95 mM, spermidine 14 mM, and 3-PGA 420 mM)
and amino acids (leucine, 5 mM, all other amino acids, 6 mM). Extract and buffer were aliquoted in separate tubes (volume appropriate
for seven reactions) and stored at −80 °C. TX-TL buffer and extract tubes were thawed on
ice for approximately 20 min. Separate reaction tubes were prepared
with combinations of DNA representing a given circuit condition. Appropriate
volumes of DNA, buffer, and extract were calculated using a custom
spreadsheet developed by Sun et al. Buffer
and extract were mixed together and then added to each tube of DNA
according to the previously published protocol. Each TX-TL reaction mixture (10 μL each) was transferred
to a 384-well plate (Nunc 142761), covered with a plate seal (Nunc
232701), and placed on a Biotek SynergyH1m plate reader. We note that
special care is needed when pipetting to avoid air bubbles, which
can interfere with fluorescence measurements. Temperature was controlled
at either 29 or 37 °C. SFGFP fluorescence was measured (485 nm
excitation, 520 emission) every 1–5 min depending on the experiment.
Spike experiments at 29 °C were paused after 25 min at which
point solutions containing DNA, theophylline, or controls were added
to the appropriate wells, and then placed back on the plate reader
for fluorescence monitoring. Spike experiments at 37 °C were
paused after 20 min. The spike time for each temperature was set to
the start of constant protein production determined by preliminary
experiments with our Att-1-SFGFP construct. In general, fluorescence
trajectories were collected for 2 h, and each experiment lasting a
total of 2–3 h. Strains, Growth Media and  Gene Expression All experiments were performed in  strain TG1. Plasmid combinations were transformed
into chemically competent  TG1 cells, plated
on Difco LB+Agar plates containing 100 μg/mL carbenicillin,
34 μg/mL chloramphenicol, and 100 μg/mL kanamycin and
incubated overnight at 37 °C. Plates were taken out of the incubator
and left at room temperature for approximately 7 h. Four colonies
were picked and separately inoculated into 300 μL of LB containing
carbenicillin, chloramphenicol, and kanamycin at the concentrations
above in a 2 mL 96-well block (Costar 3960), and grown approximately
17 h overnight at 37 °C at 1,000 rpm in a Labnet Vortemp 56 benchtop
shaker. This overnight culture (20 μL) was then added to separate
wells on a new block containing 930 and 980 μL (1:50 dilution)
of M9 minimal media (1xM9 minimal salts, 1 mM thiamine hydrochloride,
0.4% glycerol, 0.2% casamino acids, 2 mM MgSO, 0.1 mM
CaCl) containing the selective antibiotics and grown for
4 h at the same conditions as the overnight culture. Two wells were
used for the M9 growth to represent (+) and (−) theophylline
conditions for the same colony. At this point, 50 μL of a 40
mM theophylline solution was added to the wells containing 930 μL
of M9. The 96-well block was placed back on the shaker. Every 10 min
for the next 90 min, 50 μL of the cultures with and without
theophylline was removed from the block and transferred to a 96-well
plate (Costar 3631) containing 50 μL of phosphate buffered saline
(PBS). SFGFP fluorescence (485 nm excitation, 520 nm emission), mRFP
fluorescence (560 nm excitation, 630 nm emission), and optical density
(OD, 600 nm) were then measured at each time point using a Biotek
Synergy H1m plate reader. Supporting Information Figure S6 Supporting Information Figure S6 To quantify the circuit response time, we calculated τ using
data from multiple replicates in three individual experiments by first
normalizing trajectories to the end point fluorescence of the L1+L2
condition to account for variation in fluorescence output between
experiments (). Normalized fluorescence distributions from all replicates, between
each condition, were compared using Welch’s  test at each time point to determine the time at which the L1+L2
and L1+L2+L3 data sets were statistically different from each other.
The difference in average normalized fluorescence at this point was
used to set a threshold, which was then used in each individual data
set to determine the time at which each spiked trajectory differed
from the average of the L1+L2 curves of that experiment (). These times
were then used to calculate reported τ with error. To quantify the circuit response
time of the SIM, we calculated τ using data from multiple replicates
in three individual experiments by first normalizing trajectories
to the average of the  = 0 fluorescence of each
individual colony’s with and without theophylline condition.
Normalized fluorescence distributions from all replicates, between
each condition, were compared using Welch’s  test at each time point to determine the time at which the with
and without theophylline data sets were statistically different from
each other. The difference in average normalized fluorescence at this
point was used to set a threshold that was then used in each individual
data set to determine the time at which each spiked trajectory differed
from its corresponding no-theophylline trajectory. These times were
then used to calculate reported τ with error..