During expression
genetic information
is diversified by various mechanisms. Even when encoded in a single
genetic locus, many proteins occur in several isoforms, which result
from alternative promotor usage or alternative splicing. Another way
of diversification is a process called RNA editing. This
refers to the insertion or deletion of nucleotides and to the enzymatic
deamination of cytosine and adenosine resulting in the formation of
uridine and inosine, respectively. Upon editing in the open reading
frame (ORF) single amino acids can be recoded. Furthermore, RNA editing
can interfere with RNA splicing, microRNA activity, and RNA stability.
Such diversifications can affect almost any property of a protein
including substrate specificity, catalytic efficiency, protein localization,
stability, and others. As correct subcellular localization is essential
for proper functioning, mislocalization can act as a strategy to control
a protein’s function. One example is the cytosolic sequestering
of transcription factors like NF-B or the glucocorticoid
receptors, which translocate to the nucleus in response to specific
signaling cues. Synthetic biology has exploited the induction of translocation
as a strategy to control genetic networks. One example for the latter
is the engineered Cre-ER(T2) system for the conditional switch of
gene function . The information
about the subcellular localization is typically
encoded in short peptide-segments, so-called localization signals. Some signals, like the nuclear localization signal
(NLS), can be found anywhere in a protein. Whereas others, like the
ER-targeting sequence, are typically found in the N-terminus and are
proteolytically cleaved off during translation. If protein isoforms differ in their localization, such
signal peptides are typically in- or excluded by alternative promotor
or splice sites usage. We were wondering if site-directed RNA editing
could be harnessed for that purpose. We and others have recently engineered artificial guideRNA-dependent
editing machines that allow for the introduction of single A-to-I
substitutions at targeted sites in selected transcripts inside living
cells, a process called site-directed RNA editing. To
achieve this, we have fused the catalytic domain of a human adenosine
deaminase acting on RNA (hADAR) with a SNAP-tag that allows for the
formation of highly defined 1-to-1 covalent conjugates between the
guideRNA and the deaminase. The approximately
20 nt long guideRNA steers the deaminase to any arbitrary transcript
in a readily programmable way. As the deaminase acts only on double-stranded
RNA the guideRNA component provides the basis for substrate specificity.
By chemical modification and sequence refinement, the selectivity
and efficiency of the editing reaction can be further fine-tuned. So far, we and others have applied site-directed RNA editing strategies
in human cell culture, in living organisms, and in  eggs, to manipulate reporter genes and to repair disease-related
mutations in CFTR and PINK1 mRNAs. Furthermore, we recently demonstrated
the possibility of controlling the guideRNA–deaminase assembly
by light, which enabled us to extent RNA editing by photocontrol . Here, we now
demonstrate a simple strategy to apply RNA editing
for triggering the inclusion of an additional peptide signal into
both, the N- or the C-terminus of a protein. We apply the strategy
for the inclusion of a nuclear localization signal (N- or C-terminal)
and for the switching between a cytoplasmic and a membrane-bound isoform
in human cell culture. Furthermore, we demonstrate the light control
of the isoform switch. The C-terminal inclusion of
an additional peptide signal appears particularly straightforward
by putting the signal into the 3′-UTR directly behind an amber
Stop codon (UAG), . Upon editing the Stop codon to Trp (UIG) the additional
signal is inserted C-terminally. The analogous strategy at the N-terminus
appears more challenging. We explore here the activation of an alternative
Start codon in the 5′-UTR, as it is conceivable to edit an
isoleucine codon (AUA) into a methionine/Start codon (AUI), . Prior to editing,
the downstream Start codon would be used only. However, after editing
the upstream Start should dominate, as cap-dependent translation typically
applies the first Start codon after the cap. Nevertheless,
site-directed RNA editing inside the 5′-UTR has not yet been
reported. Also within natural editing sites, editing in the 5′-UTR
is strongly underrepresented. Thus, it
was unclear if the preinitiation complex of translation and the editing
machinery will interfere. To assess both strategies in a comparable
manner, we decided to start with the inclusion of a nuclear localization
signal (NLS) derived from the SV 40 Large T-antigen (PKKKRKV), which can be put to both, the N- or C-terminus. To visualize the localization phenotype, we
chose the transcript of the editing enzyme (SNAP-ADAR2) as the editing
target. On one hand, the enzyme is strictly localized in the cytoplasm
when lacking an NLS. On the other hand, the enzyme is readily stained
with fluoresceine-O6-benzylguanine (BG-FITC) to assess its localization
by fluorescence microcopy. Furthermore,
this procedure allowed us to stay with the ectopic expression of a
single construct which simplified transfection and phenotypic analysis. Three Different Constructs for Editing-Dependent Isoform Switching The NLS has been included
either N- or C-terminally into the SNAP-deaminase protein. The Ig-leader sequence, which signals plasma membrane localization,
has been included N-terminally into an HA-tagged eGFP. The C-terminal
platelet-derived growth factor receptor transmembrane domain (PDGFR-TMD)
is a single transmembrane α-helix that anchors the protein to
the plasma membrane by pointing the N-terminus outside. The expected
localization phenotype (cytoplasm, nucleoplasm or outer membrane)
is indicated. Editing-Dependent Inclusion
of the NLS into the C-Terminus under
Transient Expression According to , two plasmids were constructed that contain
SNAP-ADAR2 under control of the CMV promotor. In one construct, the
NLS was put in frame at the C-terminus (SA-TGG-NLS). When transfected
into 293T cells and BG-FITC-stained 48 h later, a clear nuclear localization
was visible (a). The other construct contained a single G-to-A mutation between
the SNAP-ADAR and the NLS which inserts a premature Stop codon and
thus shortens the open reading frame (SA-TAG-NLS). When expressed
and stained comparably, a clear cytoplasmic phenotype was visible.
The latter construct was the substrate to study the editing-dependent
phenotype switch. For editing, 293T cells were first transfected with SA-TAG-NLS
(or SA-TGG-NLS in the control) and were then reverse transfected with
a guideRNA. When the matching guideRNA was used, BG-FITC staining
revealed a clear appearance of nuclear SNAP-ADAR2 protein (a) that resembles
the phenotype of the positive control. We found this new, mixed cyto-/nucleoplasmic
phenotype in 48 ± 9% of the transfected cells. Sanger sequencing
revealed an editing yield of 74 ± 9%. We assume two reasons for
the mixed (cytoplasmic/nuclear) phenotype after editing. First, editing
was incomplete, and second, some of the stained SNAP-ADAR2 protein
was old protein from the SNAP-ADAR expression prior to induction of
the editing event by transfecting the guideRNA. The isoform switch
was strongly dependent on editing. It did neither occur in the presence
of an NH-guideRNA incapable of conjugation, nor in the presence of a BG-guideRNA with a
mismatching (mm) sequence (a). However, due to the high levels of SNAP-ADAR2 protein
and its transcript under transient expression, low levels of guideRNA-independent
editing were detectable (a, graph). Even though this low-level editing did not
result in a visible nuclear localization phenotype, we aimed to further
improve the performance of the system by genomic integration of the
SNAP-ADAR construct. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00113/suppl_file/sb7b00113_si_001.pdf Editing-dependent switch from SNAP-ADAR2 to SNAP-ADAR2-NLS
under
transient (a) and genomic (b) expression. (a) Fluorescence imaging
of FITC-stained SNAP-ADAR (green) and Hoechst 33342-stained nuclei
(blue). SA-TGG-NLS is the positive control for the nuclear localization
phenotype after editing. Quantitative analysis of the editing experiment:
Blue shows the editing yield from Sanger sequencing. Red shows the
amount of cells that are positive for SNAP-ADAR expression and show
nuclear localization. mm BG-gRNA: mismatching BG-guideRNA. Black bars
show the standard deviation from  = 3 independent
experiments. The scale bars represent 20 μm. (b) Analogous experiment
as in panel (a), but under genomic expression of the SNAP-ADAR constructs.
n.d. = neither RNA editing nor nuclear localization was detectable.
Further data and controls are shown in the , Figure S1–S3 for transient and S4–S6
for genomic expression. C-Terminal NLS-Inclusion Works Also under
Genomic Expression To obtain a weaker and more homogeneous
expression, the respective
constructs were integrated as a single copy into the genome of 293
Flip-In cells under control of the Tet-on CMV promotor (inducible
genomic expression). Fluorescence microscopy confirmed the homogeneous,
inducible and much weaker expression of the editase under genomic
control (b).
Again, the cytoplasmic (SA-TAG-NLS) and nucleoplasmic (SA-TGG-NLS)
phenotypes in the controls were clearly visible (b). As expected, and in contrast
to the conditions before, the editing was now fully dependent on the
presence of the matching BG-guideRNA. Lacking the guideRNA or applying
a mismatching or an NH-guideRNA gave no detectable editing
yield. The editing yield with the matching BG-guideRNA was 50 ±
8% and thus stayed a bit below that under transient expression. The
same trend holds also true for the isoform switch. About 34 ±
2% of the cells showed the switch from pure cytoplasmic to a mixture
of cytoplasmic and nuclear localization, demonstrating the C-terminal
NLS inclusion in an editing-dependent manner under genomic expression
of the construct. Editing-Dependent Inclusion of the NLS into
the N-Terminus (Transient
Expression) http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00113/suppl_file/sb7b00113_si_001.pdf As depicted in , two plasmids were constructed that contain
two Start codons each embedded in a strong Kozak sequence (5′-CCACC-G). One of the Start
codons was located in front and one behind the NLS. In the construct
ATGG-NLS-SA, both Start codons are appropriate to start translation.
According to the scanning model of cap-dependent translation one expects
this construct to predominantly use the Start codon prior to the NLS
and thus to express the full NLS-SNAP-ADAR2 protein. Accordingly, transient expression of this construct in 293T cells
showed exclusive nuclear localization of SNAP-ADAR (a). The construct ATAG-NLS-SA
differs from the latter by a single G-to-A mutation in the upstream
Start codon, thereby creating a 5′-CCACCAUG
sequence that is supposed to be inappropriate to start translation
prior to editing (AU) but to turn into a strong initiation
signal after editing (AU). Transient expression of
this construct gave almost exclusive cytoplasmic localization of SNAP-ADAR.
Only a small number of cells (10 ± 4%) showed a faint nuclear
staining (), which might result
from a minor translation initiation from the unedited AUA Start codon,
as it is embedded in a very strong sequence context. However, in a
similar setting it was reported that the plasmid-borne sequence 5′-CCACCG is unable to initiate translation when transfected into
COS cells. Clearly, the faint nuclear
staining was not due to (guideRNA-independent) editing, as the editing
yield in absence of the guideRNA was below the detection limit (≤2%). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00113/suppl_file/sb7b00113_si_001.pdf For editing, 293T cells
were transfected with either of the two
constructs and reverse transfected with a guideRNA. Protein localization
was analyzed by fluorescence microscopy after BG-FITC staining. After
transfection of the editing substrate (ATAG-NLS-SA) and the matching
BG-guideRNA, we found a clearly visible nuclear staining that resembled
that of the positive editing control (ATGG-NLS-SA), a. Similar to the results at
the 3′-UTR, we found a mixed nucleo-/cytoplasmic phenotype
in 57 ± 5% of all cells. After editing the nuclear staining of
the protein was much stronger compared to the occasional faint nuclear
staining observed prior to editing (). Sequencing of the mRNA revealed an editing yield of 58 ±
4%, in good agreement with the mixed phenotype. Again, the isoform
switch was dependent on the editing event and did not happen in the
presence of a mismatching or conjugation-incompetent NH-guideRNA. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00113/suppl_file/sb7b00113_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00113/suppl_file/sb7b00113_si_001.pdf Editing-dependent
switch of SNAP-ADAR2 to NLS-SNAP-ADAR2 under
transient (a) and genomic (b) expression. Experiment and analysis
follows the description given in . SA* marks the construct with the activated
E488Q deaminase. The scale bars represent 20 μm. Further data
and controls are shown in  for transient and  for
genomic expression. Editing in the 5′-UTR under Genomic
Expression Requires
an Activated Deaminase Again, we tested editing under genomic
expression of the 5′-UTR constructs. Upon induction, both constructs
behaved as expected showing either the strict nuclear (ATGG-NLS-SA)
or cytoplasmic localization (ATAG-NLS-SA) with strongly reduced but
homogeneous expression over the entire culture. Compared to the expression
under transient conditions, the occasional appearance of faint nuclear
staining in the ATAG construct was almost abolished (below 3%). However,
the editing-dependent isoform switch was disappointing. The nuclear
phenotype was visible in no more than 11 ± 4% of the cells. However,
this matched the low editing levels of 13 ± 1% (b). The editing reaction might
suffer from the comparably low concentration of editase and substrate,
which might slow down the editing reaction. To test if a faster enzyme
would help to improve the performance, we engineered two new cell
lines that contain again either the ATAG or ATGG construct, but now
with a SNAP-ADAR2* protein that contains a well-described, single
point mutation in the deaminase domain (E488Q) that is reported to
speed up deamination by at least 1 order of magnitude. The two new constructs behaved indistinguishable
from their less active counterparts in terms of expression level,
homogeneity and localization phenotype. However, in the editing experiment
the new constructs showed a robust isoform switch. A clear change
to the mixed nuclear/cytoplasmic phenotype was found in 46 ±
4% of the cells, resulting from an improved editing yield of 42 ±
2% (b). As
seen before, the switch was fully dependent on editing. Consequently,
the nuclear phenotype was seen in ≤4%, when no guideRNA, a
mismatching guideRNA, or an NH-guideRNA was used, reflecting
the low editing yields obtained under these conditions (≤4%).
Substitution of the deaminase by a more active variant boosted the
performance of the system by 3-fold in terms of editing yields and
number of cells with a phenotypic switch and brought the editing at
the 5′-UTR to a level comparable to that at the 3′-UTR. Isoform Switching Can Be Controlled by Light Light
is an attractive trigger to manipulate biological systems. We tested if a recently introduced strategy
to control the editing process by controlling the assembly reaction
could be applied for the light-control of 5′-UTR editing. As
described earlier, guideRNAs have been made that mask the SNAP-reactive
BG moiety with the Npom photocage to render it inactive for the assembly
reaction. Then, the editing reaction
can be started by treating the cells under the microscope with a short
UV-light pulse (365 nm, 5 s). First, we studied the system with the
wildtype ATAG-NLS-SA construct under transient expression. The light
flash had no effect on the negative (NH-guideRNA) and
the positive editing control (BG-guideRNA) in terms of editing yield
(4 ± 2% and 53 ± 1%) and localization phenotype (19 ±
4% and 57 ± 5%), a. However, when applying the Npom-protected BG-guideRNA,
a clear photoinduction of editing yield and isoform switch was detectable.
Without irradiation, 19 ± 6% of cells showed a faint nuclear
staining, whereas 53 ± 12% of the cells showed the switch to
a clear nuclear staining after irradiation (a). This was in accordance with the photoinduced
change of editing levels from 13 ± 5% before to 40 ± 8%
after irradiation. As before, the ATAG-NLS-SA construct suffered from
the occasional formation of faint nuclear staining under transient
expression. Thus, we also tested
photocontrol under genomic expression. As
before, editing yields and phenotype switching were dissatisfying
with wildtype enzyme and stayed below 20% (b, graph). However, the E488Q variant of
the deaminase was helpful again, and the positive editing control
(BG-guideRNA) gave robust nuclear staining in 46 ± 4% of the
cells, matching the respective editing yields of 45 ± 4% (b). The negative
editing control (NH-guideRNA) showed virtually no editing
(≤4%) and also the occasional faint nuclear staining was strongly
reduced (≤4%). When applying the Npom-protected guideRNA, a
clear photoactivation was visible. Before irradiation 12 ± 2%
of the cells showed the nuclear staining, whereas 41 ± 3% showed
nuclear staining after irradiation. Again the effect was clearly depending
on the editing yields which changed from 13 ± 2% before to 37
± 5% after irradiation, see b. Thus, protein isoforms can be switched
by light simply by photocontrolling the assembly reaction of editase
and guideRNA, both under transient and genomic expression. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00113/suppl_file/sb7b00113_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00113/suppl_file/sb7b00113_si_001.pdf Photoinduced switch of SNAP-ADAR2 to NLS-SNAP-ADAR2 under transient
(a) and genomic (b) expression. SA* marks the construct with the activated
E488Q deaminase. The scale bars represent 20 μm. Further data
is shown in  for transient
and  for genomic
expression. 5′-UTR
Editing Enables to Switch Localization from the
Cytoplasm to the Outer Membrane Induction of protein translocation
from the cytoplasm to the nucleoplasm under control of small molecules
and/or light has been achieved earlier, either by engineering fusion
proteins to become controllable by small molecules (f.i. the Cre-ER(T2)
system) or by the ectopic expression
of proteins with site-specifically photocaged amino acids. The latter strategies are feasible because trafficking into the
nucleus is a posttranslational mechanism applied to fully folded proteins.
As RNA editing happens before translation, isoform switches become
feasible that are decided cotranslationally and thus are impossible
to control at the protein level. A conceivable example is plasma membrane
localization. The respective signal peptides are found in the very
N-terminus of a protein. Once the nascent
signal peptide leaves the exit at the ribosome, it is recognized by
the signal recognition particle that recruits the translating ribosome
to the ER. At the ER, translation continues, the signal peptide is
cleaved off during translation inside the ER and the protein is inserted
into the membrane cotranslationally. We explored how RNA editing can be used to switch protein isoforms
from a cytoplasmic to a membrane-anchored localization. For this a
construct was made that contains an editable Start codon (AUA*) followed
by the 22 amino acid Igκ chain leader sequence, an alternative
Start codon (AUG), and an HA-tagged GFP protein (). At the very C-terminus,
the construct contains the transmembrane domain (TMD) of the PDGF
receptor that anchors the protein to the plasma membrane displaying
the GFP and the HA-tag to the extracellular side of the cell. The
analogous ATGG construct served as the positive editing control. To
assess the phenotype, immunofluorescence microscopy was applied. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00113/suppl_file/sb7b00113_si_001.pdf Under transient expression (293T cells) of the positive control
(ATGG), the HA-GFP is clearly localized to the outer membrane, as
visualized by a rim-like anti-HA-immunostaining in fixed but not permeabilized
cells (a).
In contrast, the negative editing control (ATAG) gave no rim-like
anti-HA-staining (f.i. b). However, when cells were permeabilized prior to immunostaining
(), the cytoplasmic expression
of the construct was clearly detectable. When cotransfecting the ATAG
construct with SNAP-ADAR2-BFP and reverse transfecting the matching
BG-guideRNA, the HA-immunofluorescence showed again the rim-like staining
of the outer membrane in 43 ± 2% of the cells that have been
positive for GFP and BFP fluorescence (c). This phenotypic switch was again clearly
depending on the editing yield (64 ± 5%). It did not occur in
the absence of a guideRNA or in the presence of a mismatching or NH-guideRNA (b). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00113/suppl_file/sb7b00113_si_001.pdf Editing-dependent switch of HA-GFP-PDGFR-TMD localization from
the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane under transient coexpression
with the BFP-tagged editase (SNAP-ADAR2). Imaging was carried out
after fixation, without permeabilization: HA-immunostaining with AlexaFluor-594
(red), GFP (green), and BFP (blue). (a) positive control for plasma
membrane localization; (b) negative editing control; (c) editing;
(d,e) light-dependent editing experiment. The scale bar represents
20 μm. Further data and controls are shown in . Translocation to the Outer Membrane Can Be Controlled by Light http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00113/suppl_file/sb7b00113_si_001.pdf Finally, we tested to switch the isoforms under control of light.
As before, we put the Npom photocage on the guideRNA. When applying
the Npom-BG-guideRNA, a modest residual editing activity was detected
(9 ± 1%), however, no outer-membrane staining was detectable
(<2%, d).
After irradiation with 365 nm light a clear membrane staining became
visible in 31 ± 3% of the cotransfected cells (e). Accordingly, the editing
yield increased from 9 ± 1% prior to 44 ± 5 after irradiation.
UV-irradiation had no influence on the editing yield or localization
phenotypes of the positive (BG-guideRNA) or negative (NH-guideRNA) editing controls (). Overall, isoform switch from cytoplasmic to the outer membrane
can be controlled at the posttranscriptional level, and photocontrol
is readily included. RNA editing
can be applied to switch protein isoforms. This is
not restricted to the recoding of amino acids or splice sites, but
can be harnessed for the inclusion of additional N- or C-terminal
peptide signals by editing of Start and Stop codons. UTRs in mammals
are typically around 100 nt long, but can extent to 1000 nt or longer.
Thus, even the N- or C-terminal inclusion of large protein domains
is conceivable. Our artificial editing
strategy that relies on the RNA-guided SNAP-tagged deaminases enables
this without detectable interference with translation and translation
initiation. It can be accomplished either under transient or genomic
expression. The usage of the SNAP-deaminases further allows for a
ready inclusion of light-control. The method might well complement
current methods in synthetic biology, including optogenetics and other optochemical approaches. On one hand it enables light-controlled isoform
switches that are impossible at the protein-level. This holds particularly
true for phenotypes that separate already during translation and thus
are inaccessible with caged or otherwise engineered proteins, as demonstrated by the switch to an outer-membrane anchored isoform.
On the other hand, the method might complement approaches that depend
on the light-dependent (in)activation of genes, which typically require massive genetic engineering. To our knowledge,
this is the first report about redirecting protein localization from
the cytoplasm to the membrane. In combination with light-control,
our tool could provide new opportunities to address biological questions
in basic research. In the future, proteins might be steered to the
cell surface by using light-activated RNA editing to manipulate intracellular
signaling but also extracellular events like cell–cell and
cell–matrix interactions in a spatiotemporal manner. Editing
under Transient Expression 293T cells were
grown in DMEM + 10% FBS + 1× P/S, 5% CO. Plasmid
transfection was done with 300 ng of the respective plasmid/well with
Lipofectamine 2000 in DMEM + 10% FBS. The respective guideRNA (2.5–10
pmol/well) was reverse transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 in DMEM
+ 1% FBS. Cells were seeded on coverslips (DMEM + 1% FBS + HEPES).
After 24 h cells were harvested for RNA sequencing or stained with
BG-FITC for fluorescence microscopy as described before. Editing under Genomic Expression 293-Flp-In T-REx cells
were induced in DMEM + 10% FBS + 15 μg/mL blasticidinS + 100
μg/mL hygromycinB + 10 ng/mL doxycycline, 5% CO.
The respective guideRNA (5–20 pmol/well) was reverse transfected
with Lipofectamine 2000 in DMEM + 10% FBS + 10 ng/mL doxycycline.
Cells were seeded on coverslips (DMEM + 10% FBS + HEPES + doxycycline).
After 24 h cells were harvested for RNA sequencing or stained with
BG-FITC for fluorescence microscopy. Experiments were carried
out as described above with an additional irradiation step 4 h after
guideRNA transfection. Cells were washed and the entire well was irradiated
with 365 nm light on the microscope (Zeiss CellObserverZ1, 365 nm
LED light source) for 5 s under full power at 5× magnification.
Then the protocol was continued as described above. To visualize the localization of SNAP-ADAR2,
acetylated BG-FITC (final concentration 2 μM) was applied to
the cells together with a blue Hoechst stain (Thermo Fisher, R37605)
for 30 min. Cells were fixed with formaldehyde and permeabilized with
0.1% Triton X-100. Cover glasses were mounted using Shandon Immu-Mount
(Thermo Fisher, USA). Cells
were fixed with
formaldehyde and blocked with PBS + 10% FBS at 4 °C overnight.
Cells were stained with a primary mouse anti-HA-antibody (Sigma-Aldrich,
H9658) diluted 1:1250 in PBS + 5% FBS for 1.5 h at room temperature,
and a secondary antimouse antibody conjugated to AlexaFluor-594 (Thermo
Fisher, A-11005) diluted 1:1500 in PBS + 10% FBS for 45 min at room
temperature. Cover glasses were mounted using Dako mounting medium
(Dako North America, USA). Microscopy was performed with a Zeiss CellObserverZ1
under 600× total magnification..