Mounting
evidence suggests ubiquitous
subcellular mRNA localization across the domains of life. Subcellular mRNA localization is important in asymmetric organization
of cells, and hence is crucial in biological processes such as cell
division, embryonic patterning, and cell migration. Trafficking and local translation of mRNA is particularly
relevant in highly polarized cells like neurons, where the phenomenon
has been implicated in a variety of developmental and regenerative
processes, including axon outgrowth, synapse formation and plasticity,
and neuron regeneration. Development of
a molecular tool for controlling mRNA transport would enable spatial
regulation of gene expression, which in turn would facilitate investigations
on causality between mRNA localization and cellular organization and
function. Previously, a tool was engineered for mRNA transport
during the
yeast budding process; however, it required
prior tagging of the target RNA and was limited to yeast. Here, by
linking a designer PUF (Pumilio and FBF homology) domain to a cellular
motor, we developed the PUF-assisted Localization of RNA (PULR) system,
which is capable of cytoplasmic redistribution of mRNA in animal cells.
Depending on the motor protein used, the system directionally transports
the mRNA toward either cellular periphery or perinuclear region. In
addition, our system takes advantage of the reprogrammability of the
PUF domain, which enables switching the system’s specificity
toward an RNA sequence of choice, and allowing the transport of tagged
as well as untagged mRNA. PULR is designed to function  reprogrammable
RNA recognition in combination with chemical-induced dimerization
with cellular motors (). For RNA recognition and binding, we used the PUF RNA-binding
domain (residues 828–1176) of human Pumilio 1 protein. The
domain is composed of 8 imperfectly repeated 36 amino acid motifs
(PUF repeats) and flanking N- and C-terminal regions, which all pack
together to form a crescent-shaped right-handed superhelix. RNA is bound to the concave surface of the domain, where each repeat
interacts with a single RNA base in the sequence of 8-base RNA target. The PUF domain is oriented toward RNA in such
a way that the N-terminal PUF repeat (R1) interacts with the 3′
base of the RNA sequence (N8), and vice versa, the C-terminal PUF
repeat (R8) interacts with the 5′ base of the RNA sequence
(N1). Each repeat establishes base-specific
hydrogen bonds with a Watson–Crick edge of an RNA base  amino acid side chains at positions 12 and 16, while
the amino acid side chains at position 13 in each repeat form stacking
interactions between adjacent RNA bases. The appeal to using the
PUF domain for RNA recognition is its modular
repeat-base recognition mode. Through a combination of inferences
from the crystal structure, engineering, and binding assays, the RNA-recognition code for
the PUF domain was established, where amino acid combination NQ recognizes uracil, CQ or SQ recognizes adenine, SE recognizes guanine, and SR recognizes cytosine. Elucidation of this RNA recognition code by
the PUF domain allows reprogramming the RNA-binding domain for recognition
of unaltered, endogenous RNA, consequently alleviating the need of
tagging and potentially disturbing the metabolism of endogenous mRNA.
We have previously developed a modular assembly strategy for facilitated
introduction of mutations in the key PUF domain amino acid positions, and used the strategy for all the modifications
of the PUF domain in this work. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf In order to prevent the PUF
domain from binding to hundreds of
its natural mRNA targets in the transcriptome, we modified its repeats 6 and 7 so that its specificity
is switched from the sequence 5′-UGUAnAUA-3′ to the
sequence 5′-UUGAnAUA-3′ (), which is predicted to be less abundant
in the human transcriptome (). To anchor the PUF domains to the transport machinery,
two PUF domains were fused with one or two consecutive FKBP (FK506-binding
protein) domains and the enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP)  flexible GGGS linkers in different polypeptide chain
variations that differed in the order of the domains. The constructs
were named based on the order of the domains from the N-terminus to
the C-terminus. For controlling the localization of mRNA, we
utilized a eukaryotic
cell’s transport system, by which molecular motors such as
dyneins and kinesins carry cellular cargos along the network of microtubules.
For retrograde mRNA transport, we utilized the N-terminal portion
of Bicaudal D2 (amino acid residues 1–594, hereafter referred
to as BICDN), which induces dynein-mediated cargo transport. For anterograde mRNA transport, we generated
truncated kinesin-1 heavy chain KIF5B without the cargo binding tail
domain (amino acid residues 1–807). To anchor the transport machinery to mRNA, we fused BICDN or KIF5
to a modified FRB (FKBP and rapamycin binding) domain, which heterodimerizes
with the FKBP domain upon addition of rapalog (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf Since HeLa cells contain radial microtubule arrays pointing from
the centrosome to the cell periphery, we expected KIF5 to transport
the PUF constructs toward the cell periphery (plus-ends of microtubules)
(a). Live-cell
fluorescent imaging of HeLa cells treated with rapalog revealed that
the PUF construct FFGPP relocalized to the cell periphery in the presence
of KIF5-FRB, but remained diffuse in the absence thereof (). To determine PULR’s effectiveness
in mRNA transport, we implemented a firefly luciferase (FLuc) mRNA
as a reporter. In the 3′ untranslated region (UTR) of FLuc
mRNA, we placed 2, 10, or no cognate PUF-binding sites (PUF-BS) (). In subsequent imaging of fixed cells,
RNA fluorescence  hybridization (RNA-FISH)
using antisense probes against the FLuc transcript and simultaneous
immunofluorescence of the proteins revealed that FLuc mRNA tagged
with 10xPUF-BS was strongly redistributed to the cell periphery and
colocalized both with FFGPP and KIF5-FRB after rapalog treatment (b). The cytoplasmic
redistribution of mRNA was observed as intensification of a number
of speckles along the cell outline, although the central region that
encompasses the nucleus and its adjacent cytoplasmic area retained
some untransported Fluc RNA. Quantification of the RNA-FISH signal
intensity in the regions of brightest FFGPP immunofluorescence across
20 cells confirmed that FLuc mRNA tagged with 10xPUF-BS was strongly
enriched in the cell periphery compared to an adjacent proximal cytoplasmic
region (c).
This sequence of FLuc mRNA tagged with 10x(UUGAUAUA) was previously
shown to not be significantly recognized by other PUF variants, such
as the WT PUF domain and a PUF mutant carrying the mutations in repeat
1(SE), suggesting
that RNA binding to this PUF construct is sequence specific. In contrast,
no enrichment of Random FLuc mRNA or FLuc mRNA tagged with 2xPUF-BS
was observed in peripheral regions of cells (b,c), suggesting that the FFGPP function
is sequence-specific; however, anterograde transport of mRNA tagged
with only 2 PUF-BS is not enough for efficient relocalization in Hela
cells. This observation is consistent with our previous finding that
the number of PUF-BS in the 3′ UTR of targeted mRNA is a limiting
factor in PUF-effector fusion protein’s functional effect on
cognate RNA in live cells. Our previously reported PUF fused to a
translational regulator showed marginal effect on the efficiency of
translation of mRNA tagged with a single repetition of PUF-BS. We also observed that both Kif5-FRB and FFGPP
were intracellularly redistributed to the same extent regardless of
the sequence of mRNA (), further
suggesting that redistribution of mRNA is sequence-specific. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf BICDN, on the other hand, was
expected to transport the PUF constructs
toward the centrosome (minus-ends of microtubules) (a). In live cells, we observed
that the PUF construct GPPF was redistributed to the perinuclear region
in the presence of BICDN-FRB, but remained diffuse in the absence
thereof (). In fixed cells, immunofluorescence
against BicD-FRB revealed rapalog-dependent aggregation of BicD-FRB
to the perinuclear region (b). This observation is consistent with our previous
finding that overexpressed BICDN inhibits dynein function, preventing
dynein from binding to cargo and also association from microtubules. However, artificial attachment of cargo reverses the inhibition
possibly through a conformational change of BICDN. Co-immunofluorescence against GPPF also revealed that in
response to rapalog, both BICDN-FRB and GPPF proteins were intracellularly
redistributed to the perinuclear region to a similar extent regardless
of the sequence of mRNA (). RNA-FISH,
in turn, revealed that only FLuc mRNA tagged with 10xPUF-BS strongly
accumulated at the perinuclear region and colocalized with GPPF and
BICDN-FRB (b,c). FLuc mRNA carrying no or 2 PUF-BS were not redistributed, (b,c), reminiscent
of what was observed with the Kif5-FRB/FFGPP combination. We next questioned whether the
PULR system is capable of (1) transporting
untagged, endogenous mRNA, and (2) transporting mRNA to greater distances.
We therefore examined whether β-actin mRNA, whose axonal localization
and biological importance are well studied, could be relocalized using our tool in cultured neuronal cells.
Although we did not observe redistribution of reporter mRNA tagged
with 2 PUF-BS in HeLa cells, we anticipated that interaction of FFGPP
with only 2 PUF-BS in the untagged endogenous mRNA would still mediate
significant mRNA redistribution in the context of a neuronal cell.
We reasoned that greater transport distances in neurites would diminish
the overall effect of mRNA diffusion, which must be a significant
factor in relatively small cells such as HeLa. β-actin
mRNA, the subcellular localization of which is one
of the best studied, is known to be localized to cell bodies as well
as to growth cones in neurons. However,
zipcode-binding protein 1 (ZBP1), a protein responsible for axonal
localization of β-actin mRNA, was
found in limited levels in adult sensory neurons. Specifically, it was shown that expression of exogenous
ZBP1 in neurons from ZBP1/ZBP1 mice led to
increased axonal β-actin mRNA levels, suggesting that β-actin mRNA levels in adult sensory neurons
are not saturated. Assuming that such β-actin mRNA distribution
is typical for most neurons, we expected the Kif5/FFGPP-mediated increase
in axonal β-actin mRNA levels of embryonic rat hippocampal neurons. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf To showcase the effectiveness of PULR independent of ZBP1, we designed
the PUF domain to recognize a sequence in the β-actin mRNA 3′
UTR other than the “RNA zipcode”, which is recognized
by ZBP1. To prepare functional PUF fusion constructs
for endogenous β-actin mRNA transport in rat hippocampal neurons,
we picked 8 potential target regions in the 3′ UTR of rat β-actin
mRNA. Each of these 8 target regions contained 2 PUF-BS that satisfied
two criteria: (1) are 3–30 bp apart and (2) would require minimal
mutagenesis in repeats 6–8 that recognize the conserved UGU
triplet in the consensus target sequence (). For recognition of each of
these target regions, we assembled individual PUF variants from a
library of repeat units using the PUF assembly kit that we previously
developed, and assembled them pairwise
into 8 GPPF constructs (GPPF act1-act8, ). To determine the most potent PUF variant combination,
we assayed each GPPF against its target sequence in the context of
BICDN transport to the centrosome, since it is easier to quantify
transport to a single centrosomal locus in HeLa cells. Consistent
with b and
c, redistribution of reporter mRNA containing only 2 PUF-BS was marginal
(). However, construct GPPF-act6
displayed increased fluorescence compared to the remaining 7 constructs
(data not shown), which was likely due to its superior soluble expression.
We therefore subsequently reassembled this combination of PUF variants
in the FFGPP configuration and used for anterograde transport of endogenous
β-actin mRNA in primary hippocampal neurons. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf Since the
microtubules are arranged in the axon with their positive
ends pointing toward the growth cones, we expected the FFGPP/Kif5-FRB
protein complex to redistribute endogenous β-actin mRNA toward
axonal growth cones (a). Coexpressing KIF5-FRB and FFGPP targeting β-actin
mRNA (FFGPP-Act-6) or unrelated sequence (FFGPP-control, ) in embryonic rat hippocampal neurons,
we observed a marked enrichment of both FFGPP-Act-6 and FFGPP-control
in axonal growth cones in response to rapalog (). Quantification () corroborated that FFGPP-act and FFGPP-control were
strongly enriched in the growth cones compared to the adjacent axon
(b,c,), suggesting
that Kif5/FFGPP is transported to axonal growth cones independent
of its RNA recognition properties. We next assessed whether FFGPP-act
cotransports β-actin mRNA. Using antisense probes against β-actin
mRNA, we found that β-actin mRNA levels in the growth cones
of neurons expressing KIF5-FRB and FFGPP-act increased on average
1.9-fold after rapalog treatment (b, d). No significant change in β-actin
mRNA levels was observed in neurons expressing KIF5-FRB/FFGPP-control
(b, d). These
results demonstrate that untagged endogenous mRNA can be transported
and enriched in axonal growth cones beyond their normal levels. Moreover,
our data suggest that enrichment of β-actin mRNA in the growth
cones is sequence- and ligand-dependent. In this work, we developed a molecular tool for chemical-controlled,
sequence-specific transport of mRNA along microtubules in animal cells.
The PULR system proved effective in ligand-dependent redistribution
of tagged reporter mRNA toward distal or proximal poles of microtubular
network in HeLa cells. In addition, it showcased the possibility of
transporting untagged endogenous mRNA such as β-actin mRNA toward
the axonal growth cones of primary neurons. Targeting and relocalization
of endogenous mRNA was made possible by utilization of a programmable
RNA-binding domain PUF, suggesting that other endogenous mRNA could
be targeted in a similar manner. The current study opens the
prospect of further investigations
into controlled local translation of mRNA and resulting phenotypical
changes, which are timely now with increasing interest in mRNA localization
and local mRNA translation. We are similarly intrigued with the possibility
of this work inspiring alternative and/or supplementary approaches
to regulating mRNA localization in the cytoplasm, such as locally
entrapping mRNA or locally protecting against degradation. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf Schematic
overview of the PULR system. In the presence of rapalog
(black squares), FFGPP/KIF5 or GPPF/BICDN protein combinations transport
reporter mRNA to the plus (+) or minus (−) ends of microtubules,
respectively. FFGPP and GPPF constructs are denominated based on the
order of their domains from amino to the carboxyl termini, depicted
right (N-t) to left (C-t). For PUF modifications/specificities introduced
in this work, as well as Firefly luciferase 3′UTR sequences
used in this work, see , respectively. Transport of
reporter mRNA to the distal ends of microtubules in
HeLa cells. (a) Schematic overview of KIF5-mediated mRNA transport.
Microtubules are represented as black solid arrows pointing from their
(+) to (−) ends. (b) Transport of FLuc mRNA to the cell periphery
by KIF5-FRB and the PUF construct FFGPP. Hoechst, nuclear stain. White
solid lines, cell outlines. Quantified areas: C, cytoplasm (light
blue dashed lines); P, periphery (yellow dashed lines). PUF-BS, PUF-binding
sites. Enriched spots indicated with arrows. Scale bar: 20 μm.
(c) Quantitation of mRNA translocation to the cell periphery. RNA-FISH
intensity at the region coinciding with the brightest fluorescent
region of KIF5 immunofluorescence was normalized to an adjacent proximal
region of the same area.  = 20 cells in 3 biological
replicates. *** < 0.001. Mean ± SEM. Transport of
reporter mRNA to the proximal ends of microtubules
in HeLa cells. (a) Schematic overview of BICDN-mediated mRNA transport.
Microtubules are represented as black solid arrows pointing from their
(−) to (+) ends. (b) Transport of FLuc mRNA to the perinuclear
region by BICDN-FRB and the PUF construct GPPF. Hoechst, nuclear stain.
White lines, cell outlines. Quantified areas: C, cytoplasm (light
blue dashed lines); Cen, centrosome (yellow dashed lines). PBS, PUF-binding
sites. Enriched spots indicated with arrows. Scale bar: 20 μm.
(c) Quantitation of mRNA transport to the perinuclear region. RNA-FISH
intensity at the region coinciding with the brightest fluorescent
region of BICDN immunofluorescence was normalized to an adjacent distal
region of the same area.  = 20 cells in 3 biological
replicates. *** < 0.001. Mean ± SEM. Transport of endogenous
β-actin mRNA to axonal growth cones
in primary neurons. (a) Schematic of endogenous mRNA transport in
hippocampal neurons. Microtubules are represented as black solid arrows
pointing from their (−) to (+) ends. (b) Effect of FFGPP-Act-6
or FFGPP-control on abundance of β-actin mRNA in axonal growth
cones. FFGPP-act-6 PUF domains recognize β-actin mRNA and FFGPP-control
PUF domains recognize unrelated 5′UUGAnAUA3′. BFP was
transfected to track the neuron outline. Quantified regions: GC, growth
cone (yellow dashed lines); A, axon (light blue dashed lines). Scale
bar: 5 μm. (c) Quantitation of FFGPP redistribution. FFGPP fluorescence
in a growth cone was normalized to fluorescence measured along a 10–20
μM line following the axon approximately 10–20 μM
away from the growth cone. (d) Quantitation of β-actin mRNA
in axonal growth cones in the presence of FFGPP-act or FFGPP-control.  = 20 cells in 3 biological replicates. Mean ± SEM.
*** < 0.001. ** < 0.01.
* < 0.05. HeLa cells were maintained
in modified Eagle’s Medium (MEM) supplemented with 10% Fetal
Bovine Serum (FBS). HeLa cells were plated a day before transfection
at a density of 1 × 10 cells/well in an 8-well poly--lysine-coated μ-slide (Ibidi) in 300 μL of media.
The next day, transfection mixtures were prepared by mixing 15 μL
OptiMEM (Life Technologies), 300 ng DNA, and 0.9 μL Fugene HD
reagent (Promega). The DNA mixture contained 100 ng of pCMV5-KIF5B-FRB
or pCMV5-BICDN-FRB, 100 ng of PUF fusion expression plasmid, and 100
ng of FLuc mRNA-transcribing plasmid. The transfection mixtures were
incubated for 15 min at room temperature and added to the cells. The
cells were allowed to grow for 48 h, after which they were treated
with 1 μM rapalog (commercial name A/C heterodimerizer, Clontech
Laboratories) for 1 h at 37 °C before live cell imaging or fixation. Primary rat hippocampal neurons were prepared from embryonic day
18 (E18) rat brains as described previously. Briefly, cells were plated on coverslips coated with poly--lysine (30 μg/mL) and laminin (2 μg/mL) at a density
of 75 000/well in a 12-well plate. Hippocampal cultures were
grown in Neurobasal medium (NB) supplemented with B27, 0.5 mM glutamine,
12.5 μM glutamate, and penicillin-streptomycin. For subsequent
RNA-FISH treatment, the neuron culturing was modified as following:
the cells were plated at a density of 20 000/well in a 24-well
plate, and cultured in NB supplemented with B27, 0.5 mM glutamine,
12.5 μM glutamate, penicillin-streptomycin, and 2 μM cytosine β--arabinofuranoside hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich). Half of conditioned
media volume was replaced with equal amount of fresh media twice a
week. Hippocampal neurons cultured in 12-well plates were transfected
at DIV8 (8 days ) with Lipofectamine 2000
(Invitrogen). DNA (1.8 μg/well) was mixed with 3.3 mL Lipofectamine
2000 in 200 μL NB, incubated for 30 min, and then added to the
neurons in NB at 37 °C in 5% CO for 45 min. For transfection
in 24-well plates, the reagents were scaled down by a factor of 0.5.
Next, neurons were washed with NB and transferred to the original
medium at 37 °C in 5% CO. At DIV11, rapalog was added
to the media to a final concentration of 0.1 μM for 24 h 37
°C in 5% CO before fixation of the cells. RNA-FISH
and Immunofluorescence http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00025/suppl_file/sb7b00025_si_001.pdf For combined RNA-FISH
and immunofluorescence, HeLa cells were washed twice with phosphate
buffer saline (PBS) and fixed in 4% formaldehyde (Polysciences) in
PBS buffer for 10 min at room temperature (RT). The cells were washed
twice in PBS and permeabilized with 70% ethanol at 4 °C overnight,
after which they were washed in a washing buffer containing 10% formamide
(Sigma) in 2× saline-sodium-citrate (SSC) for 5 min at RT. The
cells were incubated in 170 nM Stellaris Quasar 670-tagged 48 probe
mix (Biosearch Technologies) against firefly luciferase transcript,
1 μg/mL mouse monoclonal anti-HA tag IgG antibody (Abcam) (for
HA-tagged motor protein binding), and 5 μg/mL rabbit monoclonal
anti-GFP IgG Abfinity antibody (Invitrogen) (for PUF-GFP-FKBP binding)
in the FISH-IF buffer (10% dextran sulfate, 10% formamide, 2×
SSC, 2 mM vanadyl ribonucleoside complex, 0.02% RNase-free bovine
serum albumin (BSA)) in a humidified chamber overnight at 37 °C
in the dark. The next day, the cells were washed three times in the
washing buffer and incubated with 4 μg/mL Alexa-Fluor568-tagged
antimouse IgG antibodies and 10 μg/mL Alexa-Fluor488-tagged
antirabbit antibody (Invitrogen) in the FISH-IF buffer for 1 h at
RT in the dark, after which they were subsequently washed three times
in the washing buffer. The cells were next counterstained in 130 ng/mL
Hoechst 33342 (Pierce) for 5 min at RT, and washed three times in
2× SSC buffer. After washing in the oxygen scavenger (GLOX) buffer
(2× SSC, 0.4% glucose, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8) for 5 min at RT,
the cells were imaged in GLOX solution (37 μg/mL glucose oxidase
(Sigma) and 100 μg/mL catalase (Sigma) in GLOX buffer). No/negligible
cross-signal was observed between anti-HA and anti-GFP immunofluorescent
staining and RNA-FISH (). For RNA-FISH in rat hippocampal neurons, the cells were fixed in
4% formaldehyde supplemented with 4% sucrose in PBS for 10 min at
RT, washed 3× with PBS, and permeabilized in 0.1% Triton X-100
in PBS. The coverslips were next washed in the washing buffer for
5 min at RT. RNA-FISH was performed by incubation with 170 nM Stellaris
Quasar 670-tagged 48 probe mix against rat actb transcript (Biosearch
Technologies) in the FISH-IF buffer in a humidified chamber overnight
at 37 °C in the dark. The next day, the cells were washed three
times in the washing buffer and imaged in the GLOX solution as above. Image Acquisition of Hela Cells HeLa cell fluorescent
images were acquired using the Zeiss Axiovert 200 M widefield fluorescence
microscope equipped with a 40× NA 1.4 oil objective, Andor iXon
DV887-BV camera, and DAPI (Zeiss, 49 DAPI shift free (E)), FITC (Semrock,
Brightline FF01–494/20–25), Rhodamine (Semrock, Brightline
SpOr-B-CSC-ZERO), and Cy5 (Semrock, Brightline Cy5-4040B-CSC-ZERO)
excitation/emission filter sets. Care was taken not to oversaturate
the fluorescence measurements, and to use the same imaging conditions,
including the exposure time, across all image acquisitions for quantifying
samples to be compared. Quantification of mRNA Transport in HeLa
Cells http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/index.html http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/index.html Quantification
of the RNA-FISH signal from the Quasar 670-tagged probes in HeLa cells
was performed using the ImageJ software (). RNA-FISH signal (cell periphery/cytoplasm), was quantified as
follows: ; where
Q670 is the mean gray
value of Q670 fluorescence detected at the region coinciding with
the brightest immunofluorescence spot of FFGPP at the cell periphery,
Q670 is the mean gray value of background fluorescence
detected in a region of the same area but at an adjacent extracellular
region, and Q670 is fluorescence detected at an adjacent
proximal cytoplasmic region of the same area. RNA-FISH signal (centrosome/cytoplasm),
was quantified as follows: ; where Q670 is the mean gray
value of Q670 fluorescence detected at the region coinciding with
the brightest immunofluorescence spot of GPPF at the perinuclear region,
and Q670 is fluorescence detected at an adjacent distal
cytoplasmic region of the same area. The normalized RNA-FISH signal
values were averaged over 20–30 cells in which both of the
immunofluorescence signals as well as the RNA-FISH signal were observed
above background. The statistical analysis was performed with Student’s  test assuming a two-tailed and unequal variation. Image
Acquisition of Hippocampal Neurons Whole neuron
images were acquired using a Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope equipped
with a Plan Fluor 20× N.A. 1.40 oil objective, Chroma ET-DAPI
(49000), Chroma ET-GFP (49002), and a Photometrics CoolSNAP HQ2 CCD
camera. Neuron images subjected to RNA-FISH were acquired using the
above-mentioned Zeiss Axiovert 200 M widefield fluorescence microscope. Quantification of mRNA Transport in Hippocampal Neurons Quantification of the BFP, GFP, or Quasar 670-tagged RNA-FISH probe
fluorescence in the growth cones was performed using the ImageJ software. FFGPP redistribution (growth cone/axon) was quantified as follows: ; where GFP is the mean gray
value of GFP fluorescence detected within the area of a growth cone,
GFP is the mean gray value of background GFP fluorescence
detected at the adjacent extracellular region, BFP is
the mean gray value of BFP fluorescence detected within the area of
a growth cone, BFP is the mean gray value of background
BFP fluorescence detected at the adjacent extracellular region, GFP is the mean gray value of GFP fluorescence detected along
a 10–20 μM line following the axon approximately 10–20
μM away from the growth cone, and BFP is the same
value measured for BFP. Both of the regions of interest were delimitated
based on the blue fluorescent protein (BFP) distribution in the axon. FFGPP or RNA-FISH distribution was quantified similarly, by measuring
background-subtracted integrated density values of fluorescence signal
within the area of a growth cone and normalizing it to mean gray value
of fluorescence signal detected in a stretch (20–40 μm)
of an axon 10–50 μm away from the growth cone. (exposure
time was kept consistent for acquisition of fluorescence from 670-tagged
RNA-FISH probe). Approximately 20 growth cones in 3 biological replicates
were analyzed and averaged, and a statistical analysis was performed
with Student’s  test assuming a two-tailed
and unequal variation..