Synthetic
biology aims to design
programmable cells that combine sensing and molecular computing operations
with on-demand production of therapeutic relevant proteins. Engineered living materials (ELMs) integrate genetically engineered
cells with free-standing materials and represent a new class of environmentally
responsive living devices with designer physicochemical and material
properties. Ideally, ELMs provide mechanical robustness to engineered cells,
prevent their migration to the environment, and allow cells to be
viable for extended periods of time. As it has been difficult to efficiently
immobilize genetically modified microorganisms (GMMs) in ELMs, their
release into the environments poses a major challenge for future synthetic
biology applications. To date, strategies for containing
GMMs inside a living device are based on the physical confinement
by multilayer materials. Hybrid micropatterned devices
that combine layers of elastomer and microporous hydrogel have enabled
the exchange of information with the surrounding environment via diffusion
of chemical inducers and their sensing by GMMs while displaying high
mechanical resilience. Nevertheless,
the low porosity of the physical barriers mitigating bacterial escape
also significantly hampers the diffusion of macromolecules, reducing
the repertoire of synthetic biology applications to biosensing and
release of small therapeutic molecules. Programmable interactions
between GMMs and their surroundings have
recently gained interest as the design of multicellular structures
such as engineered biofilms enables a higher control over shape and
functionality of ELMs. Inducible secretion of fibrous
proteins drives the emergence of molecular architectures supporting
the artificial biofilms. Interestingly, such biofilms are self-regenerating
and are able to perform advanced tasks such as multistep enzymatic
bioremediation, and are viable over weeks. Inspired by this strategy,
we propose to leverage the formation
of programmable interactions between surface-displayed proteins on
genetically engineered cells and hydrogel constituents to ensure cell
containment within a living material while simultaneously allowing
production and delivery of large therapeutic molecules.The “Platform
for Adhesin-mediated Trapping of Cells in Hydrogels” (PATCH)
is based on engineered  expressing a recombinant
adhesion protein that stably anchors the cells to a hydrogel matrix,
avoiding entrapment by stringent physical barriers (a). Bacterial adhesins are
modular cell-surface proteins that bind different ligands in a highly
specific manner. While strategies for programmable cell–cell
interactions via adhesins have been reported, methods that allow adhesin-mediated cell-material interactions have
not been described. We engineer  bacteria
to surface-display a Ca-dependent glucose-binding adhesin
which has strong interactions with dextran-based hydrogels (b,c for details).
The engineered adhesin, referred to as A, is derived
from the  ice-binding protein
(IBP) which helps these bacteria to assemble into
multispecies biofilms on ice. Compared to conventional living
material designs, our hydrogel-based material has large pores with
diameters ranging from 10 to 100 μM, which substantially improves
the diffusion of macromolecules through the matrix. Furthermore, our
results reveal efficient containment of adhesin displaying bacteria
with a retention factor of up to 100-fold higher compared to bacteria
that lack the adhesin. PATCH may help simplify the design of ELMs
and could reduce the use of multimaterial or multilayer devices aimed
at immobilizing GMMs. Hydrogels with antimicrobial activity have become
a major focus
in biomedical research due to their unique qualities such as high
biocompatibility and ease of drug loading and release. As an application of PATCH, we anchor engineered  that produce and secrete an antimicrobial enzyme called lysostaphin
inside a dextran-based hydrogel (d,e) and show successful inhibition of  growth including a methicillin-resistant (MRSA)
strain. Due to the rising incidence of resistance, MRSA is becoming
increasingly difficult to treat by conventional antibiotics. In the United States alone, MRSA causes approximately
11 000 deaths annually. Since
lysostaphin functions by cleaving the pentaglycine components of the
cell wall of  including MRSA, it is highly specific in killing the bacterium.
Importantly, lysostaphin is an enzyme that differs from small-molecule
antibiotics, and is effective against antibiotic resistant infections. Taken together, our study demonstrates PATCH
as a programmable living material foundry with potential applications
in biosensing and controlled delivery of therapeutic proteins. Overview of the design elements for PATCH. (a)  (, orange ovals with black outlines)
expressing a cell-surface adhesin (orange-black sticks) with a high
affinity for glucose are retained inside dextran-based hydrogels.
(b) Cell surface display of the A adhesin is regulated
by cotransforming  with two expression vectors
(A; yellow). A was
cloned into a pET24a vector (pET24a-mpa) under the control of a T7
promoter (pT7-Lac) inducible by IPTG. The engineered adhesin contains
the membrane anchor (orange), extender (orange), and sugar-binding
domains (SBD, pink circle) derived from IBP of
the Antarctic bacterium, . The 23-kDa C-terminal fragment of hemolysin protein A (HlyAc, dark
blue circle) functions as a Type I Secretion Pathway (T1SS) sequence
specific to , which was grafted to the end
of A to promote its cell-surface-display. The other
two  T 1SS components HlyB (dark green) and
HlyD (light green) were expressed from a pSTV28 vector (pSTV28-hlyb/d)
under the control of a lac promoter (pLac) inducible by IPTG. The
T1SS outer-membrane component (TolC) constitutive to  BL21 cells is colored brown. (c) X-ray crystal structure of the A sugar-binding domain (SBD), which is responsible for
binding to the dextran component of the hydrogel matrix. Ca are illustrated as large blue-green spheres, waters are indicated
by small red spheres. The sugar-binding site is occupied by a glucose
molecule (green backbone; stick representation). The figure was rendered
using UCSF Chimera. (d)  (green; A/lyso) is re-engineered
to surface-display the A adhesin and secrete the
bacteriocin lysostaphin via the T1SS. HlyAc (small dark-blue circles)
was added to the C-terminus of lysostaphin (small red circles) via
a cleavable linker. The lysostaphin-HlyAc fusion construct was under
the control of a pBAD promoter (inducible by arabinose) on the pSTV28
vector that also contains the pLac-HlyB/D. The modified vector is
named pSTV28-hlyb/d_lyso.e) Schematics of the designed living material
with anti- activity. Left: Surface-expression
of A allows  to bind to
the dextran matrix, thereby retaining the bacteria in the hydrogel
(boundary marked by blue dashed lines). The engineered  inside the hydrogel can secrete lysostaphin (small red
circles), which diffuses freely to the exterior environment to inhibit
the growth of  (gold spheres), including
a methicillin-resistant strain (MRSA). Gold spheres with dashed boundaries
indicate dead  cells killed by lysostaphin. Synthesis and Characterization of Dextran-Based
Hydrogels http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00404/suppl_file/sb9b00404_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00404/suppl_file/sb9b00404_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00404/suppl_file/sb9b00404_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00404/suppl_file/sb9b00404_si_001.pdf Dextran-based hydrogels are relatively simple to
synthesize, robust
in various shapes and highly biocompatible. The glucose-based
nature of the biopolymer makes dextran an ideal material for anchoring  expressing A. The dextran (500
kDa) polymer was functionalized by methacrylation to yield methacrylated
dextran (Dex-MA) (), which was subsequently cross-linked into a covalent hydrogel via
radical polymerization. The resulting
hydrogel is easy to handle (i.e., not brittle or very viscous), and
can be adapted into various shapes tailored for different applications.
Further analysis of the wash solution of these hydrogels using NMR
and FT-IR spectroscopy demonstrated that negligible concentrations
of unreacted monomers are released from the hydrogel (), which makes it suitable for keeping bacteria viable and likely
safe for various medical applications. Scanning electron microscope
(SEM) analysis showed that the dextran-based hydrogel has an overall
microporous structure with pore diameters ranging from 10 to 100 μm
(). These large pores would allow
unrestricted diffusion of macromolecules, as well as the propagation
of native  cells (2–5 μm), resulting
in the migration of bacteria to the outside of hydrogel (). To stably
anchor  to dextran-based hydrogel, we designed
a new adhesion protein, A, that binds glucose with
high affinity and can be surface-displayed on . A is derived from the giant adhesin IBP (1.5 MDa) (a) found on the cell surface of the Antarctic Gram-negative
bacterium, . IBP binds its bacterium to ice and facilitates the formation of symbiotic
biofilms with other microorganisms.IBP has a C-terminal signal sequence enabling its secretion
by the Type I Secretion System (T1SS) specific to  (a). At the N terminus, IBP contains
an “anchor module” that helps retain the protein to
the cell surface by plugging the T1SS outer-membrane pore. The protein
further consists of 120 identical 104-aa tandem repeats that serve
to project a set of ligand-binding modules away from the cell surface
to interact with their target molecules, including various carbohydrates,
proteins, and ice. The sugar-binding domain (SBD) of IBP binds to glucose in a Ca-dependent manner, and is used in this study to
allow engineered bacteria to bind to dextran-based hydrogels. The extremely large molecular
weight of IBP
would likely prevent its use as a modular protein for cell-surface
display in . We therefore introduced several
modifications resulting in an engineered IBP-based
variant, A, optimized for cell-surface display.
First, we reduced the number of central IBP repeats
from 120 to 15, lowering the molecular weight by approximately 5-fold
(to 330 kDa; b). These 15 tandem extender domains can project the sugar-binding
domain (SBD) approximately 90 nm away from the cell surface. Next, the C-terminal domain (181 aa) of IBP was replaced by a 23 kDa C-terminal sequence of the  hemolysin protein A (HlyAc) (b), which enables translocation of the protein
to the cell surface via the Type I secretion pathway (T1SS) specific
to . The engineered  genes were placed
in a pET24a vector. Since the genome of  BLR
(DE3) does not contain the T1SS machinery genes  and  required for secretion (pSTV28-; b), a pSTV28 vector carrying
these two genes was cotransformed with the adhesin-pET24a vector (b). We refer to bacterial
cells cotransformed with these plasmids as A cells and will use this notation throughout this article
for other variants. Additional variants were created by replacing
the N-terminal domains of A with a fluorescent
protein (A-mRuby2), which was used
to validate the localization of the adhesin by confocal microscopy
(b). It has
been reported that fluorescent proteins fold rapidly in the bacterial
cytosol before being secreted by T1SS, and their large size prevents
full passage through the outer-membrane pore of the secretion system. Thus, mRuby2 serves as an “anchor” to hold A to the cell surface, while the remaining parts of the
protein protrude into the extracellular environments. As a control,
we prepared A cells by cotransformation
with a pET24a plasmid that only encodes for HlyAc (pET24a-) and the pSTV28_ vector. As
detailed later in the paper, we also created A cells capable of secreting the bacteriocin lysostaphin to
target . The resulting variant
is referred to as A/lyso. Next, a combination of flow cytometry and confocal microscopy
was
used to validate the expression of A on the outer
surface of . A/lyso (cells capable of expressing both A and lysostaphin proteins, d, details below) and A/lyso control cells were incubated with rabbit antisera
raised against the central repeats of A. After
unbound primary antibodies were removed by washing, cells were further
incubated with a fluorescently labeled (Alexa 488) secondary antibody
(c, top schematics).
As expected, A/lyso cells
(c, red histogram)
showed a median fluorescence level approximately 5-fold higher than
that of the A/lyso cells (c,
gray histogram), validating the surface localization of the adhesin.
Confocal microscopy studies using the A-mRuby2 variant revealed successful overexpression of the protein
as evident by the evenly distributed red fluorescence inside of the
cells. The surface display of this protein is demonstrated by the
green immuno-fluorescence on the exterior of the cells. As the primary
antibody targets the A extender region consisting
of 15 identical 104-aa repeats, it is likely that multiple antibodies
bind to an individual adhesin protruding from the T1SS outer-membrane
pore. This results in amplification of green fluorescence from the
Alexa488 secondary antibodies, which appears as green clusters on
the cell surface (d). These data are in agreement with the flow cytometry data.
In summary, we designed a novel IBP-based protein
for cell-surface display in  and characterized
the expression and localization of this protein using flow cytometry
and confocal microscopy. Construct design
of the engineered A adhesins
and its localization to  cell surface. (a)
Linear domain map of the native 1.5-MDa IBP with
four of its functional regions illustrated as membrane anchor (orange),
central extenders (orange repeats), sugar-binding domain (pink), and  T1SS sequence (brown). Dotted lines indicate
the ∼100 central repeats omitted in the figure. (b) Linear
domain maps of engineered constructs of A expressed
and surface-displayed by . (c) Immuno-detection
of A by flow cytometry. Top schematic shows immunodetection
of A through an antibody raised against its central
extender domains. Histograms (bottom panel) illustrating fluorescence
distribution of the immuno-detection experiments done with A/lyso (gray) and A/lyso (red) cells. (d) Fluorescence
localization after immunostaining (green) of A-mRuby2
(red) obtained using confocal microscopy. Top schematic shows the
immunodetection of A through an antibody raised
against its central extender domains. Bottom panels show images obtained
from confocal microscopy. The A-mRuby2 cells are displayed in the top two panels, while the detection of A on  outer surface by immuno-staining
with fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies (Alexa 488, green
patches on the cells) are shown in the bottom two panels. Scale bar
indicates 2 μm, and is representative for all confocal images
in this panel. MpA Efficiently Retains  inside Dextran-Based
Hydrogels http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00404/suppl_file/sb9b00404_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00404/suppl_file/sb9b00404_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00404/suppl_file/sb9b00404_si_001.pdf To validate if the surface expression of A retains  inside dextran-based
hydrogels, we designed two experiments to quantify the migration of
bacteria through the hydrogel matrix into surrounding liquid or solid
media. A and A cells were loaded into cubic-shaped hydrogels (), which were subsequently partially
submerged in LB medium (a). To estimate bacterial migration from the gel to the surrounding
medium, samples of the medium were harvested at different time points
and plated for quantification by counting the colony forming units
(CFUs). Samples taken immediately after loading of bacteria showed
similar numbers (∼10) of A and A cells leaking
into the medium. We hypothesize that this initial leakage originates
from the large pore size of the hydrogel matrix resulting in a portion
of loaded bacteria directly flowing through the gel without binding
to dextran. After unbound cells were removed by refreshing the medium,
very few A bacteria were present in
the medium outside of the hydrogel in the next 24 h (approx. 30 CFUs).
In sharp contrast, up to 100-fold A cells were present in the medium (approx. 2 ×10 CFUs) (b).
SEM analysis was performed to gain visual insight into how bacteria
interacted with the hydrogel. We observed that A bacteria formed thin layers of microcolonies on the
lamina of the hydrogel due to their strong interaction with the gel
matrix (c,d).
In contrast, A bacteria showed
a significantly sparser distribution (), indicating a weaker interaction with the hydrogel, which was consistent
with the results obtained from the leakage experiments. In a different
experiment we assessed the capability of A in retaining
the  to the dextran-based matrix, by comparing
the relative affinity of A and A cells to small hydrogel cylinders
(∼100 mm). Hydrogels were preincubated with either A or A overnight, and then extensively washed to remove unbound bacteria. A or A that remained bound to the hydrogels were released into a solution
by homogenization and were quantified by CFU counting. As expected,
hydrogels retained roughly 4-fold more A bacteria compared to those that contained A (), demonstrating
the significantly stronger interaction between the bacteria and the
hydrogel caused by A expression. Next, we tested whether surface display of A
also inhibits migration of bacteria into a surrounding solid medium.
Small disk-shaped dextran hydrogels (thickness, 0.75 mm; diameter,
8 mm) were fabricated. The hydrogel disk was then placed on a LB-agar
plate, and A/lyso cells
or A/lyso control
(1 μL) was loaded to the center of the disk. Bacterial migration
from the center of the hydrogel matrix was monitored for up to 72
h (e). We quantified
the average colonized area outside the hydrogel disk based on four
replicates. We observed that after roughly 10 h, A/lyso cells started to migrate to
the outside of the hydrogel, whereas A/lyso cells were retained for at least another 25 h (f,g). After 72 h A/lyso cells colonized
a surface 8-fold larger compared to A/lyso cells (f,g). Furthermore, uninduced A/lyso cells did not show significant differences
in migratory behavior compared to either induced or uninduced A/lyso control (-IPTG, f–h). The
expression and secretion of an additional protein, lysostaphin, which
was induced by arabinose (details below, d), did not appear to hamper A-mediated retention of the engineered  to
the hydrogel matrix (f). These results further consolidated our findings that A surface display can substantially enhance the retention
of bacteria inside dextran-based hydrogels through its sugar-binding
capability. Characterization of the A adhesin mediated retention
of  inside a dextran-based hydrogel matrix.
(a) Experimental design to quantify bacterial migration from the hydrogel
matrix into liquid medium. Leakage of MpA (orange) from
a hydrogel cube was assessed by counting the colony forming units
(CFUs) present in the LB medium surrounding the hydrogel, and compared
with the leakage obtained from A cells (blue, negative control). (b) Bacterial migration was quantified
immediately after bacterial loading (initial leakage) and over the
following day. Right panel: representative images of plates at the
same dilution are shown to illustrate the difference in migration
between A and A samples after 24 h (Day 1). Dots on the bar graph
represent the results of individual experiments. (c) Scanning electron
microscopy images obtained from the dextran-based hydrogel inoculated
with the MpA inside of the bacterial
loading chamber (cross-section). (d) Zoomed-in view of an area of
panel c, showing a bacterial microcolony of A formed on the lamina of the hydrogel matrix. Scale bars (green)
in panels c and d indicate 10 μm. (e) Representative images
showing the migration of  through the matrix
of a disk-shaped hydrogel, which was assessed by estimating the surface
area colonized by the bacteria (A/lyso or A/lyso) on the outside of the hydrogel disk over time. Arrowheads indicate
the presence of nascent colonies of  (A/lyso in blue) and (A/lyso in orange). Scale bar represents 2
mm. (f,g,h) Quantification of the time-dependent migration of engineered  (A/lyso in blue and A/lyso in orange) through the hydrogel matrix. Average area and standard
deviation of the bacteria-colonized regions outside of the hydrogel
were calculated from replicates of that in panel e over 72 h ( = 4). (f) Experiments performed in the presence of both
inducing agents, IPTG for adhesin surface display, and arabinose for
lysostaphin expression (Ara). (g) Experiments performed in the presence
of IPTG, but in the absence of Ara ( = 3). (h) Experiments
performed in the absence of IPTG or Ara ( = 3). Application of PATCH - Living Material Engineered
to Kill MRSA Having developed PATCH, we next assessed whether A bacteria can be used to deliver functional
proteins . We focused on engineering  to secrete lysostaphin, a bacteriocin produced by  to kill . The full-length lysostaphin is a 50-kDa preproenzyme with
a modular domain architecture including a 36-aa N-terminal signal
peptide followed by a region comprising 15 tandem repeats of 13-aa,
and the peptidase and cell-wall-targeting (CWT) domains at the C terminus. After its secretion from , the signal peptide and the repetitive region of prepro-lysostaphin
are sequentially cleaved to reveal its active form, with the CWT domain
binding to its substrate on  cell surface
and the peptidase domain responsible for the catalytic cleavage of
the glycil–glycine bonds. As the functional construct
of lysostaphin was engineered for secretion via the T1SS by , the N-terminal  signal
peptides and the tandem repeats of the preprolysostaphin were deemed
redundant and therefore not included in the design (b). Instead, the HlyAc sequence
required by  T1SS was fused to the C-terminus
of lysostaphin via a linker consisting of a thrombin-cleavage site
flanked by tetraglycine motifs. Although the lysostaphin would in
theory compete with the A adhesin for the T1SS
ducts, our data reveal sufficient secretion of functional lysostaphin
(). The design of the linker motifs was
intended such that the HlyAc domain can be selectively removed to
release the catalytic form of lysostaphin. In addition, a 6X Histidine-tag
was fused to the C-terminal end of the lysostaphin-HlyAc fusion protein
for purification and detection purposes. The lysostaphin-HlyAc construct
under the control of a pBAD promoter (inducible by arabinose) was
incorporated into the pSTV28-, resulting in
the pSTV28_ vector (d). The pSTV28- was cotransformed with pET24a_ vector to create A/lyso bacteria. As a control, we also prepared cells lacking A expression (A/lyso), which have been transformed with the pET24a_ and the pSTV28_ vectors. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00404/suppl_file/sb9b00404_si_001.pdf To reveal
successful secretion of the 50-kDa lysostaphin-HlyAc,
cell-free medium of A/lyso was analyzed by Western blotting with antihistag primary
antibodies. As expected, a band of approximately 50 kDa was detected
for the intact lysostaphin-HlyAc (). In addition, a much more intense band was observed at approximately
25 kDa, which indicated the presence of HlyAc alone. This observation
suggested that lysostaphin-HlyAc construct had been cleaved after
secretion. Given the capability of lysostaphin to cleave pentaglycine
and the presence of two tetraglycine motifs linking lysostaphin and
HlyAc, it is possible that the fusion protein underwent site-specific
autolysis. Nevertheless, this would have no negative impact on the
enzymatic capability of lysostaphin as it frees up its catalytic domains
from HlyAc. We quantified the efficacy of the secreted lysostaphin-HlyAc
against , using an adapted version of Kirby-Bauer
(disk
diffusion) test (a). We applied cell-free medium of A/lyso bacteria to Mueller-Hinton
agar plates prestreaked with . After an
overnight incubation period, clear round exclusion zones formed where
the medium was applied, indicating the effective inhibition of  growth (b). In contrast, cell-free medium from the A cells showed no activity against , indicating that growth inhibition was solely
caused by lysostaphin secretion. A/lyso cells were unable to inhibit the growth of a different
Gram-positive pathogen, ,
demonstrating the specificity of lysostaphin. To further consolidate
this result, we spotted living A/lyso cell cultures onto a Mueller-Hinton agar plate streaked with
the notorious methicillin-resistant  (MRSA), which is a major cause for hospital-acquired infections
worldwide. Strikingly, we observed clear
halo-like exclusion zones surrounding the A/lyso cells, indicating the inhibition of MRSA
growth (c).
These results demonstrate that sufficient amount of functional lysostaphin
was secreted even though the A adhesin and lysostaphin
compete for T1SS ducts. In sharp contrast, no such inhibition zones
separated the  cells without lysostaphin-producing
capability (A cells) and MRSA.
Consistent with the results above, A/lyso cells could not kill . These results demonstrated the high specificity and promising potential
of  lysostaphin secretion for treating antibiotic-resistant -related infections. After demonstrating that A/lyso cells can secrete functional
lysostaphin , we next investigated whether
PATCH could kill MRSA, without leakage
of GMMs. This would be a key step toward demonstrating the feasibility
of this novel platform for different applications. As anticipated,
very few  cells induced with A/lyso migrated outside of the hydrogel disks
into the surrounding Mueller-Hinton agar medium after 96 h (d). Remarkably, the
bacteria-loaded hydrogel disks are also effective in killing MRSA,
as exclusion zones developed around the periphery of the devices.
This demonstrates free diffusion of functional lysostaphin through
the hydrogel matrix to the exterior environments. In contrast, when A expression was not induced (IPTG-), A/lyso cells were not restrained to the hydrogel,
resulting in their migration into the exterior agar medium (d, two panels on
the right). When only lysostaphin expression was induced (IPTG-, Ara+),
was the inhibition zone significantly larger than when both A and lysostaphin were induced (IPTG+, Ara+). We reason
that since the adhesin plugs a significant fraction of T1SS machineries,
halting A production resulted in higher secretion
levels of lysostaphin. Furthermore, a control experiment in which
lysostaphin expression was not induced (IPTG-, Ara-) resulted in the
absence of an inhibition zone, which validates the responsiveness
of our system toward arabinose induction (d). Taken together, we have created a living
hydrogel hosting adhesin-mediated self-retaining . As an application of this versatile platform, we demonstrated a
prototype living material with anti-MRSA activity. PATCH with Anti- activity. (a) Schematic
of the adapted Kirby-Bauer test for assessing the anti- activity of lysostaphin-secreting  as an application of PATCH. (b) Evaluation of bactericidal activity
of the cell-free media collected from A/lyso, A, A/lyso and A/lyso cells against  and . White
arrows indicate where the samples were applied. Black arrows indicate
the target bacteria streaked on the plates. Growth inhibition zones
are marked by a red arrow. (c) Evaluation of bactericidal activity
of A/lyso, A, A/lyso and A/lyso (no lysostaphin-producing capability)  cells
against Methicillin-resistant  (MRSA) and . Images were captured
after an incubation time of approximately 48 h. d) Evaluation of bactericidal
activity of the living hydrogels with engineered MpA/lyso against MRSA. MpA/lyso cells were spotted to the centers
of the hydrogel disks, which were placed onto Mueller-Hinton agar
plates streaked with MRSA. The images were captured after an incubation
period of 96 h. The adhesin- and lysostaphin-functionalities were
controlled by induction by IPTG and/or Arabinose (Ara), respectively.
White arrowheads point to the edge of the hydrogel disks as outlined
by thin white circles. One challenge that impedes the deployment of living
functional
materials for biomedical applications outside the lab is the requirement
of sustaining viable cells while restricting their escape from the
device. To the best of our knowledge, this study shows the first example
toward confinement of GMMs by actively implementing adhesive interactions
between microorganisms and a fully synthetic material. The basis of
PATCH is in contrast with conventional methods for engineering living
materials, which typically rely on the presence of a physical barrier
provided by submicrometer matrices of multilayer hybrid materials.
Our work demonstrates one application of PATCH as a living material
foundry for clearing pathogenic bacteria by  production and secretion of lysostaphin. PATCH presents a
versatile toolbox that can be tailored to the
need of various applications such as biosensing and smart drug delivery
in a deployable “Sense-kill” manner, which opens the door for a wide range of future research. Given
the modularity of bacterial adhesins, PATCH can be easily tailored
to other materials. Besides the SBD, another ligand-binding domain
of A can be used to bind peptide-based materials. In addition, the  pilus domain FimH has
high specificity for mannose-based structures. Other constituents
of PATCH such as gel porosity can be tuned to modulate the diffusion
of various therapeutic compounds secreted by the bacteria. Identification of soluble  molecules capable of regulating the expression of lysostaphin would
enhance the responsiveness and specificity of the current system.
Implementing an alternative secretion system for lysostaphin might
result in higher levels of  drug delivery.
Crucially, integration of the expression systems into the genomes
of the engineered microorganisms will help diminish the spreading
of antibiotic resistant genes to pathogens via the plasmids. To address
further safety concerns, we envision that the platform could be adapted
to other microorganisms that previously demonstrated their innocuity
for humans, and were used in other animal models for synthetic biology
applications, such as  Nissle 1917 strain
(EcN) or . As such, this work constitutes an
important methodological improvement in the field of living functional
materials and living material foundries, and could have implications
for therapeutic applications. A gene encoding
a smaller version of IBP (Genbank accession: ABL74378.1
and ABL74377.1) with only 15 central repeats was synthesized and purchased
from GenScript (). The gene was codon-optimized for expression in , and the central repeats were made as different as possible at the
DNA level to reduce the chance of recombination. Next, the -specific Type I Secretion System (T1SS) sequence
near its C terminus (181 aa) was replaced by the  T1SS sequence (last 213 aa of the Hemolysin A protein, HlyAc, also
codon-optimized and synthesized by GenScript) to result in the A adhesin (b). A fluorescent variant of A, A-mRuby2, was created by replacing the membrane anchor
(412 aa at the N terminus) of the adhesin with mRuby2 (b). Each A construct was placed between the  and  sites in a pET24a vector. Genes encoding for two other
machinery proteins ( and ) of  T1SS were placed between the  and HI sites in a pSTV28 plasmid
as described. The  genes were PCR amplified from a pLG575 plasmid kindly provided by
Professor Dr. Peter Sebo (Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy
of Sciences). Approximately 10 of either
induced A/lyso or A/lyso cells were collected,
blocked with 1 mg/mL bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich) in a buffer
containing 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 9, 150 mM NaCl, and 5 mM CaCl (Buffer A), and incubated (1:100, 1 h) with rabbit antiserum raised
against the central repeats of A. After washing
with buffer A (2×), cells were incubated with a goat antirabbit
secondary antibody (Alexa 633, Invitrogen; 1:100, 1 h) and then analyzed
by a Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorter (Aria III, BD Sciences). The
stained cells were gated based on forward and side scattering. At
least 10 000 gated events were analyzed and plotted using the
FlowJo software. Cells were prepared
in a similar
way as those for flow cytometry experiments described above. A-mRuby2-expressing cells were collected, blocked with
1 mg/mL bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich) in Buffer A, and incubated
(1:100, 1 h) with rabbit antiserum raised against the central repeats
of A. After washing with buffer A (2×), a
secondary (goat antirabbit) antibody conjugated with a fluorophore
(Alexa 488, invitrogen) was used to label the cell-surface-exposed A-mRuby2. Samples were mounted on the stage of a confocal
laser scanning microscope (Leica SP8) equipped with solid-state lasers
(488 and 638 nm), a Plan APO 63× water immersion objective (NA
1.2) and hybrid detector. Fluorescent images were acquired using the
Leica LAS X software. Synthesis of Methacrylated Dextran http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00404/suppl_file/sb9b00404_si_001.pdf Dextran T500 (500
kDa, Pharmacosmos) (4 g, 24.7 mmol glucopyranose unit) was dissolved
in 36 mL of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and degassed with argon for
15 min. After dissolving 800 mg of 4-dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP,
Sigma-Aldrich), 2.4 mL of glycidyl methacrylate (GMA, Sigma-Aldrich)
was added. The solution was stirred at room temperature for 44 h and
the reaction was stopped by adding 6.6 mL of 1 M HCl to neutralize
the DMAP. The reaction mixture was transferred to a SnakeSkin Dialysis
bag (molecular weight cutoff: 10 kDa, Thermo scientific) and dialyzed
against demineralized water at room temperature with changing water
3–4 times a day for 72 h. Next, the methacrylated dextran solution
was lyophilized and stored at −30 °C before use. For NMR
measurements, pharmaceutical-grade dextran 500 and methacrylated dextran
samples were prepared in 10 mg/mL CDCl and 1 mg/mL DO, respectively. The samples were measured on a Bruker Avance
3 HD NanoBay spectrometer (H NMR 400 MHz) at 23 °C.
The degree of substitution, which is the percentage of methacrylated
glucose monomers, was calculated with the formula (/1.04) × 100, where  stands
for the average integral of the protons of the double bond, indicated
with 22′ and 22′′ in the spectrum,  stands for the integral of the anomeric proton, indicated with 4
in the spectrum, and 1.04 is the correction factor for the average
4% of α – 1, 3 linkages in dextran (). Dextran-Based Hydrogel Preparation An aqueous solution
of methacrylated dextran (5% w/v, 200 mg methacrylated dextran in
4 mL of HO) and ammonium persulfate (4.5 mg) was degassed
with argon, stirred, and cooled in an ice bath for 15 min. From here
on, all preparation was done at 4 °C in a cold room. After the
addition of 5 μL of tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED), the
solution was mixed vigorously for 4–5 s and poured into the
mold for hydrogel formation via freezing at −20 °C. Assessment and Quantification of Unreacted Monomers Present
in Hydrogel Wash Solutions by NMR and FT-IR Samples of the
wash solution were prepared by soaking a ready-to-use hydrogel (10
× 10 mm) in 5 mL of UP-mQ (ultrapure miliQ for analytical purposes).
After 72 h the gel was removed, and the UP-mQ was freeze-dried in
a 50 mL falcon tube. Subsequently, 800 μL of DO
was added to the falcon tube and sonicated for 5 min. This solution
was filtered through a syringe filter (0.2 μm) to remove residual
dextran hydrogel that was still present in the sample. For NMR measurement,
a sample (0.2% methanol as an internal standard) was measured on a
Bruker Avance 3 HD NanoBay spectrometer (1H-NMR 400 MHz) with a water
suppression scan. The liquid-state IR spectrum for the sample was
recorded on a PerkinElmer Spectrum One spectrometer in a CaF cell. The NMR and FT-IR experiments were performed at 23 °C. Mold Fabrication for the Cubic Hydrogel http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00404/suppl_file/sb9b00404_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00404/suppl_file/sb9b00404_si_001.pdf The device
mold was fabricated in two steps. First, a poly(methyl methacrylate)
(PMMA) mold was made using a CO laser (see ) and glued to a flat PMMA using an
acrylic glue. Second, a PDMS prepolymer mixture was prepared in a
10:1 ratio (PDMS: curing agent) and poured over the mold. This was
thermally cured in an oven at 65 °C for 2 h, and then the polymer
was carefully peeled off from the mold (see ). A side hole (θ = 2 mm) was made at the center using
metallic punches. In the side holes, glass needles were inserted before
the hydrogel was poured in. Preparation of the Cubic Hydrogel for the
Quantification of
Bacterial Leakage Activated methacrylated dextran solution
was poured into a PDMS mold with a pin placed through the central
hole from one side to the center of the cubic mold. Removal of the
pin after the solidification of the pregel solution resulted in an
empty chamber within the hydrogel for loading bacteria. The casted
methacrylated dextran was kept frozen at −20 °C overnight,
and later thawed at room temperature, washed with 20 mL of Milli-Q,
and allowed to swell for 5 min. Next, the gel was washed with 20 mL
of 0.05 M NaOH followed by 20 mL of Milli-Q and stored at 4 °C
in a falcon tube with fresh Milli-Q. Activated methacrylated dextran
was casted in a mold used for fabrication of acrylamide-based gels
for SDS-PAGE (Mini PAGE mold, Bio-Rad). This resulted in the fabrication
of a 0.75 mm-thick homogeneous sheet. After washing, the hydrogel
disks were formed by punching off the sheet with a 8 mm hole puncher,
and stored in fresh Milli-Q at room temperature. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00404/suppl_file/sb9b00404_si_001.pdf Cloning procedures were performed following
the Gibson assembly method. Reagents and competent
DH5a cells used for cloning were from the NEBuilder HiFi DNA Cloning
Kit (Product E5520S New England Biolabs). Q5 High-Fidelity 2X Master
Mix was used for long PCRs (Product M0492SNew England Biolabs 240
County Road Ipswich, MA 01938–2732). The correct gene products
were confirmed by DNA sequencing (BaseClear BV. Sylviusweg 74 2333
BE Leiden, The Netherlands, ). Unless otherwise noted, all bacteria
were grown at 37 °C. Cultures were grown overnight in LB supplemented
with selective antibiotics from single colonies of freshly transformed
cells. Overnight cultures were further diluted 100-fold in fresh LB
supplemented with selective antibiotics. After 3 h incubation, cells
were chemically induced (0 or 5 mM arabinose, 0 or 0.5 mM IPTG) (OD = 0.8) and further grown for 3 h. Note timing is important
for ensuring optimum protein expression levels and therefore functionality
of the system. Bacterial Leakage Experiment with the Cubic
Hydrogels (Liquid
LB Medium) Cubic hydrogels were soaked in LB medium supplemented
with 30 μg/mL chloramphenicol, 100 μg/mL kanamycine, 5
mM CaCl, and 0.5 mM IPTG for 1 h and transferred to an
empty sterile Petri-dish by tweezers with the opening of the bacteria-loading
chamber facing upward. Excess LB was pipetted out of the central chamber.
Engineered  (7 μL, OD is approximately 1) were pipetted into the central chamber of the
cubic hydrogel placed in a sterile Petri-dish. Next, 25 mL of medium
was added to the plate gradually to roughly 80% (8 mm) of the height
of the cubic hydrogel incubated at room temperature. The medium was
collected at two different time points after the bacterial loading
(10 min and 24 h) and plated (100 μL) for the quantification
of bacterial leakage by CFU counting. The LB medium and Petri-dish
were refreshed after each sample collection to prevent the overgrowth
of bacteria. Experiments for Assessing Bacterial Retention
to the Hydrogels Approximately 100 μL of activated
methacrylated dextran solution
was poured into individual wells of 96-well plate to make hydrogel
cylinders. To bind bacteria to the dextran-based hydrogel, each hydrogel
cylinder was incubated with 5 mL of A or A (OD = ∼1) in the
presence of 0.5 mM IPTG and 2 mM CaCl in a shaking incubator
overnight (37 °C, 250 rpm). The hydrogels were then transferred
to a fresh culture tube containing 5 mL of a sterile buffer (10 mM
Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, and 2 mM CaCl) with antibiotics
(for A, chloramphenicol only;
for A, both kanamycin and chloramphenicol).
The hydrogels were washed in the buffer with shaking (200 rpm, 20
°C) for 1 h. The hydrogels were then transferred to fresh culture
tubes and homogenized with a glass rod before resuspending in 100
μL of the wash buffer. Serial dilutions of the samples were
plated onto agar plates with appropriate antibiotics, and CFUs were
counted the next day for quantification of bacteria bound to the hydrogel. Dextran gels seeded with
cells were first fixated in 4% formaldehyde for 20 min, and further
kept in Milli-Q water. Samples were further sliced using a scalpel
to show the cross-section of the bacterial loading chamber and sputter
coated with a 9 nm-gold layer using an EMITECH K575X Peltier-cooled
SOP Turbo sputter coater Dual. The gels were imaged at 5 kV in a FEI
Quanta 3D field-emission SEM, equipped with an Everhart-Thornley secondary
electron detector Bacterial Leakage Experiment with the Hydrogel
Disks (LB-Agar
Medium) Prior to use, dextran-based hydrogel disks were soaked
in LB medium supplemented with 30 μg/mL chloramphenicol, 100
μg/mL kanamycine, and 5 mM CaCl. Next, 100 μL
of a solution containing chemical inducers (0 or 5 mM arabinose, 0
or 0.5 mM IPTG) were spread on LB-agar plates supplemented with antibiotics
and CaCl. The surface of the LB-agar substrate was allowed
to dry by incubating the plates at 37 °C for 30 min. Hydrogel
disks were set on the agar-LB surface and quickly dabbed dry using
clean, dust-free, paper tissue, and further incubated for 10 min at
37 °C. A drop (1 μL) of engineered  culture was placed in the center of hydrogel surface on the LB agar
medium within Petri dishes. The migration of the engineered  was tracked by imaging for 4 days. Pictures were
analyzed using ImageJ/Fiji. Antibacterial
Activity Tests (Modified Kirby-Bauer Test) Master mix solutions
(100 μL) containing various chemical inducers
(0 or 5 mM arabinose, 0 or 0.5 mM IPTG, 5 mM CaCl) were
spread onto 15 mL Mueller-Hinton agar plates, which were dried by
incubating them at 37 °C. Further, a protocol of a standard Kirby-Bauer
test was followed. Briefly, bacterial cultures of  (methicillin resistant) or  was diluted to OD of 0.4–0.6, and streaked
across the Mueller-Hinton agar plates with a cotton swab before they
were tested against various antibacterial treatments. Various engineered  cells including A/lyso, A/lyso, A/lyso and A/Lyso were spotted (5–10 μL) onto the plates, and their effects
on the growth of  were observed and photographed. Approximately 3 h after
lysostaphin induction with 5 mM arabinose, 100 mL of engineered  cell culture was spun down by centrifugation (4000
rpm) for 15 min at 4 °C. The cell-free-medium was then harvested
after the removal of residual cells by filtering (0.2 μm cutoff).
To remove the antibiotics present in the growth medium, the cell-free-medium
was buffer-exchanged into buffer A and concentrated approximately
30-fold using Millipore spin cassettes (molecular weight cutoff: 10-kDa).
The cell-free medium was further tested by applying a drop of 5 μL
onto the surface of the prestreaked plates (see antibacterial activity
tests). Living Hydrogel with anti-MRSA Activity Dextran-based
hydrogel disks were briefly dried using a sterile cotton swab and
then placed on the Mueller-Hinton agar plates streaked with methicillin-resistant . Prior to their infusion into the
hydrogel disks, the engineered  cells were
washed to 2 times in LB to ensure complete removal of antibiotics
(growth medium). Next, a drop (1 μL) of the induced  cells was placed at the center of the dextran-based
hydrogel disk surface. Plates were further incubated at 37 °C
for up to 4 days, and the effects of bacteriocin-producing living
hydrogels were visualized by imaging with a DSLR camera (Canon 600D,
50 mm lens). Pictures were analyzed using ImageJ..