AM1 (formerly ) has
been used as a model organism to study methylotrophy, , growth on C carbon sources, such as methanol and formate,
since its isolation in 1961. The genome
of  AM1 has been fully sequenced,
and a genome-scale metabolic network was reconstructed for rational
engineering. The unique ability of  to grow on C-units has made
it an increasingly relevant organism for biotechnology in a methanol-
and formate-based bioeconomy. Production
of bulk and value-added chemicals such as mevalonate, α-humulene,
3-hydroxypropionate, and 1-butanol has already been realized in . For the further development of  as a platform organism in C-biotechnology, a broad set
of genetic tools are required. Several basic tools are available:
one replicative plasmid,  and -based suicide vectors for allelic replacement, and genetic parts
including constitutive and, to a lesser extent, inducible promoters. Yet, this basic set of genetic tools is far from being complete,
and many applications are challenged by the fact that more elaborate
genetic tools are missing for this organism. One particular
challenge is the lack of dynamic control of gene
expression in . The P promoter and its derivatives, which are widely
used in many bacteria, confer only weak or leaky expression in . As an alternative
to P, cumate-inducible promoters have
been created by combining the CuO-CymR system from  F1 to native P and
P promoters. While these hybrid promoters are strong upon induction, overexpression
of the CymR repressor itself is toxic to the cells causing severe
growth defects. Another, equally important challenge is the
availability and control
over extrachromosomal genetic elements. Only one broad host range
plasmid has been reported that replicates in  without causing severe growth defects. This plasmid
(referred to as oriV-traJ′ henceforth) has several disadvantages:
a multiple and varying copy number, limited compatibility with other
extrachromosomal genetic elements, and the need for constant selective
pressure, which restricts its application potential. Genomic integration
would circumvent using a plasmid. However, the transformation efficiency
is several orders of magnitude lower for genomic integration events,
and neutral sites for integration have not been characterized in this
organism. It also requires the construction of a suicide vector with
the desired DNA cargo flanked by homologous regions (≥0.5 kb)
and subsequent verification of integration at the desired locus. All
of these steps are work intensive and time-consuming. Many Alphaproteobacteria
have multipartite genomes composed of
a main chromosome and one or more megaplasmids. The replication of
megaplasmids is integrated into the bacterial cell cycle and occurs
once to ensure faithful transmission of genetic information. A small region within these megaplasmids, termed the  cassette, drives vertical transmission of these secondary replicons.  and  encode for partitioning proteins
analogous to the well-known ParA and ParB, while RepC is a replication
initiator protein. The origin of replication resides within the  coding sequence, whose expression is downregulated
by a short, nontranslated counter-transcribed RNA (ctRNA) typically
located in the / intergenic
region. On the basis of this distinctive region, a new family
of -type shuttle vectors was successfully designed
for  mimicking the characteristic
features of secondary replicons, , single copy
number and stable propagation. Four of
these  regions were shown to be able to replicate
in  but they affected the growth
of the organism. Here, to expand
the limited genetic toolbox of  AM1, we developed a set of inducible, orthogonal promoters of different
strengths, which can be dynamically controlled by IPTG. Furthermore,
we systematically tested new  regions to establish
a set of extrachromosomal elements (“mini-chromosomes”)
that are faithfully inherited by daughter cells and compatible with
each other. This work provides the tools for the extensive genetic
engineering of  AM1 in the future. Realization of Tight, IPTG-Inducible Promoters
with a Dynamic
Range To overcome the problem of weak and leaky expression
from IPTG-inducible promoters in , we sought to develop different -controlled
promoters that are tight and show a wide range of expression levels
after addition of the inducer. The P promoter, also known as P, was functional in  with 27-fold induction of the fluorescence
reporter gene mCherry (C). The P and P promoters were also functional and showed 21- and 6-fold
induction, respectively. A single point mutation within the O4s region
of P, resulting in P, showed
increased mCherry expression at the expense of leakiness without inducer. The T5 promoter has been used for many years for
protein overexpression
in . The P promoter from pCA24N was weakly functional in , but there was no difference in the fluorescent signal between uninduced
and induced states (data not shown). We modified the upstream region
and replaced  for a  sequence
resulting in promoter P that is tightly repressed
but only weakly induced (11-fold). While P is not
suitable for gene overexpression, it might be interesting for applications
where a protein is toxic if expressed at high levels or constitutively
within the cell. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf We also created three P hybrid promoters, P, P, and P, which are all strongly repressed in the
absence of
inducer. Upon induction, P and P exhibit
15- and 23-fold induction of mCherry, respectively. Notably, these
two promoters provide mCherry fluorescence levels that are approximately
1.5-fold higher than those of the P promoter, which drives 9% of soluble protein expression in () (C, dashed line shows
P levels). The dynamic range of the
P promoter is given in . See  for more
details on all inducible promoters tested in this study. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf In
summary, we created and identified a set of IPTG-inducible promoters
for  that range between 6- and
36-fold induction (). Additionally,
our P- and P-derived promoters range in maximum
strength between 9% and 166% of the strong P promoter, which opens new possibilities for the controlled
overexpression of proteins. Thus far, the highest expression level
reported from an inducible promoter in  was 33% of the P promoter. To facilitate the use of these new promoters
by the scientific community, we created empty vectors featuring the
respective promoter and a multiple cloning site with an optional N-terminal
Strep-II tag compatible with the Methylobrick system and pET vectors (Novagen). IPTG-inducible
promoters for . Map of pIND4-derived
plasmid for testing new promoters expressing
mCherry (A). Sequence of hybrid promoters constructed and tested (B);  sequences are shown in red. The point mutation within
the  region is underlined. Fluorescence/OD before and after addition of 1 mM IPTG (C). The dashed
line marks fluorescence/OD signal obtained using the
strong  promoter. Identification of Suitable  Regions for
Use in  AM1 http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf To establish
artificial mini-chromosomal elements in , we tested 11  regions from six different
organisms. We introduced these regions into pK18mob2, which is a “suicide”
vector unable to replicate in  (A and ). All  regions were
maintained as independent replicons in  The -based replicons were recovered for restriction
analysis and sequencing of the  region to confirm
their integrity. The only exception was Mnod-2 from , for which no colonies were obtained after electroporation,
likely due to incompatibility of the Mnod-2  region with the native genomic system. Next, we determined the growth behavior of  carrying each replicon under selective conditions, as well as replicon
stability after 96 h under nonselective conditions (B). We observed a general trend
that replicon stability and growth behavior of  were correlated. Mnod-1, also from , was very unstable, showed the lowest doubling time (B) and a long lag phase (data
not shown), suggesting that  cassettes from
this organism are generally not well compatible with . Similarly, Nham-2a and Nham-2b from  are very unstable and affected the growth. Replicons originating
from  were also unstable
in the absence of selective pressure, in particular Ocar-1 and Ocar-2a,
discouraging the use of these elements for genetic manipulations of . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf The  cassette
Mex-CM4 originating from  CM4 showed
an interesting behavior. Mex-CM4
allowed fast doubling of  AM1 under
selective conditions, while cells quickly lost the replicon in the
absence of antibiotic pressure (B and ). The  cassettes of Mex-CM4 and Mex-DM4 (discussed below) are 98% identical
to each other, except for the fact that Mex-DM4 has a longer region
downstream of  (B and ). It might be the case that Mex-CM4 lacks some  sites required for a faithful transmission of the respective replicon
to the daughter cells. This behavior makes Mex-CM4 an interesting
system to establish CRISPR-Cas in  where transient expression followed by fast extinction of the genetic
element is a desired feature. The replicons Mex-DM4 (originating
from  DM4), Mrad-JCM (from  JCM2831),
and Nham-3 (from  X-14 plasmid
3) showed the highest stability with 97%, 86%, and 77% of cells still
harboring the plasmid after 96 h without antibiotic selection, respectively.
The replicons were isolated from kanamycin resistant cells after 96
h without selective pressure and their integrity was verified by restriction
analysis (data not shown). These three replicons allowed fast doubling
times of , reaching almost wildtype-like
growth behavior, and were present at a copy number of 1 (), indicating that
they are good candidates for the construction of mini-chromosomes. regions tested in . (A) Size
and operon organization. (B) Doubling time  replicon stability (% of kanamycin resistant colonies) of  regions in the suicide vector pK18mob2. Mean and
SD from three biological replicates. Copy Number of Stable  Cassettes
in Mean ± SD from three biological
replicates. Assembly and
Testing of Mini-Chromosomes in  AM1 Next, we used the stable  regions
identified in the pK18mob2 system plus Mex-CM4 to construct mini-chromosomes
that can be shuttled between  and . The pABC vector concept and assembly strategy
is based on four basic modules each with several standardized parts
(see below). Each part is flanked by standardized linker sequences
for ligase chain reaction LCR-based assembly. This enables a fast
and convenient build-up of custom-made replicons for individual purposes.
Additional modules, if necessary, can be implemented with ease. The
position and orientation of each module () was designed to minimize crosstalk from
adjacent regions. The MCS and the promoter of the  operon are insulated by flanking transcriptional terminators. The
antibiotic resistance cassette is located downstream and in the same
orientation as the  transcriptional unit to
avoid reverse transcriptional read-through. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf We decided to assemble several mini-chromosomes
from the four basic
modules, , (1) a -based
origin for  AM1 (Mex-DM4, Nham-3,
Mrad-JCM, Mex-CM4), (2) an  origin of
replication (pMB1, p15A, or pSC101*), (3) a minimal antibiotic resistance
cassette (Kanamycin, Gentamicin, Tetracycline), and (4) a multiple
cloning site (MCS1, MCS2, MCS3) flanked by synthetic terminators (). When we assembled
and tested the final mini-chromosomes, our constructs showed similar
or higher growth rates of transformed  compared to replicative plasmids. Replicon stability of the mini-chromosomes
was confirmed  flow cytometry, showing similar
results as before (). We
also assembled pABC mini-chromosomes with a mob site for conjugation
and the Cre recombinase under control of constitutive (PcoxB) and
inducible (PL/O4/A1) promoters as additional fifth modules (see ). The modular construction of
the mini-chromosomes allowed us to
test intercompatibility of replicons while avoiding extended regions
of high sequence identity, which could lead to homologous recombination
events. Nham-3 was compatible with Mex-DM4 and Mrad-JCM, while the
two latter were not compatible with each other ( and ). In addition,
we also tested the compatibility of Mex-DM4, Mrad-JCM, and Nham-3
with the pIND4 and pTE101 vectors, respectively. All three mini-chromosomes
were fully compatible with those plasmids, further expanding the box
of available and compatible extrachromosomal genetic elements in  AM1. Replicon integrity was verified
by restriction analysis from single and double compatibility test
of pABCs and/or replicative plasmids. There were no instances of recombination,
proving all compatible replicons functioned autonomously (data not
shown). In all cases tested, double transformations were possible,
adding to the convenience of these tools for their use in genetic
engineering of  AM1. Modular
Construction of -Based Mini-Chromosomes Abbreviations: oriVMe, -based
origin of replication for  AM1;
oriVEc, origin of replication for ; SynTer-MCS,
multiple cloning site flanked by synthetic terminators. Doubling Times (h) of  with -Based Mini-Chromosomes in Single and
Double Compatibility Tests Mean ± SD
from three biological
replicates. X = not compatible. pTE100/pTE101 = oriV-traJ′,
pIND4/pTE1841 = pMG160. Areas were left blank to avoid redundancy. Here,
we provide a set of novel promoters for  AM1 that are tight and show a dynamic range of different expression
levels upon induction, even exceeding the promoter elements available
thus far. We also identified a set of  regions
that allowed us to construct different mini-chromosomal elements that
can be stably maintained at single copy number and in different combinations
with each other. In addition, we also provide  regions that allow transient expression in the absence of antibiotic
selection, which is a prerequisite to establish CRISPR-Cas-based methods
in this organism in the future. Altogether, these tools expand genetic
tools available for the engineering of , an important platform organism for a sustainable C-biotechnology.
The genetic tools developed in this study are freely available to
the community and hopefully leverage the metabolic and biotechnological
potential of  AM1. Strains and Cultivation Conditions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf AM1 strains () were grown at
30 °C in minimal medium with 123 mM methanol. Antibiotics were used accordingly: kanamycin 35 μg/mL
for  or 50 μg/mL for , gentamicin 7.5 μg/mL for  or 8–15 μg/mL for , tetracycline
4–10 μg/mL for both, chloramphenicol 34 μg/mL for , ampicillin 100 μg/mL for .  TOP10 Δ strains were supplemented with 0.3 μM diaminopimelic acid
(DAP).  was grown at 37 °C in LB
medium.  TOP10 and DH5α (Thermo
Scientific) were used for construction and amplification of all plasmids
in this study. Solid medium had 1.5% (w/v) select agar. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf Plasmids () were transferred into .  by electroporation or triparental mating. The  gene of  TOP10
was disrupted by an FRT-flanked chloramphenicol resistance cassette,
amplified from pKD3 with MC261 + MC262 primers, using the Quick and
Easy  Gene Deletion kit (Gene Bridges
K006-GVO-GB) according to manufacturer’s instructions. In brief,
20 μL of recipient  from
a well-grown culture were spotted on nonselective medium and incubated
at 30 °C for 24 h. Donor and helper  TOP10 Δ strains were spotted on top of
the recipient cells and incubated at 30 °C for 24 h. pRK2013
was used as helper plasmid. Spotted cells were recovered and plated
at appropriate dilutions on selective medium. Donor and helper  TOP10 Δ cannot grow
without DAP. Single colonies were screened for chromosomal integration
of pTE1899 by colony PCR. DNA Manipulation and Plasmid Construction http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00220/suppl_file/sb9b00220_si_001.pdf Refer to  for detailed information
on the construction
of each plasmid (). Standard molecular techniques were used for amplification, purification,
cloning and transformation of DNA. Point
mutations were generated by QuickChange Site-Directed mutagenesis
(Stratagene, La Jolla, USA). Ligase chain reaction (LCR) and primer
hybridization reactions were performed as published before. T4 Polynucleotide Kinase, FastAP, and FastDigest
restriction enzymes were obtained from Thermo Scientific, Q5 DNA polymerase
was obtained from NEB, and used according to manufacturer’s
instructions. DNA oligos were obtained from Eurofins Genomics (). Plasmid isolation and PCR product
purification was performed with NucleoSpin Plasmid and NucleoSpin
Gel and PCR Clean-up kits (Macherey Nagel), E.Z.N.A. Plasmid Mini
Kit (Omega Bio-Tek), or illustra GFX PCR DNA and Gel Band Purification
Kit (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) according to manufacturer’s
instructions. Cultures
were inoculated from
a single colony or glycerol stocks into Erlenmeyer flasks with 20
mL of the appropriate medium. Cells from late exponential phase were
diluted in fresh medium at an OD ≈ 0.05 and 180
μL of cell suspension was aliquoted into Nunclon Delta Surface
(Thermo Scientific #167008) 96-well plates. The temperature was kept
constant at 30 °C and OD was recorded every 30
min using a Tecan Infinite M200Pro (Tecan, Männedorf, Switzerland).
Data was analyzed using the GraphPad Prism 7 software. qPCR-Based
Copy Number Determination strains were grown in selective medium until OD 1.0,
adjusted to 1.38 × 10 cells (≙ 10 ng DNA/μL)
and boiled at 95 °C for 15 min to serve as templates. qPCR was
carried out in a qTOWER Thermal Cycler (Analytik Jena, Germany) using
the Takyon No ROX SYBR 2X MasterMix blue dTTP. Reactions were performed
according to the manufacturer’s instructions in a 5 μL
volume. ::pTE1179 was used
as a reference strain. Replicon copy number was calculated according
to Lee , 2006 using
primer sets JD253 + 254 and MC147 + 148. carrying pK18mob2- derivatives were grown
until OD = 1.0–1.5 in selective medium. Cell
suspensions were diluted every 24 h to an OD ≈
0.02 in nonselective medium. Dilution series were plated on agar with
and without kanamycin. Antibiotic resistance was correlated with the
presence of the assessed plasmid. The inheritance stability of selected  replicons expressing mCherry as mini-chromosomes
was assessed  flow cytometry on a BD LSRFortessaTM
SORP flow-cytometer (BD Biosciences, NJ, USA). Fluorescence was detected
using a 561 nm laser at 100 mW and a 610/20 bandpass filter. Forward and side scatter values were monitored using a 488 nm laser
at 100 mW. The acquired data was analyzed using FACSDiva software
v8.0 (BD Biosciences). The percentage of fluorescent and nonfluorescent
cells was determined from 30 000 gated events each..