To date, more than 900 naturally occurring amino acids have been identified (Lu and Freeland ) of which the 20 proteinogenic L-amino acids only constitute 2%. The majority of the residual 98% of non-proteinogenic amino acids serve as building blocks for bioactive natural compounds (Walsh et al. ). Non-proteinogenic amino acids are becoming ever more important as tools for modern drug discovery and development. On the one hand, freestanding non-proteinogenic amino acids act as antimetabolites of common amino acids and are effective inhibitors for various metabolic targets. Besides that, non-proteinogenic amino acids serve as building blocks for numerous bioactive compounds and drugs. Especially D-amino acids are of particular importance for the production of pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals. They are utilized in drugs, drug intermediates, food additives, artificial sweeteners, deodorants, insecticides, or commodity chemicals (Barredo ; Global Industry Analysts Inc. ). Annually, several tons of D-amino acids are produced. Due to an aging world population, there is a strong demand for dietary and pharmaceutical supplements, which in turn will increase the need for D-amino acids in the coming years (Global Industry Analysts Inc. ). One of the industrially relevant D-amino acids is D-phenylglycine (D-Phg), which is used as precursor for the production of various β-lactam antibiotics. D-Phg is a constituent of a number of semisynthetic penicillins (ampicillin, apalcillin (Boehringer Ingelheim), mezlocillin (Bayer), pivampicillin, LEO Pharma), etc.) and cephalosporins (cefalexin, cefradine, cefaclor, cefaloglycine, etc.) (Stevenazzi et al. ; Shiau et al. ; Schmid et al. ; Müller et al. ). Currently, D-Phg is produced in a scale > 5000 tons per year worldwide (Vedha-Peters et al. ). Until now, the amino acid is synthesized by classical or enzymatic resolution of a racemic mixture (Wegman et al. ). This production process is based on petrochemical feedstocks. The disadvantage of such a conventional method is that it includes many individual processing steps, which make the entire production process commercially less attractive. Besides that, chemical syntheses often need numerous chemicals and solvents, are energetically unfavorable, and/or produce a lot of waste substances. It would therefore be highly desirable to avail a more environmentally friendly fermentative route for the production of the unnatural amino acid D-Phg in future. With a fermentative production process, the substance of interest is produced by microorganisms obtained from renewable raw materials, such as glucose, whereby the end-products are characterized by a high chemo-, regio-, and stereo-selectivity. In terms of Phg, fermentative production was hampered by the fact that the amino acid is not accessible by any natural biosynthetic pathway from microbes or other organisms. In a previous approach, an artificial D-Phg production pathway has been designed in  that applies three different enzymes from three different organisms (HmaS-hydroxymandelate synthase from , Hmo-hydroxymandelate oxidase from  and HpgAT–D-(4-hydroxy)phenylglycine aminotransferase from ), which led to the successful production of D-Phg (Müller et al. ). Only recently, the first natural Phg biosynthetic pathway has been reported for the antibiotic producer  (Mast et al. ; Osipenkov et al. ), which can now serve as the basis for the development of a fermentative D-Phg production route. Schematic presentation of the  operon. L-Phg biosynthesis genes are shown as dashed arrows and adjacent genes as black arrows. Predicted RT-PCR amplificates (A′–E′) are shown as black lines. Transcriptional activation by PapR2 (gray ellipses) is indicated as broken arrow. Thin black arrow depicts co-transcription of genes (). Transcriptional analysis of the  operon in . Total RNA was harvested after 24 h. Left figure shows RT-PCR results with specific primers and total RNA (negative control, NC) and cDNA (positive control, PC) as template, respectively. Right figure shows RT-PCR results from amplification of  gene overlapping regions (amplificate A′, B′, C′, D′, and E′, respectively). A total of 5 μl of the 1 kb ladder from Fermentas was used as an internal standard (M) () is the producer of the streptogramin antibiotic pristinamycin, which consists of the two chemically non-related substances pristinamycin I (PI) and pristinamycin II (PII). PI is synthesized by the nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) SnbA, SnbC, and SnbDE, whereby the latter one incorporates L-Phg as the final amino acid into the growing PI peptide chain (Mast et al. ; Mast and Wohlleben ). Within the pristinamycin biosynthetic gene region, the genes , , , , and  are organized in an operon-like structure () and together encode for L-Phg biosynthesis (Mast et al. , , Osipenkov ). These genes are located downstream of the NRPS genes  and  and are under control of the pathway-specific transcriptional activator PapR2 (Mast et al. ) (Fig. ). Schematic presentation of the natural L-Phg biosynthetic pathway from  Biochemical reactions targeted by genetic engineering, such as the HpgAT catalyzed reaction resulting in D-Phg production, PaaABCDE-catalyzed Phenylacetyl-CoA degradation, and SnbDE-catalyzed incorporation of L-Phg into PI, are highlighted in black boxes L-Phg in  is suggested to originate from the shikimate pathway. As a first metabolic step, phenylpyruvate is converted to phenylacetyl-CoA by the action of a pyruvate dehydrogenase–like complex PglB/C. Phenylacetyl-CoA is oxidized to benzoylformyl-CoA via the Phg dioxygenase PglA. The CoA residue from benzoylformyl-CoA is cleaved off by the thioesterase PglD, resulting in the formation of phenylglyoxylate. In a final reaction step, phenylglyoxylate is converted to L-Phg by the aminotransferase PglE (Mast et al. ). As PglE uses L-phenylalanine as amino group donor for the transamination reaction, phenylpyruvate is formed as the α-keto acid product, which can re-enter Phg biosynthesis as a precursor (Osipenkov et al. ) (see Fig. ). γ-secretase, a target used for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease and different types of cancer L-Phg is a rare amino acid, which only occurs in a few natural products, such as the related streptogramin antibiotic virginiamycin S from  (Ningsih et al. ) or the bicyclic peptide antibiotics dityromycin, produced by  sp. strain AM-2504; GE82832 of  strain GE82832, or MBJ-0086 and MBJ-0087, isolated from  sp. 3226 (Al Toma et al. ). There is also an industrial demand for L-Phg since it is used as a component of the synthetic cyclic hexadepsipeptide pasireotide (Signifor®, Novartis), which is a somatostatin analogue used for the treatment of Cushing’s disease. L-Phg is also used for the synthesis of the antitumor compound taxol (Croteau et al. ; Denis et al. ; Wang et al. ) and the synthesis of DAPT (N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-L-alanyl]-S- t-butyl ester), which acts as an inhibitor of the human  (Kan et al. ). Besides its application for diverse pharmaceuticals, L-Phg, as well as the enantiomeric D-Phg, can be used for the synthesis of the artificial non-nutritive sweetener aspartame (Ebeling ; Janusz ; Schutt ). In this study, we describe the development of a synthetic biology-derived D-Phg pathway. Furthermore, we report on genetic engineering approaches in order to optimize Phg production in actinomycetal expression strains. Bacterial strains, plasmids, and cultivation conditions List of genes mentioned in this study with encoded functions Pyruvate dehydrogenase α-subunit Pyruvate dehydrogenase β-subunit L-phenylglycine aminotransferase D-phenylglycine aminotransferase Pristinamycin I–specific nonribosomal peptide synthetase TetR-like repressor of pristinamycin biosynthesis phenylacetyl-CoA epoxidase multicomponent enzyme system Bacterial strains, plasmids, cosmids, and primers used in this study are listed in Table . An overview of genes used for this study is given in Table . For routine cloning strategies,  XL1-Blue was used.  strains were grown in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium at 37 °C (Sambrook et al. ) supplemented with kanamycin or apramycin (50 or 100 μg/ml, respectively) when appropriate. For cultivation and harvesting of genomic DNA,  strains were grown in 100 ml of S-medium (Kieser et al. ) in 500-ml Erlenmeyer flasks (with steel springs) on an orbital shaker (180 rpm) at 28 °C. For pristinamycin production analyses, cells were grown and treated as reported previously (Mast et al. ). Transcriptional analysis by RT-PCR experiments Pr11 wild type was grown in pristinamycin inoculum and production medium as reported previously (Mast et al. ). Samples were harvested after 24 h. RNA isolation and RT-PCR procedure were carried out as described before (Mast et al. ). For RT-PCR reactions, primers RTpglfw/rv were used that anneal to overlapping regions of the  gene sequences. As an internal control, RT-PCR was performed with primers targeting the major sigma factor transcript . To exclude DNA contamination, negative controls were carried out by using total RNA as a template for each RT-PCR reaction. Construction of Phg expression plasmids For cloning of the native  operon from , the pYJM1 cosmid DNA, harboring the  genes, was used as a template in a PCR approach with the primers lpgfw/rv and KAPAHiFi™ polymerase (Peqlab). The lpgfw/rv primer pair was designed in a way that a I (5′ end) and dIII (3′ end) restriction sequence is added to the  amplificate. The ~ 6-kb  fragment was subcloned into the linear PCR cloning vector pJET1.2/blunt (Fermentas), which resulted in the construct pJET/lpg.  was isolated from pJET/lpg as a I/dIII fragment and was cloned into the I/dIII-restriction site of the expression vector pRM4 under control of the constitutive erythromycin resistance gene promoter, , resulting in the  expression construct pYM/lpg (Fig. ). On the basis of the natural  operon from  an artificial  operon was constructed. For this purpose, the I/dIII  fragment from pJET/lpg (see above) was subcloned into the I/dIII-restricted  vector pK18 (Pridmore ), resulting in construct pK18/lpg. For cloning of the  operon, a recombinant PCR approach was conducted in order to fuse the  gene from  to the  gene of . To amplify the  fragment, the pYJM1 cosmid DNA was used as a template together with primers pglDfus1/2 for PCR amplification, resulting in fragment  with a size of ~ 800 bp. The  gene (accession number AX467211) from  was synthesized de novo (Mr. Gene GmbH, Regensburg) and used as a template for PCR amplification with primers hpgATfus1/2, which resulted in the ~ 1.4-kb fragment . Primers pglDfus2 and hpgATfus1 had 20-bp complementary 5′-3′ sequences, which allowed annealing of the fragments in a recombinant PCR approach.  and  were used as templates for recombinant PCR with primers pglDfus1/hpgATfus2, resulting in the fusion product  (~ 2.2 kb).  was subcloned in the PCR cloning plasmid pDrive (Qiagen), which resulted in the construct pDrive/. The correctness of the gene sequence was verified by the primer walking method (GATC Biotech, Konstanz). The plasmid pK18/lpg was cleaved with  and the ~ 6.3-kb pK18/ fragment was ligated to the  fragment, which was excised with the same restriction enzymes from pDrive/, resulting in the construct pK18/dpg. The artificial  operon was isolated from pK18/dpg as a I/dIII fragment and was subcloned into the I/dIII-restricted pRM4 plasmid, resulting in the  expression construct pYM/dpg (Fig. ). Expression constructs with thiostrepton resistance cassettes In order to select for Phg operon containing transformants of apramycin-resistant mutants ( (Mast et al. ) and Mast et al. )), expression constructs were designed, which harbor a thiostrepton resistance cassette (). For this purpose, the  cassette was isolated as a I-restricted fragment from pDrive-thio and was cloned into the I restriction site of pRM4, pYM/lpg, and pYM/dpg, resulting in the expression constructs pYMT, pYMT/lpg, and pYMT/dpg, respectively (Fig. ). Transformation of strains and culture conditions The targeting plasmids pYM/ and pYM/ were each transferred to  Pr11,  T7, , , and  RHA1 by protoplast transformation (Kieser et al. ), resulting in the expression strains , , , , , , , , , and , respectively. Strains with the empty pRM4 vector served as control (, , , , and , respectively). All strains were inoculated from R5 agar into three independent replicates of 100 ml of preculture medium (R5 or pristinamycin production medium HT7T). R5 contained (per liter) the following: sucrose 103 g; yeast extract, 5 g; glucose, 10 g; TES ([N-tris(hydroxymethyl)methyl-2-aminoethanesulfonic acid], 5.75 g; KSO, 0.25 g; MgCl, 10.12 g; casamino acids, 0.1 g; L-proline, 3 g; KHPO, 0.05 g; CaClx2HO, 2.94 g, 2 ml of trace elements stock solution; pH 7.4 and HT7T contained (per liter): white dextrin, 10 g; NZ amine-A, 2 g; LabLemco beef powder, 1 g; yeast extract, 1 g; 1 ml of trace elements stock solution; pH 7.4 (Kieser et al. ; Folcher et al. ). Strains were cultivated in 500-ml Erlenmeyer flasks (with steel springs) on an orbital shaker (180 rpm) at 30 °C. After 72 h, 7 ml of preculture were inoculated into 100 ml of production medium (R5 or HT7T, respectively) and the main culture was grown for 24, 30, 48, 72, or 96 h, respectively. Ten milliliters of sample was harvested and centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 10 min. One milliliter of culture filtrate was used for HPLC-MS/MS analysis. Construction of mutants and mutant-derived expression strains Construction and verification of the mutants , , and , as well as construction of all mutant-derived expression strains, is described in . HPLC-MS/MS analysis of phenylglycine HPLC-MS/MS analysis has been performed as described previously (Osipenkov et al. ). Tandem MS (MS/MS) was carried out in the positive mode for phenylglycine (Phg) (precursor ion m/z 152) with the corresponding target mass. Phg amount was measured in counts corresponding to the peak height. Phg concentration was calculated by reference to a standard curve using suitable concentrations of pure Phg (Fluka). Data are presented as the averages of the results from three independent biological replicates. Phg biosynthetic genes are co-transcribed as a multi-gene operon As described above, the L-Phg biosynthetic genes () are organized in an operon-like structure () within the pristinamycin biosynthetic gene region (Fig. ) (Mast et al. ).  is localized between the genes  and , which encode PI- and PII-specific peptide synthetases, respectively (Mast et al. ). The gene  is embedded in the  region and encodes a MbtH-like protein, which is suggested to interact with SnbDE but is not directly involved in Phg biosynthesis (Mast et al. ). In order to determine if the  genes are co-transcribed and to ensure a successful transcription of the  operon in the heterologous expression studies later on, RT-PCR experiments have been conducted with RNA isolated from the  wild type and primers that anneal to overlapping regions of the  genes (Fig. ). With these experiments, amplicons were obtained, which are specific for the overlapping regions between  and  (A′),  and  (B′ ),  and  (C′),  and  (D′ ), and  and  (E′ ), respectively, revealing that all  genes are transcribed as one polycistronic mRNA and form an operon together with the Phg-specific NRPS gene  (Fig. ). Since  is located directly downstream of  with overlapping stop and start codons, respectively, and  has been shown to be regulated by PapR2, it can be estimated that , , and the  genes together form a multi-gene operon, which is under regulatory control of the pristinamycin pathway-specific activator PapR2 (Fig. ). Expression of L- and D-Phg operons in suitable host strains Phg production of the different expression strains  (, ),  (, ),  (, ),  (, ), and  (, ) grown in R5 medium. Phg production was measured at 30 h. Phg concentration is given in micrograms per liter. Data were obtained from three independent biological replicates To obtain constructs for the fermentative production of L-Phg, the native ~ 6-kb  operon from  was cloned into the integrative vector pRM4 under control of the constitutive * promoter, resulting in the expression construct pYM/lpg (Fig. ). For production of the D-Phg enantiomer, an artificial D-Phg operon () was generated on the basis of the native  operon from  In a synthetic biology approach, the gene  encoding the L-Phg aminotransferase in  was exchanged by the gene  from , which codes for a stereospecific D-Phg aminotransferase. This D-Phg aminotransferase is the only currently known L to D stereo-inverting aminotransferase (Walton et al. ). A recombinant PCR yielded the artificial  operon, which was cloned into pRM4, resulting in the expression construct pYM/dpg (Fig. ). Both plasmids, pYM/lpg and pYM/dpg, were each transferred into different actinomycetes ( Pr11,  T7,  J1074, , and  RHA1) as homologous or heterologous host strains, respectively (–OE strains; ). Strains with the empty pRM4 vector served as control (–C strains; ).  was used as expression strain because it is the natural producer of L-Phg, which is a building block for the biosynthesis of the streptogramin antibiotic PI.  was tested since it produces the structurally related non-proteinogenic amino acids hydroxy- and dihydroxy-phenylglycine, which are components of the glycopeptide antibiotic balhimycin (Pfeifer et al. ).  and  are established heterologous expression strains (Nah et al. ) and  has a well-studied, intensive aromatic compound metabolism (Yam et al. ). All strains were grown in R5 medium in triplicate. After 30-h, supernatant samples were harvested and Phg amount (given in μg/L) was determined by HPLC-MS/MS analysis. Here, it should be noted that the applied method does not allow to distinguish between different Phg enantiomers. In order to determine enantiomerism of the produced Phg compounds, chiral HPLC analyses have been performed with various expression samples. However, Phg concentrations were too low to be detected (data not shown). HPLC-MS/MS analysis revealed that Phg amount was largest in samples from  (SL) and  (SP) expression strains (> 1 μg/L), whereas only minor Phg amounts were measured for samples of  (SA),  (AB), and  (RJ) expression strains (< 0.75 μg/L) (Fig. ). No, or only trace amounts of Phg were detected in the respective pRM4 control samples (–C strains, data not shown). Interestingly, all D-Phg expression samples contained higher amounts of Phg than the respective L-Phg expression samples (Fig. ). Altogether, from all tested strains,  and  turned out to be the optimal hosts for fermentative Phg production. Optimal production media for Phg production Phg production of  Phg expression strains  and , (control: ) in R5 () and HT7T (). Phg production of  Phg expression strains  and , (control: ) in R5 () and HT7T (). Phg production was measured at 24, 48, 72, and 96 h. Phg concentration is given in micrograms per liter. Data were obtained from three independent biological replicates In order to define the best Phg production conditions, the optimal producer strains  (, ) and  (, ) were grown in two different culture media—the complex medium R5 and the pristinamycin production medium HT7T. Samples were taken at different time points (24, 48, 72, and 96 h) and Phg amount was determined by HPLC-MS/MS. Phg was detected in all  (, ) and  (, ) expression samples, whereas only trace amounts of Phg were measured in the respective pRM4 control samples (Fig. ). Overall, Phg production was generally higher (even if statistically significant only for L-Phg expression samples as shown in Fig. S2) and more consistent in HT7T medium than in R5 (Fig.  vs a, c). Interestingly, Phg concentrations decreased in nearly all media and all expression hosts after reaching the maximal level, which suggests a degradation or metabolization of the expression product. An exception was found for  expression strains in HT7T medium, where Phg production steadily increased to cultivation time point 96 h (Fig. ). Thus, Phg metabolization in  seems to be medium dependent. For  samples, Phg decrease in the pristinamycin production medium HT7T might also be explained by a subsequent incorporation of Phg into PI. Furthermore, it was observed that Phg concentrations in general were higher in D-Phg expression strains than in L-Phg expression strains, which was consistent with the data obtained from the Phg expression studies in different host strains (Fig.  vs Fig. ). D-amino acids are known for their poor metabolic usability (Elmadfa and Leitzmann ). Hence, the higher Phg amount in the D-Phg expression strains might be explained by a rather poor metabolization of the unnatural D-Phg enantiomer. Due to the observation that overall Phg production was more stable and consistent in HT7T and with regard to subsequent genetic engineering approaches targeting pristinamycin-specific genes in  host strains (see below), the pristinamycin production medium HT7T was used as Phg production medium for further analyses. Deletion of a gene of the phenylacetyl-CoA degradation pathway significantly improves Phg production in  but not in Phg production of  host strains  and , (control: ) () and  host strains  and , (control: ) () grown in HT7T. Phg production was measured at 24, 48, 72, and 96 h. Phg concentration is given in micrograms per liter. Data were obtained from three independent biological replicates In order to increase Phg production in the optimal producer strains  and , we aimed to genetically manipulate key steps within primary metabolism involved in precursor supply to direct the metabolic flux towards Phg production. As a target of manipulation, we chose the phenylacetyl-CoA degradation pathway since phenylacetyl-CoA is a suggested precursor for the biosynthesis of Phg (Mast et al. ; Osipenkov et al. ) (Fig. ). In a previous study from Zhao et al. (), it has been reported that the  () operon from  encodes a putative phenylacetyl-CoA epoxidase multicomponent enzyme system, which is responsible for the degradation of phenylacetyl-CoA (Zhao et al. ). It was suggested that derepression of the  operon in  leads to a higher flux of phenylacetyl-CoA towards the phenylacetic acid catabolic pathway and thus to less precursor supply for L-Phg biosynthesis (Zhao et al. ). By contrast, it can be assumed that an inactivation of the  genes in  drives the phenylacetyl-CoA flux towards Phg biosynthesis. Thus, we aimed to inactivate the  operon in —but also , since a homologous  operon is present in the  genome ()—and overexpress the Phg operons in the engineered mutant strains in order to increase production yields. For this purpose, the gene region  in  and , respectively, was inactivated by replacing it against a thiostrepton resistance cassette () (Supplementary File, Fig. ). This resulted in the mutants  and , respectively, in which the Phg expression constructs pYM/lpg and pYM/dpg, as well as the empty vector as a control, were each transferred to. The  control strains,  and  and the host strains , , , and  were grown in HT7T medium and supernatant samples at different time points were used for Phg production analysis. HPLC-MS/MS measurements of the samples from the engineered host strains revealed that Phg production in the  expression samples was almost the same as in the wild-type-derived expression samples (Fig.  vs Fig. ): maximal Phg production at 96 h was measured for  at 1.00 μg/L compared with 0.94 μg/L for  and 0.95 μg/L for  compared with 1.2 μg/L for  In contrast, Phg production was strongly improved for -derived expression samples (Fig.  vs Fig. ): Already after 24 h, Phg amount in  (1.57 μg/L) was 5-fold higher than in  (0.31 μg/L) and remained high until 96 h. Here, the production decline at 72 h might be an artifact since standard deviations for the -OE samples in general were quite high. Phg production was also significantly improved for  strains, where the maximal Phg production at 96 h (1.30 μg/L) was 3.7-fold higher than in non-engineered  strains (0.35 μg/L). Overall, the significant improvement of Phg production in  host strains most likely results from the directed flux of the phenylacetyl-CoA precursor towards the Phg biosynthetic pathway. The fact that Phg production was improved for -OE compared with -OE might be explained by the different enzyme kinetics of the two aminotransferases. D-amino acid transaminases, such as HpgAT (encoded in the  operon), are commonly known to have a very low transamination activity towards D-Phg (Soda and Esaki ). Thus, PglE may convert the accruing phenylglyoxylate precursor more efficiently to L-Phg than HpgAT can convert it to D-Phg. Deletion of Phg aminotransferase gene  slightly improves Phg production in Phg production of  host strains  and , (control: ) grown in HT7T. Phg production was measured at 24, 48, 72, and 96 h. Phg concentration is given in micrograms per liter. Data were obtained from three independent biological replicates In a recent study, we showed that the L-Phg aminotransferase PglE is responsible for the conversion of phenylglyoxylate to L-Phg in  (Osipenkov et al. ) (Fig. ). Deletion of  leads to an accumulation of phenylglyoxylate (Osipenkov et al. ). Due to this increased basal precursor availability, we were interested how the Phg operon expression in the  mutant () would influence production performance. Besides that, inactivation of the native  gene could deliver a genetic background for the production of enantiopure Phgs in . Thus, the  mutant was used as parental strain for the expression of the Phg operons. Strain denomination is similar as reported above and samples were treated as outlined before. HPLC-MS/MS analysis revealed that Phg production in  host strains ( and ) was overall slightly higher than in  wild-type-derived strains (Fig.  vs Fig. ): An improvement was observed for the  samples, where a maximal production of 0.56 μg/L Phg at 48 h was measured, which is an increase of 1.8-fold compared with the maximal value of 0.31 μg/L Phg at 24 h in the  sample. For  expression samples, no tremendous Phg production improvement was observed (Fig. ). Therefore, one could speculate that the slightly increased Phg rates in  may result from a somehow favorable basal phenylglyoxylate precursor supply. Deletion of the PI-NRPS gene  significantly improves Phg production in Phg production of  host strains  and , (control: ) grown in HT7T. Phg production was measured at 24, 48, 72, and 96 h. Phg concentration is given in micrograms per liter. Data were obtained from three independent biological replicates As suggested above, the decrease of Phg in  samples may be due to an incorporation of L-Phg into PI (Fig. ). Thus, a strategy to increase Phg production in  is to block PI biosynthesis. In order to do that, we inactivated the gene  in  (), which encodes the PI-specific NRPS module SnbDE that uses L-Phg as a building block for PI biosynthesis (Mast et al. ). The respective mutant  was used as expression host for the Phg operon expression. The derived host strains  and , as well as the control , were grown in HT7T and samples were analyzed for Phg production by HPLC-MS/MS. HPLC-MS/MS analysis revealed a maximal Phg production in samples  (0.87 μg/L) and  (1.27 μg/L) at 96 h, which was an increase of ~ 3-fold compared with maximal production values in wild-type-derived samples  and  (0.30 μg/L and 0.35 μg/L), respectively (Fig.  vs Fig. ). Furthermore, it was found that Phg concentration in the -derived strains increased continuously, whereas a decrease was observed in the wild-type-derived samples at later time points. Actually, the Phg production profile of the -derived strains more resembled the production profile of the  host strains (Fig.  vs Fig. ). Thus, it can be assumed that Phg production in the -derived strains is steadily increasing because Phg is not utilized for PI biosynthesis and thus accumulates, which may also happen in  because this strain does not produce pristinamycin. Deletion of the pristinamycin TetR–like regulatory gene  significantly improves Phg production in Phg production in the  host strains  and , (control: ) grown in HT7T. Phg production was measured at 24, 48, 72, and 96 h. Phg concentration is given in micrograms per liter. Data were obtained from three independent biological replicates As we had incident that Phg production performance in  depends on the pristinamycin biosynthesis capability (see above for  samples), we aimed to further enhance Phg production by using a pristinamycin superproducer as expression host. In a previous study, we showed that the  repressor mutant  produces up to ~ 300% more pristinamycin than the wild-type strain (Mast et al. ). Due to this high pristinamycin production capability, we used  as a host for Phg operon expression. The derived host strains  and , as well as the control strain , were grown in HT7T and samples were analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS for Phg production. HPLC-MS/MS data revealed that Phg production was significantly increased in -derived host strains compared with the wild-type-derived ones:  and  produced approximately 3.3-fold and 2-fold, respectively, more Phg than the wild-type-derived expression strains (: 1 μg/L; : 0.72 μg/L Phg) (Fig.  vs Fig. ). Phg production was increased especially in the  host strain, which was also observed for the other Phg precursor–engineered host strains (, , and ). Thus, Phg-related precursor engineering seems to affect more L-Phg than D-Phg biosynthesis. This might be explained by the less favorable enzymatic properties of HpgAT, as mentioned before. The reason why Phg concentration is stable or even increasing in these expression hosts might be because PI production is oversaturated with Phg precursor and thus Phg would accumulate. Overall, the improvement of Phg production in the -derived host strains most likely results from the elevated levels of precursor supply in the course of an increased pristinamycin biosynthesis. Non-proteinogenic amino acids, such as Phg, are important building blocks and precursors for the synthesis of industrial relevant pharmaceuticals and other fine chemicals. We could show that genetic engineering of suitable target genes in appropriate expression strains allows improvement of Phg production. As expression hosts, we tested different actinomycetal species. This is the first time that Phg production has been accomplished in actinomycetes. Even if Phg production was quite efficient in  expression strains,  is preferred as producer host since it offers a broader range of target genes, suitable for genetic engineering to increase production yields. The strongest Phg production improvement was observed for  expression strains with an inactivated phenylacetyl-CoA degradation pathway ( strains). Here, production levels were quite high from the beginning on, which might be the result of so far unknown feedback/feedforward control of Phg biosynthesis in . Maximal production of  was measured at ~ 1.6 μg/L Phg, which corresponds to a 4.6-fold increase compared with the production levels of wild-type-derived strains. However, also mutations of specific PI biosynthesis genes () and a pristinamycin transcriptional regulator gene () led to an increase of Phg production. Especially for these producer strains it would be interesting to also determine PI production levels in order analyze how they correlate with Phg production profiles. Furthermore, it should be investigated if D-Phg can be used as a building block for PI biosynthesis, which is not known so far. This could be assumed since Phg production was increased in both PI-NRPS deletion host strains,  and , suggesting that both Phg enantiomers are used as PI building blocks A logic strategy to further increase Phg production is to perform a combinatory genetic engineering approach and inactivate all the above-mentioned genes in . An additional target gene for further production improvement is , which encodes a SARP-type transcriptional regulator that is suggested to activate the L-Phg operon in  (Mast et al. ). Thus, additional overexpression of  in an engineered  Phg superhost could further increase production yields. Due to these multifarious manipulation opportunities,  indeed represents a good chassis strain for fermentative Phg production. However, even if production improvement worked out quite well for , the overall product concentrations are still low. Maximal production was ~ 1.6 μg/L Phg, which is still far away from mg production levels previously reported for  fermentation (Müller et al. ). In , Phg production was accomplished by expressing an artificial Phg operon, consisting of at least three genes (, , , or ) from different organisms (, , and ) in a suitable pathway-engineered  strain (Müller et al. ; Liu et al. ). Thereby, Phg production was optimized to 51.6 mg/g dry cell weight L-Phg (Liu et al. , ) and 102 mg/g dry cell weight D-Phg (Müller et al. ). In another approach, L-Phg production was accomplished in  by co-expression of a leucine dehydrogenase from  (LeuDH) and a NAD-dependent mutant formate dehydrogenase from  (FDH), which yielded 28.4 mg/g dry cell weight L-Phg (Liu et al. ). However, these values are not comparable with those of our study since production volumes are given in mg/g biomass in the  studies but were measured in micrograms per liter of Phg from culture supernatant samples in the present study. Indeed, it was not possible to correlate biomass values (dry cell weight) with Phg production outputs in  samples due to their irregular growth in liquid cultures, which leads to strong deviations in biomass values. In any way, absolute Phg concentrations for  samples are hard to determine exactly by HPLC-MS/MS quantification. What we rather would like to depict is that Phg production and optimization can clearly be followed by comparison with control strains. Notably, this is the first time that fermentative Phg production has been reported for actinomycetes. Furthermore, it is important to mention that, unlike the studies in , the precursor supply of phenylpyruvate was not modified in our strains. This is a pivotal target for further studies as usually the aromatic amino acid biosynthesis pathway in bacteria is strictly regulated and limits the precursor supply (Huccetogullari et al. ; Lee and Wendisch ; Rodriguez et al. ; Sprenger ). It was shown for  that an improved flux through the shikimate pathway by overexpressing the genes of shikimate kinase () and dehydroquinate synthase () increased the production of the aromatic antibiotic chloramphenicol (Vitayakritsirikul et al. ). Overexpression of the gene chorismate synthase () in  improved the production of the immunosuppressant tacrolimus (Wang et al. ). Furthermore, overexpression of the 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate synthase gene () and the prephenate dehydrogenase gene () in  resulted in improved balhimycin production (Thykaer et al. ). Thus, it is very likely that Phg amount can be further increased by improving precursor supply from the shikimate pathway. In our study, we could ensure and show that the final reaction, the conversion of phenylpyruvate to Phg, can be improved by deleting the competing reaction for Phg biosynthesis. -derived Phg operons indeed are interesting molecular entities for future applications. So far, the  genes from  encode the only known natural Phg biosynthesis pathway. One could assume that this pathway is already evolutionary optimized and under appropriate conditions might be more powerful than an artificially assembled pathway harboring genes from different origins. However, this would require further investigations. Overall, the Phg operons represent promising biobricks for Phg-related production processes. A purely fermentative production route has mainly been prevented by the absence of a natural Phg pathway. In this study, we could describe the functionality of the natural L-Phg operon from  and its derived D-Phg operon obtained by a synthetic biology approach. The new fermentative Phg production route serves as a basis to replace the environmentally unfriendly industrial Phg production process. Electronic supplementary material.