One main
aim of synthetic biology
is to design microorganisms with novel capabilities that could be
interesting for a huge variety of applications, such as green chemistry, bioremediation, and microbial therapies. As an integrative discipline, synthetic biology
aims to bring an engineering perspective to the design of new living
forms. Following this rationale, designer
organisms should be based on a genomic backbone (i.e., chassis), ideally
depleted of most of the functions irrelevant to its programmed purpose,
with additional modules that can be plugged into this chassis to add
novel functionalities. While several interesting modules have been
developed, most synthetic biology projects so far have revolved around a small
set of chassis strains, primarily  and . However, the adoption
of these organisms as chassis strains was mainly related to their
strong adaptation for laboratory requirements (e.g., fast growth,
efficient recombination) rather than their fulfilment of a set of
desirable features. For instance, from an engineering point of view,  could represent a reasonable starting structure
into which different modules can be introduced to develop a designer
strain for gastrointestinal therapies. In contrast,
for other environments or purposes,  might
not be the best-suited candidate to use for engineering a designer
microorganism. Indeed, it is becoming widely accepted that to move
synthetic biology from the laboratory to the field, novel chassis
strains should be generated; however, the development of such strains
is tightly linked to the establishment of advanced genome editing
tools for these less well-studied bacteria. Mycoplasma strains share several distinctive features, including
the lack of a cell wall, streamlined genomes, limited biosynthetic
capabilities, and a variant genetic code in which the UGA codon codes
for tryptophan rather than being read as a stop codon. All of these features might be of interest for
different synthetic biology concerns, such as orthogonality, biosafety,
and limited horizontal gene transfer. In other words, the naturally
reduced genomes of Mycoplasmas fit perfectly with the chassis concept
of synthetic biology. Notably, the human pathogen  arises as candidate for synthetic biology projects
because it is one of the most deeply characterized bacteria, as a
consequence of being a model organism for systems biology for over
a decade. Thus, by removing the few and well-characterized pathogenicity determinants
found in its genome, could become a suitable chassis for plugging in gene platforms to
provide the desired functions. Specifically, the natural tropism of  toward the human respiratory tract might facilitate
the development of a designer strain capable to deliver therapeutic
molecules into the lung. However, the transition from using  as a model organism for systems biology to
creating a chassis strain for synthetic biology has been hindered
so far by the historical paucity of genome editing tools for this
bacterium. There are few reports describing the achievement
of targeted gene
deletions within the Mycoplasma genus. Initially restricted to , and later expanded with
limited success to other strains, all of these
reports rely on the transformation of a nonreplicative plasmid carrying
a selectable marker surrounded by regions homologous to the sequences
that flank the target gene. In this framework, the appearance of a
mutant cell relies on the ability of the Mycoplasma recombination
machinery to perform the deletion, making direct editing of Mycoplasma
genomes an inefficient and unreliable process. In the case of the  reference strain M129, only one positively
edited clone was obtained, reflecting its poor recombination capability. This has been linked to the lack of a functional
copy of the RecU Holliday junction resolvase. Alternatively, it has been proposed that its recombination machinery
is tightly controlled by the expression of a sigma factor encoded
by the  gene, whose overexpression is rather
toxic, as inferred from data available for its orthologue MG428 in
the closely related bacterium . The poor performance of the recombination
machinery in most Mycoplasma
species has forced researchers to develop alternative strategies such
as Haystack mutagenesis. This technique
allows the isolation of clones carrying transposon insertions at the
locus of interest, through a comprehensive and iterative PCR screening
of an ordered collection of pooled random transposon insertion mutants.
Despite being a tedious and time-consuming protocol, it has become
the standard method to obtain mutants in most Mycoplasma species.
However, it cannot be considered a true genome-editing tool, as it
only allows the selection of clones in which a particular gene has
been disrupted but not deleted or edited. On the other extreme of
technical innovation, we find the chemical synthesis of whole mycoplasma
genomes and subsequent transplantation
into a recipient cell. Though strictly
this is a genome-writing rather than a genome-editing technique, the
possibilities it opens up are fascinating. However, the cost of synthesizing
a whole genome is prohibitive for most academic laboratories. Alternatively,
a more affordable strategy is to clone naturally existing Mycoplasma
genomes as yeast circular centromeric plasmids. These genomes can later be comprehensively modified using
the state-of-the-art editing tools available for yeast before their reintroduction into a recipient Mycoplasma cell (i.e.,
genome transplantation). This complete
cycle of cloning, in-yeast modification, and genome transplantation,
has led to the generation of a fully attenuated  subsp.  strain unable to cause lung lesions
in a goat animal model. Unfortunately,
all genome transplantation experiments so far have used  as the recipient cell, and only genomes from species
closely related to this strain in terms of phylogeny can be employed
as donors. Therefore, genome transplantation continues to be a bottleneck
for many synthetic biology projects and does not seem to be broadly
applicable to other species, even within the Mycoplasma genus. In this work, we developed a reliable
genome editing system for . Rather than
trying to enhance the  recombination
machinery, we developed an oligo
recombineering system based on the GP35 recombinase, a protein originally
found in the genome of the  associated
phage SPP1. A recent survey on bacterial recombinases pinpointed GP35
as the most efficient protein to perform recombineering in , a species phylogenetically
related to the Mycoplasma genus. We conducted a similar survey revealing
that, for , GP35 also outperforms other
putative recombinases in terms of recombineering efficiency. Using
GP35-based oligo recombineering, point mutations (i.e., 1-bp deletions)
could be obtained with efficiencies as high as 2% of the total amount
of cells, whereas larger modifications (i.e., 1800-bp deletions) had
efficiencies of ∼10. These editing efficiencies
were further boosted by using CRISPR/Cas9 technology to counterselect
nonedited cells. This allowed edited clones to be recovered with little
to no screening of survivor cells. We believe this technology is a
great step toward the use of  as a synthetic
biology chassis strain. Establishment of a Recombineering
System for To overcome the
lack of genome-editing tools available
for , we aimed to develop an oligo recombineering
system functional for this strain. This
technology relies on two consecutive events. The first step is the
homology-driven positioning of oligonucleotides at the lagging strand
of the replication fork, a process that in bacteria can be boosted
by phage-derived ssDNA recombinases. Subsequently,
the arranged oligonucleotide is incorporated into the newly synthesized
chromosomal copy as an Okazaki fragment, thereby mediating the introduction
of the intended modifications in the genome. The apparent simplicity
of this process, together with the universal conservation of the replication
mechanism, might lead one to assume that oligo recombineering is a
broadly portable technology capable of editing genomes independently
of the host recombination machinery. However, phage-derived recombinases
do not maintain their efficient performance across different bacterial
genera, suggesting some sort of dependence on host machinery. Indeed, it seems that the recombineering frequency
obtained depends on the phylogenetic distance between the native host
of the phage and the bacteria being engineered. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_001.pdf Prompted by these observations, we decided to survey
the mycoplasma pan-genome as well as their associated phages for the
presence of proteins orthologous to Recβ and RecT. These two
proteins from the lambda and Rac phages, respectively, are the best-characterized
and most frequently employed phage-derived ssDNA recombinases in oligo
recombineering protocols. We found three
RecT-like proteins coded by the genomes of , , and  (), which we renamed RecT, RecT, and RecT, respectively.
Our search for Mycoplasma Recβ orthologues did not produce any
relevant candidate. To further complement the screening, we wanted
to include a recombinase with a proven capacity to perform recombineering.
This led us to choose GP35, a protein recently reported to be the
most efficient phage-derived recombinase for performing genome editing
in , a species phylogenetically related to the Mycoplasma genus. The ability of the different proteins to introduce changes to the  genome by catalyzing oligo recombineering
was experimentally monitored with a recombineering sensor termed MutCm+1.
This sensor is based on a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene (), whose protein product confers resistance to chloramphenicol
(). Nevertheless, the  coding
sequence in the sensor is frame-shifted by the addition of a single
nucleotide at position 310, rendering a protein product unable to
confer resistance to the antibiotic. To correct the MutCm+1 sensor,
we designed two different oligonucleotides termed CmONsense and CmONantisense,
following the rules reported in a screening of optimized design criteria
for recombineering oligonucleotides. Both
oligonucleotides have the exact same sequence present in the region
surrounding the frame-shift included in the sensor, except for the
extra nucleotide. However, whereas CmONsense has the same orientation
as the frame-shifted  gene, the CmONantisense
oligonucleotide is antisense to the sequence of the  gene. In principle, either of the oligonucleotides could mediate
the deletion of the frame-shifted nucleotide and the consequent activation
of the  gene. However, as oligonucleotides are
incorporated as Okazaki fragments into the newly synthesized chromosome,
those targeting the lagging strand produce a substantially higher
editing rate than those binding the leading strand of the replication
fork. Thus, determining the location
of the MutCm+1 sensor within the  genome
was essential for our screen, as synthesis of a DNA strand as either
leading or lagging depends on its chromosomal location with respect
to the origin of replication. To this end, the MutCm+1 sensor was
cloned into a transposon vector and transformed into  WT cells to generate a strain termed M129MutCm+1. After clone isolation,
we used an arbitrary PCR (A-PCR) protocol to locate the transposon insertion at genome position 60107 (MPN049
locus) of the minus strand. Thus, the CmONsense oligonucleotide would
be the one targeting the lagging strand at this location and should
yield a higher number of edited cells (A). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx Four different strains, all containing
the MutCm+1 sensor and the
different recombinases found in our orthologue search (i.e., GP35,
RecT-sm, RecT-sc, and RecT-sp), were subjected to a mock transformation,
or to transformations with the editing oligos CmONsense and CmONantisense.
In addition, a control strain not expressing any recombinase was included
in this screening (B). Two hours post-transformation, serial dilutions of cells
were seeded on either nonselective plates to calculate the total amount
of cells or on -supplemented plates to determine
the amount of edited cells for each condition. These values allowed
us to calculate the editing rate (edited cells/total cells) for each
recombinase and condition (). For all strains assessed, mock transformations yielded a low proportion
of cells that were -resistant (B). The small amount of cells
observed in all the cases (i.e., ∼2 × 10)
might represent spontaneous mutants resistant to  or might arise as a consequence of poor  selective
pressure when highly concentrated dilutions are spotted. In any case,
this frequency of -resistant cells should be considered
as a background signal of our screening, as its occurrence is not
mediated by a recombineering phenomenon. The amount of -resistant cells increased in
all the strains when transformed with the CmONantisense oligonucleotide
(B). However,
the amount of edited cells barely overcame the background signal of
the screening (i.e., ∼9 × 10 vs ∼2
× 10), except for the strain expressing the GP35
recombinase, for which we detected an increase of almost 2 orders
of magnitude in the amount of -resistant cells
as compared to the background signal (1.6 × 10 vs
∼2 × 10, respectively). Moreover, the difference
between the GP35-expressing strain and all others was further increased
when transformed with CmONsense oligonucleotide (B). In this scenario, the amount
of edited (-resistant) cells was 1.6 × 10 for the strain expressing GP35, but only slightly higher
than background signal (i.e., ∼2 × 10 vs ∼2
× 10) for all other strains. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_001.pdf Altogether, these
results suggest that none of the RecT-like recombinases
are functional in , even though the
expression levels of at least RecT-sm and RecT-sc were similar to
the those in the strain expressing the GP35 recombinase (). Surprisingly, RecT-sm and RecT-sc
are annotated as a RecT family protein and a putative RecT protein,
respectively. Although it cannot be ruled out that these proteins
might behave as actual recombinases in their native organisms, it
seems that they could be carrying out alternative functions, despite
showing a moderate sequence similarity with RecT proteins. In contrast,
we found that GP35 is a functional protein that performs oligonucleotide
recombineering in  with an editing efficiency
reaching 9.8 × 10. Screening of different ssDNA recombinases to
perform oligo recombineering
in . (A) Scheme depicting the chromosome
of M129MutCm+1 strain, showing the bidirectional replication fork
that starts at the origin of replication (ori) and enlarges until
reaching the terminus of replication (ter). The plus and minus strands
follow the indicated color code; newly synthesized DNA is either continuous
(solid line) or discontinuous (dashed line). The MutCm+1 recombineering
sensor located at the minus strand of the  locus
is indicated by a green arrow, as well as the CmONsense or CmONantisense
editing oligonucleotides reflected with a color code if their sequence
is the same as present on the plus or the minus strand of the chromosome.
(B) Bar plot showing in logarithmic scale the colony-forming units
(CFU) obtained for  M129 cells carrying
the recombineering sensor (M129MutCm+1 strain) or the recombineering
sensor plus a second transposon coding for the different recombinases
(M129MutCm+1GP35, M129MutCm+1RecT, M129MutCm+1RecT, or M129MutCm+1RecT). Cells were subjected
to a mock transformation (yellow bars) or transformation with the
editing oligos CmONantisense (blue bars) or CmONsense (green bars)
and then seeded onto nonselective (gray bars) or -selective plates (yellow, blue, and green bars). Total cells (gray
bars) are calculated as the mean of CFU counted on nonselective plates
for the three transformations for each strain. The editing rate (edited
cells/total cells) obtained with the CmONsense oligonucleotide for
each strain is shown above the bars. Those differences in terms of
editing rate that were found to be statistically significant ( < 0.05) after conducting a paired  test are indicated with an asterisk (*). Error bars represent the
mean of the standard deviation (SEM) of three different biological
replicas. Optimization of GP35-Mediated
Oligo Recombineering in Our
screening identified GP35 as
the first reported recombinase capable of mediating oligonucleotide
recombineering . Yet, the editing
efficiencies obtained were still far from those reported for other
recombinase-microorganism pairs. For instance, in  expressing Recβ protein, oligo recombineering mediates 1 bp
gene editing with efficiencies as high as 2 × 10, whereas the same type of modification
is obtained at frequencies of 1.8 × 10 for  expressing Rec2 protein or at 2.5 × 10 for  expressing EF2132 protein. Consequently, we attempted to increase the efficiency by changing
some parameters of our recombineering protocol. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_001.pdf As a starting
point, we reasoned that if GP35 protein catalyzes the incorporation
of the oligonucleotide at the replication fork, a permissive window
of time should be considered to perform its task. For a slow-dividing
microorganism such as , with a doubling
time of approximately 8 h, the 2 h interval between transformation
and plate seeding employed in the initial screening might be insufficient
to ensure that the replication fork has passed at least once across
the desired locus in all the cells of the population. To test this
hypothesis, the GP35-expressing strain carrying the MutCm+1 sensor
(M129MutCm+1GP35) was transformed with the CmONsense oligonucleotide,
but this time the cells were grown under nonselective conditions for
either 2, 24, or 48 h before plate seeding ( and A). In line with our hypothesis,
when cells that received the oligonucleotide
were grown for 24 h before plating, the editing efficiency increased
to 1.3 × 10. Indeed, during the time window
between 2 and 24 h post-transformation, the total number of cells
rose almost six times (5.3 × 10 vs 3.1 × 10, respectively), whereas the numbers of edited cells increased
∼43 times (9.2 × 10 vs 4 × 10, respectively). This result further suggests that the GP35-oligo
editing mechanism is linked to the replication machinery. A similar
editing efficiency was observed when comparing 24- and 48-h post transformation
time points (1.3 × 10 vs 8.9 × 10, respectively). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx To further increase the transformation
efficiency, we fixed 24
h as the optimal time frame before plating and examined the contribution
of the amount of recombination substrate (, and B). Increasing the oligonucleotide amount from 1 to 5 μL enhanced
the editing rate almost 7 times (9.4 × 10 vs 6.3 × 10, respectively), whereas using
10 μL did not significantly improve this rate (giving 6.8 ×
10). Thus, we concluded that using 5 μL
of the editing oligonucleotide is sufficient to saturate the recombineering
process. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx Finally, we explored whether multiple electroporation
pulses could
improve editing efficiency. A similar strategy was reported to increase
the number of plasmid-transformed cells by 2–5 times in . Thus,
M129MutCm+1GP35 cells were transformed with 5 μL of CmONsense
oligonucleotide, subjected to a variable number of pulses (i.e., 1,
3, 6 or 10), and seeded on plates 24 h post-transformation ( and C). We observed a general trend of compromised
viability with increasing number of pulses: of the cells that survived
a single pulse, only ∼30% remained viable after 6 or 10 pulses.
However, the number of edited cells increased with the number of pulses,
at least until the viability of the total population started to be
severely compromised. Altogether, this screening identified 6 electroporation
pulses as the trade-off point between an increased number of edited
cells and total cell viability, resulting in an editing rate 2.3 times
higher than that obtained with one pulse (2.7 × 10 vs 1.2 × 10, respectively). In sum,
after a limited screening of a series of parameters that
could affect the recombineering process, we increased the editing
rate 165 times (from 1.6 × 10 to 2.7 ×
10). Indeed, after optimization, the frequency
of incorporation of a 1-bp deletion in  outperformed that reported for other bacteria such as () or () by 1 order of magnitude. Optimization of GP35-oligo recombineering protocol for . (A–C) Bar plots showing in logarithmic
scale the CFU obtained for the M129MutCm+1GP35 strain after transformation
with the CmONsense oligonucleotide and seeding on either nonselective
plates (gray bars) or -selective plates (green
bars). The editing rate (edited cells/total cells) is shown above
each group of bars. Those differences in terms of editing rate that
were found to be statistically significant ( <
0.05) after conducting a paired  test are indicated
with an asterisk (*). Error bars represent the SEM of three different
biological replicas. (A) Transformed cells were allowed to recover
for different time intervals prior to seeding, as indicated on the -axis. (B) M129MutCm+1GP35 cells were transformed with
different amounts of oligo, as indicated on the -axis, and seeded on plates at 24 h after transformation. (C) M129MutCm+1GP35
cells were transformed with 5 μL of the CmONsense oligo and
subjected to 1, 3, 6, or 10 electroporation pulses, as indicated on
the -axis. Cells were allowed to recover for 24
h before seeding. Cell viability for each condition is expressed as
a percentage of that observed after one electroporation pulse, as
shown below each bar. The Scale of
Genetic Modifications Affects Recombineering Efficiency http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx The
future adoption of  as a suitable
synthetic biology chassis strain would unarguably require more than
point mutations to its genome. Therefore, we determined which efficiencies
could be obtained when using GP35-mediated oligo recombineering to
carry out gene edits larger than 1 bp. To this end, we created three
new reporters in which a 50-bp, 750-bp, or 1800-bp frame-shifting
sequence was placed in the  coding sequence. Next,  WT cells were subjected to a first transformation
with transposon vectors carrying the above-mentioned sensors, and
a second transformation with the GP35-coding transposon. The resulting
clonal strains termed M129MutCm+50GP35, M129MutCm+750GP35, and M129MutCm+1800GP35
were found to harbor the sensors in the positive strand of the MPN493,
MPN582, and MPN034 loci, respectively. In line with these locations,
the CmONsense oligonucleotide was used as a recombineering substrate
for both M129MutCm+50GP35 and M129MutCm+750GP35 strains, whereas the
CmONantisense oligonucleotide was used for the M129MutCm+1800 strain
(). The three reporter strains
were then subjected to 6 electroporation pulses with 5 μL of
their corresponding oligos, and seeded on plates 24 h post-transformation.
( and A). For all three reporter strains, there was a clear anticorrelation
between recombineering efficiency and length of the attempted deletion
(A). Specifically,
the editing rate obtained for a 50-bp deletion was 8.1 × 10, which is only 3-fold lower than that observed for
a 1-bp deletion (2.7 × 10). In contrast,
deletions of 750 bp and 1800 bp occurred at much lower frequencies,
with editing rates of 3.4 × 10 and 9.5 ×
10, respectively. Collectively, these results
showed that GP35-mediated oligo recombineering can perform targeted
chromosomal deletions of various sizes, though the efficiency is affected
by the length of the deletion. Indeed, when the editing rates obtained
for each reporter strain are plotted against the deletion size, the
results adjust quite well to a decreasing power trend (B). These results are in line
with those previously reported for recombineering-mediated chromosomal
deletions in . Of note, the different recombineering sensors were incorporated
at chromosomal locations quite distant from each other (i.e., MPN049,
MPN493, MPN582, and MPN034), suggesting that the whole chromosome
is capable of being edited by GP35-mediated oligo recombineering. Efficiency of GP35-oligo recombineering for
large chromosomal modifications.
(A) Bar plot showing in logarithmic scale the CFU obtained for different
recombineering sensor strains (-axis) after transformation
with their respective editing oligos following the conditions established
in the optimization screening and seeding on nonselective medium (gray
bars) or on -selective medium (green bars). All
strains expressed GP35 recombinase and different recombineering sensors
whose activation required the deletion of 50 bp, 750 bp, or 1800 bp,
depending on the strain. The editing rate (edited cells/total cells)
obtained for each strain is shown on top of each group of bars. Those
differences in terms of editing rate that were found to be statistically
significant ( < 0.05) after conducting a paired  test are indicated with an asterisk (*). Error bars represent
the SEM of three different biological replicas. (B) Plot comparing
the size of the attempted chromosomal deletion and the editing rate
obtained for that modification. Each green rectangle represents the
mean editing rate of three independent biological replicas performed
with M129MutCm+1GP35, M129MutCm+50GP35, M129MutCm+750GP35, or M129MutCm+1800GP35
strains. Error bars represent the SEM of three different biological
replicas. Dotted line represents the decreasing power trend observed
between deletion size and efficiency. The equation describing this
trend as well as the coefficient of determination () is shown inside the square. Adaptation of CRISPR/Cas9 Technology to  as a Tool to Counterselect Nonedited Cells The main limitation
of oligo recombineering lies in its inability to select for those
cells carrying the intended modification, as the limited oligonucleotide
length precludes the inclusion of a selection marker into the chromosome
of edited cells to facilitate their identification. To solve this,
spCas9, a -derived protein
forming part of the widely known CRISPR/Cas system, has been recently repurposed as counterselection tool for
recombineering protocols given its ability
to specifically cleave a target DNA sequence in an easily reprogrammable
manner. This ability relies on short guide RNAs (sgRNAs) that guide
the endonuclease Cas9 to their complementary strand on the target
DNA, and also on the presence of a 5′-NGG-3′ consensus
sequence immediately downstream of the target site, which is called
the protospacer adjacent motif (PAM). Cas9 chromosomal cleavage is highly lethal in bacteria, presumably
due to the lack of NHEJ systems in most of the genera. This toxicity has been exploited to counterselect
nonedited cells in oligo recombineering protocols developed for different
strains. For this reason,
the transposon vector employed to introduce the GP35 recombinase into
the three reporter strains also contained a Cas9-based counterselection
platform. Specifically, this platform was composed of: (i) an inducible
system responding to anhydrotetracycline (aTc), based on the tet repressor
(TetR) and a promoter termed Pxyl/tetO2mod, (ii) a copy of the enhanced-Cas9 (eCas9) coding sequence, and (iii) a sgRNA termed eNT2 that targets the
nontemplate strand of the gene coding for the Venus fluorescent protein. Note that the sequence recognized by eNT2 sgRNA
is present in the three different recombineering sensors, as part
of the frame-shifting sequences. Thus, in principle only edited cells—that
is, those that have incorporated a recombineering oligo and consequently
deleted the  frame-shifting sequence—would
survive once eCas9 expression is induced. Nevertheless, nonedited
“escapee” cells carrying mutations that somehow affect
Cas9 activity or expression would also survive and still carry the
sequence recognized by eNT2 sgRNA in their chromosomes (also termed
Cas9 evaders). An outline of the recombineering and Cas9-mediated
counter-selection strategy can be found in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx Thus, the three different
reporter strains expressing GP35 recombinase
and the enhanced and inducible Cas9 (eiCas9) system were transformed
with either CmONsense or CmONantisense oligos and, after 24 h, seeded
on -selective or nonselective plates supplemented
with different aTc concentrations (). This screening of inducer concentrations allowed us to determine
two important parameters for the counter-selection protocol: the optimal
inducer concentration and the Cas9 evader rate. The optimal inducer
concentration is defined as the aTc dose at which the viability of
the total cells is affected without having an impact on the survival
of edited cells. For instance, in the case of M129MutCm+50GP35 strain,
this optimal inducer concentration was found at 0.66 ng/mL, a condition
that led to a 50-fold reduction in the viability of total cells (1.2
× 10 vs 2.3 × 10) without affecting
the edited population (1.5 × 10 vs 2.2 × 10). However, in the cases of the M129MutCm+750GP35 and M129MutCm+1800GP35
strains, the optimal Cas9 induction was found to take place at 1.25
ng/mL aTc (, ). Note that these three sensor strains differ in
the chromosomal location of the eiCas9 gene cassette, and this probably
accounts for the variable optimal inducer concentrations found. On
the other hand, the Cas9 evader rate is defined as the proportion
of cells that survive to eiCas9-mediated counterselection, regardless
of the inducer concentration. Thus, the ratio between survivor cells
at the highest aTc concentration and total cells when no induction
is applied allowed us to calculate the evader rate for each strain
(). Strikingly, this parameter
also showed variations depending on the strain. This suggests that
the tightness in the regulation of the eiCas9 inducible system is
also affected by the chromosomal location of the cassette, resulting
in higher evader rates for those locations favoring leaky transcription
of eiCas9 gene. In any case, is it clear that the evader rate will
influence the outcome of the recombineering–counterselection
protocol. Specifically, if the proportion of evaders is higher than
the proportion of edited cells, the selection of the latter would
require numerous clones to be screened. In contrast, if the rate of
evaders is lower than the rate of editing, virtually all cells surviving
eiCas9 expression should carry the intended modification. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_001.pdf Taking
advantage of all the data generated in the screening of
eiCas9 inducer concentrations ( and ), we compared the editing
rates obtained for each strain in the absence of eiCas9-mediated counterselection
or under optimal eiCas9 induction conditions (). For the M129MutCm+50GP35 strain, optimal
induction of eiCas9 expression boosted the editing rate from the initial
value 1.3 × 10 to 9.9 × 10 . This implies that virtually all cells surviving eiCas9 induction
are edited cells. To further confirm this, we randomly picked 20 colonies
from nonselective plates supplemented with the optimal aTc dose for
this strain, and inoculated them into a 96-well plate containing either
nonselective or -selective medium. Of note, 19
out the 20 clones analyzed were found to be chloramphenicol resistant
(). This efficient selection of
edited cells relies on the fact that, for this strain, the initial
editing rate is higher than the frequency of evaders (1.3 × 10 and 3.1 × 10, respectively).
In contrast, the initial editing rates obtained for M129MutCm+750GP35
and M129MutCm+1800GP35 strains (i.e., 4.9 × 10 and 1.1 × 10, respectively) were lower
than the Cas9 evader rate (3.9 × 10 and 8.3
× 10, respectively) ( and ). In other
words, in these two strains the number of cells that do not respond
to eiCas9 induction is higher than the amount cells that were positively
edited by oligo recombineering. As a consequence, optimal eiCas9 induction
boosted the editing rates to 1.2 × 10 in
the M129MutCm+750GP35 strain, and 6.4 × 10 in the M129MutCm+1800GP35 strain, both values being lower than the
editing rate observed in M129MutCm+50GP35 strain after eiCas9-mediated
counterselection (9.9 × 10 ) (). Nevertheless, these values
should enable the isolation of positively edited cells by analyzing
a reasonable number of clones. In the case of the M129MutCm+750GP35
strain, the analysis of 20 colonies randomly picked from nonselective
plates supplemented with 1.25 ng/mL aTc allowed the identification
of two positively edited clones, as inferred from their ability to
grow on -selective medium. This ratio of edited
clones (2/20) is substantially lower that the one obtained for 50
bp deletions (19/20), and therefore the identification of clones carrying
deletions of 750 bp would inarguably require a PCR screening. Thus,
as a proof of concept, the same 20 clones assessed in the antibiotic
selection screening were analyzed by PCR, confirming the deletion
of 750 bp in the same clones that were found to be resistant to chloramphenicol
(). Likewise, the same screenings
conducted in 20 clones of M129MutCm+1800GP35 strain led to the identification
of one positively edited clone that carried a targeted 1.8 kb deletion
(). Altogether, these results indicate that GP35 recombineering coupled
to eiCas9-mediated counterselection enables cells that have undergone
a 50-bp chromosome editing to be isolated with virtually no screening,
and allows simple and affordable screening experiments for deletions
as large as 1.8 kb. Paradoxically, small scale modifications such
as point mutations might be the hardest to obtain with this technology,
as PAM sequences required to be recognized by Cas9 might not be always
present in the vicinity of the nucleotide to be modified. However,
Cas-9 mediated counterselection is not an absolute requirement to
select for small scale modifications. Indeed, GP35 oligo recombineering
generates clones carrying point mutations with a frequency high enough
(i.e., 2.7 × 10) to allow their identification
through a screening based on allele-specific PCR protocols. Outline of the recombineering and Cas9-mediated
counterselection
strategy. Top: scheme depicting a bacterial population along the different
steps of the protocol. The initial population is composed of unedited
cells (gray bacteria) carrying a Cas9 system that is either functional
(indicated by orange chromosomes) or nonfunctional (Cas9 evaders,
indicated by red chromosomes). Upon oligo transformation, some cells
become edited (green cells), and subsequent Cas9 induction (represented
by orange or red outer shades) results in the selective killing of
unedited cells (gray bacteria with broken chromosomes) and the survival
of edited cells and Cas9 evaders. Bottom: scheme depicting the molecular
mechanisms of this selection. In counterselected cells the functional
Cas9 protein (orange molecule) forms a complex with eNT2 sgRNA (purple
molecule) that specifically cuts the frameshifting sequence (black
box) found in the MutCm sensor. The same complex is formed in edited
cells, but the oligo-mediated deletion of the frameshifting sequence
precludes Cas9-mediated cleavage of the chromosome. In Cas9 evaders,
a nonfunctional (NF) copy of Cas9 is expressed (red molecule), resulting
in the survival of cells still carrying the frameshifting sequence
on their chromosomes. Improvement of editing
rates mediated by Cas9-based counterselection.
Bar plot showing in logarithmic scale the CFU values obtained for
the indicated recombineering sensor strains after transformation with
their corresponding editing oligos and seeding on nonselective medium
(gray bars) or selective medium (green bars), nonsupplemented with
aTc (−) or supplemented with the optimal aTc dose for each
strain (+) as indicated on the -axis. The editing
rate (edited cells/total cells) obtained for each strain and experimental
condition is shown on top of each group of bars. Those differences
in terms of editing rate that were found to be statistically significant
( < 0.05) after conducting a paired  test are indicated with an asterisk (*). Error bars represent the
SEM of three different biological replicas. Research in the Mycoplasma
field has traditionally been hampered
by the lack of reliable genome editing tools. The cloning of natural
Mycoplasma genomes as yeast centromeric plasmids was a major breakthrough
that seemed to overcome the scarcity of tools for this genus. Indeed, complete genomes of several Mycoplasma species have been
cloned and modified in yeast with a variety of genome-editing techniques
such as TREC, TREC-IN, and CreasPy-cloning that take
advantage of the proficient recombination machinery found in . Perhaps the best example to illustrate the
potential of this approach is the recent report of massive genome
engineering in  using the TREC technique
that involved the multistep targeted deletion of up to 10% of the
original genome. Once the in-yeast edited genome was transplanted
into a Mycoplasma acceptor cell, a fully attenuated  strain was generated. Given that this
strain shows a host preference in principle restricted to ruminants,
it might become a standard for synthetic biology projects focused
on the veterinary field. However, synthetic biology projects focused
on human health still miss a member of the Mycoplasma genus as a suitable
chassis strain. That strain could be , as it is a bacterium that naturally infects the human respiratory
tract and is extensively characterized. Still, the few pathogenicity
determinants encoded in its genome should be removed before it can
be used therapeutically. Strikingly, the genome of  has also
been cloned as a yeast centromeric plasmid and successfully edited
using the CreasPy-cloning technique. In
spite of this, the reintroduction of this in-yeast engineered  genome into a Mycoplasma acceptor cell (i.e.,
genome transplantation) has never been reported. Therefore, although
the  genome can be edited in yeast,
the generation of  edited cells remains
unsolved. The same applies for , whose
genome has been cloned and edited in yeast but never transplanted
to generate  mutant cells. This is not surprising, as it was recently reported that
the phylogenetic distance between the donor genome and the recipient
cell constrains the efficiency of genome transplantation, requiring
around 90% of identity of the core proteome between donor and acceptor
organisms to obtain a successful outcome. As the only available acceptor cell for genome transplantation to
date is , in-yeast engineering of Mycoplasma
genomes and subsequent transplantation is a feasible approach for
only a few species. Thus, there is a need for strategies enabling
direct editing of Mycoplasma genomes without requiring the use of
yeast as the engineering platform. In this work, we report the
development of a recombineering technology
coupled to CRISPR/Cas9-based counterselection for . Our work may represent the foundation for the adoption of this
bacterium as a synthetic biology chassis strain by providing a technology
that should enable the removal of the few and well-characterized pathogenicity
determinants found in the  genome. Remarkably,
gene editing with the GP35-CRISPR/Cas9 system leaves no marks behind,
so that iterative rounds can be performed without requiring selection
marker recycling. Once the undesired elements of the naturally
streamlined genome
of  have been erased, it is likely that
novel functions can be plugged into this genomic backbone. However,
while oligo recombineering can easily mediate gene deletions, the
small size of oligonucleotides precludes the use of this technology
to mediate targeted insertion of gene cassettes. To solve this, we
envision that  sites are small enough (i.e., 34
bp) to be included into oligonucleotide molecules, which would enable
GP35-mediated generation of targeted landing platforms that can later
be loaded with the gene cassettes of interest. Notably, the functionality
of Cre/ technology has been already demonstrated
in , a
species closely related with . Finally, it should be noted that GP35 is a ssDNA recombinase from
a phage that uses  as a host. Despite
this phylogenetic distance, GP35 performs quite efficiently in , so it would not be surprising if its efficacy
is maintained across the whole Mycoplasma genus. Bacterial Strains
and Culture Conditions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx All the  strains generated in this work are described
in  and derive from the wild-type
strain M129-B7 (ATTC 29342, subtype 1, broth passage no. 35). All
strains were grown in Hayflick modified medium at 37 °C under 5% CO in tissue culture
flasks (Corning). Hayflick broth was supplemented with tetracycline
(2 μg mL), puromycin (3 μg mL), or chloramphenicol (20 μg mL) for selection of cells as needed or with anhydrotetracycline at
the indicated concentrations for inducing Cas9 expression. When growth
on the plate was required, Hayflick broth was supplemented with 0.8%
bacto agar (Difco). All strains generated in this work are available
upon request. For cloning purposes, the  NEB 5-alpha High Efficiency strain (New England Biolabs) was grown
at 37 °C in LB broth or on LB agar plates supplemented with ampicillin
(100 μg mL) http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx All of the plasmids generated
in this work were assembled following the Gibson method unless otherwise indicated. When required, IDT
Incorporation performed gene synthesis. Oligonucleotides were synthesized
by Sigma-Aldrich. Gene amplifications were carried out with Phusion
DNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) A detailed list of plasmids
and the sequences of the different modules included in them is available
in . Note that  does not require a Shine–Dalgarno region at the 5′
end of the mRNA to efficiently translate the transcripts, so the promoter
sequences indicated in  contain
the region placed immediately upstream of each of the coding sequences
controlled by them. Thus, researchers working with other Mycoplasma
species may need to define their own regulatory regions or use a recently
reported regulatory region that seems to be functional in all Mycoplasma
species. All plasmids generated in this
work are available upon request. All oligonucleotides employed for
plasmid assembly as well as details for vector construction are available
in . The correct assembly of all
plasmids was verified by Sanger sequencing (GATC biotech). The sequences
of the editing oligonucleotides employed as substrates for recombineering
are available in . The sequences
of the oligonucleotides employed for the arbitrary PCR protocol and
for the screening of edited clones are available in  and , respectively. BLAST Search of Orthologues, CLUSTALW Multiple Sequence Alignment,
and Accession Numbers of Recombinases Mycoplasma orthologues
of -derived proteins RecT (P33228) and Recβ
(P03698) were sought using BLASTp (protein–protein BLAST).
Parameters of the search were restricted to Mycoplasmas and walled
relatives (taxid: 31969), Mycoplasma phage phiMFV1 (taxid: 280702),
Mycoplasma phage MAV1 (taxid: 75590), and Mycoplasma phage P1 (taxid:
35238). RecT-associated positive hits of this search, here renamed
as RecTsm (WP_004028097.1), RecTsp (WP_127093247.1), and RecTsc (CAK99285.1),
were later aligned using CLUSTALW software taking the native -derived RecT protein as a reference. A search for
Recβ-like orthologues did not produce any positive hits. As
our search did not produce any candidate with a proven capacity to
perform recombineering, GP35 protein (CAA66543.1) was included in
the screening of recombinases. Transformations
were performed as described previously with few modifications. Briefly,  cultures
were grown to late-exponential phase in 75 cm tissue culture
flasks. The adherent layer of  cells
was washed three times with chilled electroporation buffer, scraped off, and resuspended in 500 μL
of this buffer at a concentration of approximately 10 cells mL. Next, this cell suspension was passed
10 times through a 25-gauge (G25) syringe needle, and 50 μL
aliquots were mixed with the desired DNA molecules for transformation.
For transposon vector transformations, 2 μg of DNA was added
to the mix, whereas for oligo transformations, the volumes employed
were 1, 5, or 10 μL of a 100 μM stock, corresponding to
0.1, 0.5, or 1 nmol, respectively. The mixture of DNA and cells was
adjusted to a final volume of 80 μL and transferred into 0.1
cm electrocuvettes, letting it sit for 15 min on ice before being
electroporated in a BIO-RAD Gene Pulser Xcell apparatus. The settings
employed were 1250 V/25 μF/100 Ω. After the pulse, cells
were incubated on ice for 15 min and subsequently harvested by adding
420 μL of Hayflick into the cuvette. In the case of transposon
vector transformations, cells were allowed to recover at 37 °C
for 2 h before inoculating one-fifth of the transformation volume
into a 25 cm flask filled with 5 mL of Hayflick supplemented
with the appropriate antibiotic. In those cases in which individual
clones of the transformation were required, after the 2 h of recovering
time, serial dilutions were seeded on plates, and an individual clone
was picked and expanded. In the case of oligo transformations where
several pulses were performed, cells were allowed to recover 3 min
on ice between the pulses. Later, the total volume of the transformation
was directly inoculated into T75 flasks containing 25 mL of Hayflick
medium. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx cells carrying one of the different recombineering sensors generated
in this work, a second transposon harboring one of the recombinases
screened, and in some cases also the eiCas9 system were transformed
with an editing oligo. The sequences of the editing oligos can be
found in . At the indicated post-transformation
time, transformed cells were scraped from the flask in 500 μL
of Hayflick medium. Subsequently, 10-fold serial dilutions were performed
(from −1 to −8). Dilutions were made in a total volume
of 100 μL, and 10 μL of each dilution was spotted onto
Hayflick 0.8% bacto agar plates supplemented with chloramphenicol
and/or anhydrotetracycline where required. Thus, the detection limit
of these experiments was 500 CFU. When the number of cells obtained
for a given condition was below this detection limit, the maximum
possible number of cells (i.e., 499 CFU) was considered for statistical
analyses. The editing rate is defined as the number of cells resistant
to chloramphenicol divided by the total number of cells obtained for
each condition. Paired  test analysis of the editing
rates obtained in the three biological replicates conducted for each
condition was performed using GraphPad QuickCalcs software. An asterisk
(*) was included in the figures when the difference in the editing
rate for two given conditions was found to be statistically significant
( < 0.05). The actual value of all p-values can
be found in the . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx Plasmids employed in this work
to assess the functionality of different proteins were free of protein
tags to avoid the possibility that their inclusion could affect the
activity. Therefore, to confirm the expression of the different recombinases,
a set of dedicated plasmids containing FLAG tags was constructed (). The strains carrying these tagged
constructs were grown on 25 cm flasks until reaching confluence.
The adherent layer of cells was washed twice with PBS and scraped
off in 500 μL of this buffer. Cell solution was centrifuged
(12 000, 5 min), and the resulting pellet
was lysed in 150 of lysis buffer (SDS 4%, Hepes 100 mM). Subsequently,
mycoplasma cell lysates were quantified using the Pierce BCA Protein
Assay Kit, and 10 μg of cell extracts was subjected to electrophoresis
on NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris precast polyacrylamide gels (Invitrogen).
Next, proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes using
an iBlot dry blotting system (Invitrogen). Novex Sharp Prestained
Proteins Standards allowed cutting the membrane into two pieces to
process individually. Both membrane pieces were blocked with 5% skim
milk (Sigma) in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) solution, containing 0.1%
Tween 20 (TBST). The upper membrane piece (containing proteins above
20 kDa) was probed with monoclonal anti-FLAG M2 (Sigma) as primary
antibody (1:5000) and antimouse IgG (1:10 000) conjugated to
horseradish peroxidase (Sigma) as secondary antibody. The lower membrane
piece (containing proteins below 20 kDa) was probed with anti-RL7
polyclonal serum (kind gift of Dr. Herrmann, Heidelberg University)
as primary antibody (1:1000) and antirabbit IgG (1:10 000)
coupled to horseradish peroxidase (Sigma) as secondary antibody. Blots
were developed with the Supersignal West Femto Chemiluminescent Substrate
Detection Kit (ThermoScientific), and signals were detected in a LAS-3000
Imaging System (Fujifilm). Transposon Insertion Localization by A-PCR Cultures
of the clones of interest were grown in 25 cm flasks until
reaching confluence. The adherent layer of cells was washed three
times with PBS and scraped off in 300 μL of this buffer. This
cell solution was treated with MasterPure DNA Purification Kit (Epicenter)
following the manufacturer’s instructions to isolate genomic
DNA. https://github.com/jdelgadoblanco/pentanucleotides.git https://github.com/jdelgadoblanco/pentanucleotides.git http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx The A-PCR protocol followed is a variant of the one previously
described to adapt it to  genome composition. Specifically, we modified the 3′ end
of the arbitrary oligo to mimic the most frequent pentanucleotide
sequence in the  genome that ends in
a “GC clump”. The script for finding the most frequent
pentanucleotides for a given genome and sort them by the number of
hits is available at: . The sequences of the four primers employed for A-PCR in this study
are detailed in . 96 well plates were prepared
as follows: all the perimeter wells were filled with 200 μL
of Hayflick medium as color reference. Then, the “inoculation
wells” were filled with 200 μL of Hayflick medium, the
“non-selective wells” with 150 μL of Hayflick
medium, and the “-selective wells”
with 150 μL of Hayflick medium supplemented with  at 1.25× concentration. Colonies were picked from the plates
of interest and transferred into the inoculation wells by pipetting
up and down several times. Subsequently, separate aliquots of 50 μL
were transferred from the inoculation well to both the “non-selective
well” and the “-selective well”.
Plates were incubated at 37 °C under 5% CO for 7
days before taking pictures of them with ImageScannerIII (Epson). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00022/suppl_file/sb0c00022_si_002.xlsx For the PCR screening of edited clones, a fast genomic DNA extraction
of Mycoplasma cells was performed. Briefly, cells grown in the multiwell
plates were scraped off and 100 μL of the resulting cell suspensions
were transferred to Eppendorf tubes and boiled for 10 min. Next, the
inactivated cell suspension was mixed with 20 μL of StrataClean
resin (Agilent). This mixture was incubated for 10 min at RT with
gentle mixing every 2 min before being centrifuged (10 000, 1 min). Finally, 3 μL of the resulting supernatants
was used as a template for the PCR with the screening oligos detailed
in ..