All processes
in cells are subject
to variation in the numbers or states of involved molecules. These
random fluctuations cause gene expression noise, which is the variation
of the numbers of gene products across a population of clonally identical
cells. Experimentally one can distinguish between two types of noise
that affect expression of a particular gene. Extrinsic or global noise is caused by the fluctuations of concentrations,
state, or location of factors that affect multiple genes or even the
entire cell, such as the number of ribosomes as a limiting factor
for overall protein production. Intrinsic
or gene-specific noise is caused by the stochasticity of the biochemical
reactions during each step of the expression of an individual gene,
including transcriptional (, transcription initiation),
post-transcriptional (, mRNA degradation), (co)translational
(, translation initiation) and post-translational
processes (, protein degradation). While in some cases variability in expression
within a population
of cells might be beneficial, as in the case of environmental stress
response, expression noise typically reduces
cellular fitness and is generally counter-selected. Low noise is especially important for cellular
processes that require a certain stoichiometry of involved proteins. Similarly, noise control is important to achieve reliable function
of complex synthetic genetic circuits. Consequently, several strategies for noise reduction have
been
recognized in living organisms and applied in the design of synthetic
genetic circuits. One common strategy is to use negative feedback
loops, , by transcriptional repression. However, such negative feedback control of gene
expression has been shown to have very limited efficiency and comes
at high cost. Decoupling noise from the
mean expression has also been achieved by altering the expression
of upstream regulators of the target gene or by inserting inducible promoters with different noise characteristics. In principle, noise can be effectively
controlled  the basic rate constants of gene expression. In the simplest model of gene expression, the
steady state
concentration of a protein is governed by the rate constants of four
processes: transcription, mRNA degradation, translation, and protein
degradation. Here, , the same amount of a protein
can be produced when the gene is transcribed at a high rate but transcripts
have a low translation rate, or when the gene is transcribed at a
low rate but the translation rate is high. In the first case, many
mRNA molecules are translated at a low rate, whereas in the second
case fewer transcripts are produced but translated at a higher rate.
The first scenario generally results in lower variation of protein
concentration over time, because stochasticity of transcription is
averaged out due to a high number of transcripts. Here, we describe an approach to decouple the mean
expression from
the expression noise of a gene by using two different inducers, independently
controlling the transcription rate and the mRNA degradation rate,
respectively. Stochastic simulations of an analytical model that links
gene expression to population-level distributions of protein showed
that the noise in this system is mainly governed by transcriptional
bursts at low promoter activities. Finally, we used our noise tuner
to control signaling noise and therefore the amount of conveyed information
in the yeast mating pathway, a prototypic signaling pathway for synthetic
biology. Design and Implementation
of a Noise Tuner http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00279/suppl_file/sb8b00279_si_001.pdf In order
to decouple mean gene expression levels from expression noise in , we built a system that allows
independent control of both transcription rate and mRNA degradation
rate for a specific gene. This system that we term “noise tuner”
employs a doxycycline-inducible Tet-promoter to vary mRNA production
and a ribozyme regulated by a small molecule theophylline to adjust the mRNA half-life (a). Doxycycline binds to the
constitutively expressed reverse tetracycline trans-activator (rtTA), which is then recruited to Tet-operator (TetO)
sites within the Tet-promoter and initiates transcription. The mRNA
degradation rate is controlled by a ribozyme sequence in its 3′
untranslated region (3′-UTR). This sequence folds into a stem
loop and exhibits autocatalytic endoribonuclease activity that is
inhibited by binding of theophylline, which therefore increases gene
expression (). Additionally, a
short synthetic transcriptional terminator is placed downstream of the gene. Hereinafter, we will refer to
a combination of 3′-UTR and transcriptional terminator as a
3′ regulatory region (3′-RR). For proof of concept, we genomically integrated noise tuner
modules
controlling the expression of the yellow-green fluorescent protein
mNeongreen into yeast and measured fluorescence
in single cells by flow cytometry. Additionally, our reporter strains
constitutively expressed a blue fluorescent protein mTurquoise2, which
allowed for cell-by-cell normalization of the mNeongreen signal and
thus effective elimination of extrinsic noise sources (see below). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00279/suppl_file/sb8b00279_si_001.pdf First, we tested the efficacy of expression regulation for two
different ribozymes, (L2b8–47 and L2b8-a1-t41, here termed
Ribo 1 and Ribo 2), which yielded different
absolute levels of protein expression but showed similar, approximately
13-fold, relative changes upon addition of theophylline (). If not mentioned otherwise, subsequent
results reported here were obtained with ribozyme Ribo 2, which generally
confers lower expression. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00279/suppl_file/sb8b00279_si_001.pdf Next, we tested whether the synthetic
3′-RR conferred expression
levels within the range of native yeast 3′-RRs. For this purpose,
we compared the noise tuner containing Ribo 2 to constructs with the
identical Tet-promoter and mNeongreen sequences, but different native
yeast 3′-RRs, which have been shown to result in either very
high or low reporter expression, respectively. We found that the noise tuner operates within the lower
range of expression strengths (b, upper panel); however, if required, higher overall
expression can be achieved by employing the 3′-RR with ribozyme
Ribo 1 (). We also calculated
gene expression noise in these experiments. Here, the noise in protein
levels, , fluorescence intensities, across the
population is given as the robust coefficient of variation (see ). We found that gene expression noise at
a given expression intensity correlates with the overall expression
strength conferred by a 3′-RR (b, lower panel). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00279/suppl_file/sb8b00279_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00279/suppl_file/sb8b00279_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00279/suppl_file/sb8b00279_si_001.pdf We noticed that stronger
transcriptional stimulation (, doxycycline concentration)
led to lower gene expression noise at
a given median expression level. To further explore the relationship
between transcription, mRNA degradation and noise, we adjusted steady
state expression of the noise tuner with different combinations of
doxycycline and theophylline concentrations to differentially control
transcription and mRNA degradation rates. From that, we derived a
comprehensive expression landscape () and a noise landscape that integrates the median expression of
the fluorescence marker in a population of cells with the variation
around that median (a). In the noise matrix, “isomedian” lines indicate
same median expressions that have been obtained with different combinations
of transcription and mRNA degradation rates (a). We observed that while the noise levels
at a given median expression were reduced with increasing transcription
rate, noise was not affected by changes in mRNA degradation rate.
As a consequence, when a given median expression level is reached
using high transcription rate and low transcript stability, the population
of cells exhibits a significantly (up to 2-fold) lower coefficient
of variation as compared to populations with lower transcription rate
and higher transcript half-life (b). Similar results with overall higher expression
levels were obtained when using Ribo 1 for noise tuning (), whereas no effect of theophylline
was observed for a control strain without the ribozyme (). Since the noise tuner adjusts gene-specific factors of expression,
it is expected to primarily control intrinsic noise, whereas global
expression noise should be largely removed by normalization to mTurquoise2
levels. To verify this, we performed a reduced gate size analysis,
which can be used in yeast to discriminate between extrinsic and intrinsic
contributions to the observed noise. The
analysis was done by selecting subsets of cells according to their
forward (FSC) and side scatter (SSC) signals in flow cytometric measurements.
FSC and SSC provide information about cell size and granularity, so
that by reducing the subset size by applying a smaller gate, sources
of extrinsic variation are filtered out. We found that noise for non-normalized
data was somewhat reduced for smaller, morphologically more similar
subsets of cells, while it remained virtually unchanged for normalized
data (c). We
conclude that extrinsic factors make only minor contribution to gene
expression noise in our non-normalized data and cell-wise normalization
to the constitutive reporter essentially eliminates those factors.
Noise in the populations on different ends of the same isomedian line
changes up to 2-fold. Design and benchmarking
of a noise tuning system. (a) Schematic
depiction of the noise tuner. In a Tet-ON system doxycycline activates transcription of the fluorescent
mNeongreen reporter gene by binding to the constitutively expressed
reverse tetracycline trans-activator (rtTA, not shown). Addition of
theophylline prevents mRNA degradation by disrupting the ribozyme
cleavage activity in the 3′-UTR. (b) Comparison of the noise
tuner with constructs harboring native 3′ regulatory regions
measured by flow cytometry. All constructs are identical in their
Tet promoter and mNeongreen fluorescent reporter gene and differ only
in their 3′ RRs that confer low (FZF1t, GIC1t) or high (TPS1t,
ADH1t) expression. Top panel: Dose–responses
with 0 to 12.8 ng/μL doxycycline. The noise-tuner transcript
was either unstable (0 mM theophylline, “NT”) or fully
stabilized (12.8 mM theophylline, “NT + theo”). Bottom
panel: The noise tuner exhibits similar inverse noise-median correlation
as native 3′ RRs. Noise is given as the robust coefficient
of variation (robust CV, see ). Median
fluorescence intensities normalized to a constitutively expressed
mTurquoise2 reporter gene are given in arbitrary units (a.u.). Higher
median fluorescence intensities correspond to induction with higher
doxycycline concentrations. Gene expression noise is decoupled from
mean expression by orthogonal
control of transcription rate and mRNA degradation rate. (a) Median-noise
landscape for noise-tuner expression at different combinations of
doxycycline and theophylline concentrations. Colors indicate noise;
lines indicate identical median normalized fluorescence, interpolated
from the measured data (“isomedian lines”). At intermediate
expression range, noise levels can be adjusted for a given median
expression by use of different combinations of doxycycline and theophylline.
The measured robust CV decreases when a median is reached with higher
transcription rates and correspondingly lower mRNA degradation rates.
(b) Example histograms of populations with similar median expression
but different noise settings. Populations with higher mNeongreen transcription
and mRNA degradation rates (red) display lower heterogeneity than
populations with lower rates (blue). Insets indicate the compared
populations from (a). (c) Deconvolution of measured noise. For populations
shown in (b), noise is plotted against the radius of a circular gate
around the median forward (FSC) and side scatter (SSC) values. Decreasing
gate sizes lead to more homogeneous FCS-SSC populations, effectively
filtering out the extrinsic component of the observed noise. In contrast to autofluorescence-subtracted raw
data (solid lines), noise of autofluorescence-subtracted data normalized
to a constitutively expressed mTurquoise2 reporter (dashed lines)
is virtually independent of the gate size. To further
examine the mechanisms
behind different dependencies of noise tuner mean expression and noise
on doxycycline and theophylline levels, we turned to a theoretical
analysis of the distribution of protein copy numbers in a population
of cells. In this model, the distribution
of protein levels depends on only two parameters: , where  is
the mRNA transcription rate and  is
the protein degradation rate, and , where  is
the translation rate and  is the mRNA
degradation rate (a). The parameter  corresponds to the translational
burst size—the average number of proteins translated per mRNA—while  can be interpreted as the average number of mRNA transcribed
during the lifetime of a single protein. According to the model, the
mean protein number μ per cell can be expressed as the two parameters’
productwhile the CV can be expressed
as We note that if the burst size  ≫ 1, meaning
that if a large number of protein molecules are being produced from
a single mRNA molecule, then the factor in brackets in  is approximately 1. Thus, in this
regime, the CV depends only on the parameter , , on the transcription rate and the protein degradation
rate. The burst size  is generally believed to be
large, due to the fact that for most genes the translation frequency
is greater than the mRNA decay frequency. The probability for mature mRNA molecules to encounter the translation
machinery is higher than to encounter the RNA decay machinery, leading
to multiple translation events during the lifetime of an mRNA molecule. The independence of the CV on the burst size was further confirmed
by stochastic simulations, which could reproduce the experimental
observations in a biologically reasonable parameter space (see ). While the mean protein number was maximized
when both,  and , were high, the
CV showed dependence on  but not on  (b). Consequently, the model can also reproduce the experimentally observed
decoupling of the mean protein number in a cell from its CV. c exemplifies two
pairs of simulated distributions with similar mean protein number
but different CVs and which are in qualitative agreement with the
experimental results in b. The employed two-stage model (ON model) assumes a
constantly accessible
promoter and thus, does not factor in all sources of burstiness in
transcription. The related three-stage model
(ON–OFF model) takes promoter ON and OFF states into account
to reflect heterochromatin remodeling. However, using the three-stage
model would require us to include two additional, unknown parameters  and , which
are the rates for promoter activation and deactivation, respectively.
Since we have no experimental data to constrain these parameters,
we restricted ourselves to the simpler ON model. Furthermore, we can
show that the observed behavior (CV independent of  when  ≫ 1) holds also for the ON–OFF
model. From eq 21 in ref (), we find thatThe first term corresponds
to the noise arising from transcription and translation, while the
second term corresponds solely to the noise arising from transitions
between promoter ON and OFF stages. As in , for  ≫ 1 we find
that the CV does not depend on . A simple mathematical model can reproduce the observed
median-noise
relationship. (a) Schematic depiction of the employed model. The protein
number within single cells is defined by the synthesis and degradation
rates of mRNA and protein ( and  and  and , respectively), which are used to calculate
the coefficients  and . (b) Simulated
protein number and CV as a function of  and . Lines indicate same mean protein number, colors indicate
CV. Scaling of  and  axes was
chosen to correspond to experimentally observed expression intensities
with different doxycycline and theophylline concentrations. (c) Comparison
of protein number distributions for simulated populations with different
values for  and . Insets indicate
the compared populations from (b). Populations that reach a certain
mean protein number with higher  and lower  show a smaller variance in protein number. Tuning of Information
Flow through a Signaling Pathway http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00279/suppl_file/sb8b00279_si_001.pdf Finally, we tested the operation
of the noise tuner in the context
of a cellular network to investigate whether changing the noise levels
of individual network components could change the noise of the pathway
output. We chose to probe noise sensitivity of the yeast mating pathway
(a), a prototypic
MAPK pathway and a model system for signal transduction. In haploid
yeast cells, this pathway detects and transmits a pheromone signal
emitted by cells of the opposite mating type to induce a mating response. As investment in mating carries high cost and
leads to cell-cycle arrest, induction
of the pathway normally occurs with high precision and overall low pathway noise (; compare to b). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00279/suppl_file/sb8b00279_si_001.pdf We applied the noise
tuner to control expression of an upstream
negative feedback regulator Sst2 that has been shown to act as noise
suppressor of the pathway. Instead of
measuring the regulated gene directly, in this case we quantified
the pathway output by means of a mNeongreen reporter gene controlled
by the promoter of the pathway response gene . For regulation of , we tested different combinations
of doxycycline and theophylline () and chose two that gave similar pathway output but were expected
to result in different noise levels. Two populations with these different  expression settings were stimulated with different
doses of pheromone, indeed resulting in similar pathway activity over
the range of applied pheromone concentrations (b). However, noise in the pathway output
was substantially different over essentially the whole range of output
levels (c),
with higher noise in Sst2 being unambiguously manifested in higher
signaling and consequently output noise. From this we conclude that
(i) Sst2 noise can be regulated by the noise tuner, and (ii) changes
in Sst2 noise are transmitted, at least qualitatively, through the
cascade without being filtered out. We thus demonstrate that the noise
tuner can be used for studying cellular networks, , for identifying components whose noise-characteristics are critical
for robustness of the whole network. Pathway noise impacts the
amount of information that can be conveyed
through the pathway. In order to quantify the precision at which cells
could determine the pheromone concentration we calculated the mutual
information between the input and output signals, which is a key metric
for the accuracy of a signaling pathway. We found an up to 50% change in mutual information with low-noise
compared to high-noise  settings (d). Thus, noise changes generated
by the noise tuner resulted in significant changes in signal transduction
accuracy of the mating pathway. Calibration of noise in a signaling pathway component alters noise
of pathway output. (a) Schematic depiction of the yeast pheromone
signaling (mating) pathway. Yeast cells sense pheromones secreted
by the opposite mating type  a G-protein coupled
receptor. The signal is transduced through a mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) cascade and ultimately induces the expression of pheromone
response genes (PRG), such as the upstream negative feedback regulator
Sst2. As a pathway activity readout, mNeongreen (mNG) driven by PRG
promoter P was genomically integrated. (b) Dose response
curves of the pathway reporter. Blue and red indicate high noise and
low noise condition of  expression, respectively.
Cells were stimulated for 180 min with different concentrations of
pheromone. Lines indicate medians of normalized fluorescence, shaded
areas show the corresponding median absolute deviations. Low noise
(8.5 ng/μL doxycycline) and high noise (1 ng/μL doxycycline,
10 mM theophylline) conditions for  expression
were chosen in order to achieve similar pathway responses. (c) Pathway
reporter noise at different pathway activity levels for high and low
noise  conditions. Points from left to right
indicate stimulation with increasing pheromone concentrations as in
(b). Over the whole pathway activity range, the population of yeast
cells with low noise in  expression displays
a lower robust CV in the pathway reporter output than the population
with high noise in  expression. (d) Pathway information
transmission is more precise with lower noise in  expression. Mutual information between pheromone input and pathway
output plotted against the pathway output for better comparison (see  for calculation). Precision is highest at
intermediate reporter activity and overall higher with lower noise
in Sst2. Points indicate stimulation with different pheromone concentrations
as in (b) and (c). In
this work, we present a novel approach to effectively decouple
mean and noise of yeast gene expression, allowing us to flexibly adjust
different levels for median expression and noise in clonally identical
cells. The noise tuner acts on two basic rates of gene expression,
with two small molecule inducers individually controlling transcription
and mRNA degradation rates. In this system, the transcription rate
determines the noise level, whereas adjustment of the mRNA degradation
rate allows for similar mean expression levels with different promoter
activities. We found that this is consistent with a mathematical model
of gene expression, which shows that for genes with sufficiently high
protein lifetime, transcript stability has only little effect on noise. Comparison to constructs with native 3′-RRs suggests that
the low-expression noise tuner operates at the lower end of the physiological
mean-noise space that can be conferred by 3′-RRs. A more stable
ribozyme shifts the expression toward higher levels while maintaining
the noise tuning capabilities. The noise tuners presented here can
produce more than 2-fold difference in noise over a 5-fold range of
mean expression levels. We demonstrate that the described noise control
system could be used to study noise sensitivity of cellular networks
and to identify pathway components which are critical for robustness. Noise control by regulation of mRNA levels,
as demonstrated here,
may be not only highly effective but also metabolically cheap, given
the generally low numbers of mRNA molecules, as compared to protein molecules, which are several magnitudes higher. Furthermore, due to its simplicity, the noise
tuner might find common application in the design of synthetic genetic
circuits that lack robustness if they do not contain noise dampening
modules. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00279/suppl_file/sb8b00279_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00279/suppl_file/sb8b00279_si_001.pdf All plasmids
used in this study
are listed in . Plasmids were either
cut with PmeI (New England Biolabs) or PCR-amplified to yield linear
DNA with homology sequences on both ends. All primers are listed in . For PCR-amplified DNA, the homology
was introduced by primer overhangs of at least 50 bp. PCRs were performed
using PrimeSTAR GXL DNA polymerase (Takara). The resulting single
integration constructs were transformed into  strains using a standard lithium acetate protocol. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00279/suppl_file/sb8b00279_si_001.pdf All  strains in this study
derived from haploid SEY6210 mating type  and are listed
in . The strain used for the proof
of concept of direct noise control (YMFM050) was built by transformation
of 1 μg of PmeI-digested plasmid pMFM048. The plasmid contains
the mNeongreen reporter gene, kind gift of Hyun Youk, driven by an
inducible TetO7-promoter. Downstream of the coding sequence the construct
contains the L2b8-a1-t41 inducible ribozyme, provided by Christina Smolke, and the minimal terminator sequence
T(Synth27). To construct the plasmid,
individual PCR fragments containing the parts were joined by Gibson
assembly. The ribozyme was introduced using restriction ligation  AvrII and XhoI. On the basis of YMFM050, the strains
with native 3′ RRs (YMFM101, 102, 103, 104) were constructed
by  tagging with PCR fragments created from
primers with homology overhangs and the templates pAA263, pAA207,
pAA208, pAA209, and pMFM065, respectively. The  noise mating pathway reporter strain
was constructed by  tagging of strain YAA328
with a PCR fragment derived from pAA263 to integrate the TetO7 promoter
upstream of the native  open reading frame and
subsequently integrating a PCR fragment derived from pMFM058 to replace
the native 3′ RR downstream of the  open
reading frame with the inducible ribozyme and the minimal terminator. All experiments were performed
with cells grown in low fluorescent synthetic defined media (LD).
Cells were inoculated from single colonies and grown at 30 °C
with shaking overnight for at least 16 h. Day cultures were inoculated
to an initial OD of 0.05 and grown at 30 °C with shaking for
5 to 6 h to an OD between 0.4 and 0.8 prior to the measurement. For
mating pathway stimulation experiments, media was supplemented with
2 μM casein and cells were grown to at least OD 0.2 prior to
stimulation with pheromone. For strains harboring genes controlled
by Tet-promoter and inducible ribozyme, doxycycline and theophylline
were added to the final concentrations as indicated in the results
section. Due to the low solubility in aqueous solutions, LD containing
theophylline was prepared by adding the appropriate amount of theophylline
powder directly to the media. One liter synthetic defined low
fluorescent media contains 6.9
g YNB (Formedium), 790 mg of the appropriate amino acid mix (Formedium),
and 2% glucose (Roth). Selection of transformants was done on agar
plates containing YNB, glucose and the appropriate amino acid dropout
mix, supplemented with 1.5% agar (Becton Dickinson) for transformants
with auxotrophic marker. Transformants with antibiotic marker KanMX
were selected using plates containing YPD (Roth), 1.5% agar and 500
mg/mL G418 (Formedium). Flow Cytometry Measurements and Noise Calculation Yeast
cells were grown in 24-well plates and then transferred to a 96-well
plate. Using a high throughput sampler, cells were injected into an
LSR Fortessa Special Order flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). Fluorescence
was measured with lasers of two different wavelengths; 488 nm for
mNeongreen and 447 nm for the constitutively expressed mTurquoise2.
Using the BD FACS DIVA software (BD Biosciences), cells were gated
in a FSC-A/SSC-A plot to exclude debris. Per sample, 50 000
cells from within the gate were acquired. To account for autofluorescence,
a yeast strain was measured that contained the mTurquoise2 intrinsic
control module but not the mNeongreen gene. The signal for green fluorescence
of every individual cell was compared to the distribution of the corresponding
signals of the autofluorescence strain. Treating the control distribution
as a probability distribution, a random value of that distribution
(based on the probability) was subtracted from the measured fluorescence
of each individual cell. When the value was within the range of the
background distribution, the random value was picked only from the
part of the distribution that was lower than the measured value. This
method of background subtraction works under the prerequisite that
the background fluorescence of a given cell is bounded by 0 and the
fluorescence signal of that cell. As a result, for distributions that
overlap with the distribution of the autofluorescence control, cells
toward the left end of a population are deducted a smaller value than
cells toward the right end of the population. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00279/suppl_file/sb8b00279_si_001.pdf The median absolute
deviation is given aswith the fluorescence intensity
of an individual cell, . Median and
MAD were calculated for the set of autofluorescence-subtracted values
and cells that deviated from the median by more than five times the
scaled MAD (= MAD/0.6745) were excluded from the subsequent analysis.
The resulting value for each cell was then divided by the fluorescence
value of the constitutively expressed mTurquoise2 expression control
to normalize for the general expression state of each individual cell.
Median and MAD were calculated from the resulting set of values and
outliers were removed as above. A final median and MAD was calculated
for the remaining cells. As a measure for noise, the robust coefficient
of variation (rCV) was calculated asIsomedian lines (a, 3b, ) were
plotted using MATLAB’s  function. The simulation is based on a
two-stage model of gene expression as has been analyzed by Shahrezaei
and Swain. The model describes the probability
distribution of protein numbers in a cell, based on the underlying
probabilities of mRNA synthesis , mRNA
degradation , protein synthesis  and protein degradation  (see also a). Given the assumption that the protein lifetime is much
longer than the lifetime of a transcript (), a probability distribution can
be derived
for the steady state protein number :where the production
and degradation
probabilities are reformulated as mRNA production per protein lifetime  and the translational
burst size . Γ() denotes the
gamma function to
take noninteger values into account. To confirm that the CV
becomes independent of the translational burst size  as long as  ≫ 1, we performed stochastic
simulations of the four processes above using the Gillespie formulism as was also done by Shahrezaei and Swain. We
fixed the protein half-life to be 2 h, which is a conservative estimate
based on GFP data, resulting in the protein
degradation rate . We varied
the parameter , thereby achieving a corresponding
range in values of the mRNA synthesis
rate . Up to a normalization, the set
of values for  and  were chosen
by non-negative matrix factorization (using the function  in MATLAB) of the matrix of experimental mean fluorescent values
(similar to a). Since the mean is given theoretically by ,
this provides a conversion from the doxycycline and theophylline concentrations
used in the experiment to (up to an unknown factor) the corresponding  and  values. The normalization factors
were chosen to match the experimental range of rCV and to give reasonable
values for the mean number of molecules and the burst size. Finally,
the protein synthesis rate was fixed at  = 0.11 s such that the range of mRNA half-lives
fell within the biologically expected range (minutes). The resultant
values werewhich corresponded to mRNA synthesis rates
(in units of hour) ofand
mRNA half-lives (in units of minutes)
of Simulations were performed using these
values, and the properties
of the steady-state protein distribution were compared to the experimental
result (a and b). Because the flow cytometry measurements do not
provide us with single-molecule data, reverse calculation of  and  from the experiments is only possible
in terms of an unknown conversion factor and therefore was not included
in this study. Calculation of Mutual Information Mutual information
describes how much information (in bits) from an input distribution
(here: pheromone concentrations) can be inferred from an output distribution
(here: fluorescence intensities). In the experiments described in
this study, only the output distribution is known (continuous data
sets of fluorescence intensities), whereas the input can only be described
by discrete values (20 pheromone concentrations ranging from 0 nM
to 18.75 nM). We used the formula derived in ref () to calculate the mutual
information  between a discrete data set  and a continuous data set :with the discrete probability
function () and the continuous
densities μ(, ) and μ(). We calculated (, ) for a moving window of four experimental subsets of subsequent
pheromone concentrations, considering
pheromone/fluorescence data of 45 000 cells for each subset.
For the 20 pheromone concentrations tested, this resulted in 17 values
for mutual information (first window: 1–4; last window: 17–20). We note that the absolute values of mutual information calculated
is somewhat arbitrary as it depends heavily on the number of different
inputs measured: A high-resolution dose–response with many
input pheromone concentrations contains only little mutual information
when adjacent concentrations are compared. In contrast, when only
off- and on-state of the pathway are compared (0 nM and 18.75 nM pheromone),
the mutual information increases, but the results would not allow
to quantify differences between the high-noise and the low-noise setting..