CO can be fixed
directly into diverse (carbon) compounds using sunlight and genetically
engineered cyanobacterial cell factories. Large scale applications of these cell factories are limited due
to their tendency to lose their production capability. In essence, this production instability occurs because
the commonly used heterologous metabolic pathways used in the engineering
approaches directly compete with biomass formation, which imposes
a high fitness burden on production strains. These strains thus become
susceptible to suppressor mutations, such as insertions or deletions,
that remove the fitness burden at the cost of product formation. To ensure stable production in cyanobacterial
cell factories, stable metabolic engineering approaches need to be
developed and optimized. This can be achieved with so-called
“growth-coupled production
strategies” (i.e., obligate coupling of the synthesis of a
specific target product to the growth of that cell factory), which
stabilizes production traits. When the formation of
product and biomass are aligned (i.e., obligatorily coupled), nonproducing
mutants that emerge spontaneously are outcompeted by the fitter producing
strains according to Darwinian selection principles. Although attempts have been made at engineering growth-coupled
strategies in phototrophs, implementation proved difficult. For instance, a
common principle employed in the engineering of growth-coupled strategies
is the linking of a product-forming pathway to the capacity of the
cell to regenerate energy and/or redox cofactors. This principle has
been proposed to hold for photoautotrophs but it remains to be demonstrated in the laboratory. This might
be caused by the plasticity conferred to cyanobacteria by all the
alternative electron transfer pathways through photosystems I and
II, which makes it very difficult to achieve the desired coupling. Recently we developed a method to design
growth-coupled production
strategies based on a new principle. Instead
of using energy or redox regeneration, our method is based on the
direct stoichiometric coupling of pathways responsible for the formation
of biomass precursors, to the production of target compounds. This
concept has been developed into an algorithm that can be used to “find
reactions usable in tapping side-products” (FRUITS). By analyzing
existing genome-scale metabolic models, this open source pipeline
identifies anabolic side-products that can be coupled to cell growth
by the deletion of their reutilization pathway(s). We have previously
validated FRUITS with the production of acetate in  sp. PCC6803 (hereafter, ) under photoautotrophic
conditions. Here, we have shifted the
focus to yet another product, fumarate, as simulations suggest that
it will be produced in much larger amounts (>4-fold). Furthermore, fumarate is a very interesting compound from a biotechnological
point-of-view, with multiple applications across diverse fields, such
as an acidity regulator in the food industry, a suitable building block for polymer (e.g., biodegradable plastic)
production, etc. Thus far, the majority
of fumarate is produced from refined fossilized carbon deposits by
chemical synthesis. Given the aforementioned applications of fumarate,
a sustainable and biobased route for its production would be highly
relevant. An evident inconvenience of this (or any) growth-coupled
production
strategy is that if cells do not grow, they do not produce. Particularly
at the industrial scale, cyanobacteria are often dependent on natural
solar radiation as their primary source of light and energy. This means these cultures are subject to an
oscillating light–dark cycle. Thus, during a significant amount
of time, cyanobacteria will be in the dark, a condition where no growth
may be expected, and by consequence, no product is formed. To overcome
this problem, we propose to combine different strategies of aligning
genetically engineered product formation with microbial fitness in
a single host; that is to say, to couple product formation to the
intrinsic abilities of cyanobacteria to adjust their metabolism to
suit their surrounding conditions. Here, we will demonstrate the feasibility
of engineering such a host, by coupling fumarate production to both
day and night-time metabolism. Day-Time Production of
Fumarate The analysis of the  genome-scale metabolic model (GSMM), constrained
to simulate photoautotrophic growth, reveals
that fumarate is predicted to be produced as a byproduct of specific
anabolic reactions within purine metabolism and urea metabolism and
is reassimilated through the TCA cycle via the activity of FumC (fumarase)
(). If this
single fumarate assimilation pathway is removed, by the construction
of a  deletion strain, FRUITS predicts that fumarate
will accumulate at a yield of 0.848 mmol fumarate per gDW, with a
very low impact on the growth rate (0.001 h).
In this study, we have tested this prediction by the construction
and validation of a  mutant.
Under constant illumination,  wild-type
and the  strain grow similarly during
the exponential growth phase, while, wild-type reached a slightly
higher optical density after entering the stationary phase (A). These observations
indicate that any potential growth rate difference is too small for
us to detect. Not surprisingly, there was no extracellular fumarate
production in  wild-type. In contrast,
the  strain excreted significant amounts
of fumarate throughout the cultivation (>1 mM final concentration;
see A). These
results match very nicely the  prediction
that disrupting  will result in fumarate accumulation. While undoubtedly promising, these initial simple growth
experiments
do not ensure that biomass and fumarate formation are strictly coupled.
The strict stoichiometric coupling, which we are striving to engineer,
implies that at different growth rates a linearly proportional change
in the biomass specific production rate of fumarate is obtained, and
this, remained to be tested. Schematic
overview of metabolism in  surrounding
fumarate. During day-time fumarate is produced as part
of the purine and urea metabolism. Removing the  blocks the reutilization of fumarate, causing it to accumulate and
eventually leak out. At night-time  uses
the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) to generate energy-carriers from
glycogen. Removal of the  gene, disables the OPPP
and forces the utilization of the disrupted TCA cycle. Stable fumarate production in . (A)
Cell growth (squares) and extracellular fumarate production (triangles)
of both the wild-type (purple) and the  (dark green) strain in a Multi-Cultivator illuminated with constant
light for over 200 h. (B) A linear relationship between growth rate
and biomass specific fumarate productivity. Each point represents
a single observation, and the solid line is a linear fit of all experimental
data points. The dashed line is based on  FBA simulations of the GSMM of , using
biomass maximization as the objective function. (C) Carbon partitioning
of fumarate production versus biomass at different photonfluxostat
light regimes. The red line is based on in silico FBA simulations.
(D) Stability of production of fumarate (dark green) and lactate (light
green, using strain SAA023) during prolonged
turbidostat cultivation under continuous illumination. SAA023 is a
lactate producing  mutant, expressing
the lactate dehydrogenase from  at the  genomic locus. Productivity at corresponding
time points was normalized based on the average productivity at the
first time point (set to be 100%). The shade area indicates one standard
deviation from 4 biological replicates. Error bars indicate the standard
deviations ( ≥ 2). If an error bar is not
visible, it is smaller than the size of the symbol. Fumarate Production Rate Is Proportional
to Growth Rate We tested whether fumarate production and
growth rate is coupled
in the  strain, by performing 12 independent
photonfluxostat experiments at different, yet constant, growth rates. This was achieved by dosing the biomass specific
light flux to intensities ranging from 30 to 100 μmol photons
m s OD. From all cultivations maintained at a specific growth rate, samples
were taken at multiple times during the cultivation, to quantify extracellular
fumarate concentration. Fumarate productivities were subsequently
calculated and plotted against growth rate (B). The results obtained indicate that fumarate
productivity is indeed proportional to growth rate, fully consistent
with the idea that both physiological traits are indeed coupled. Furthermore,
we compared the linear fit between the rate of fumarate productivity
and growth rate, based on our experiments, with the outcome of the
simulations using flux balance analysis (FBA) on the metabolic network reconstruction of  (B). It is
important to highlight that we did not in any way tweak the modeling
parameters, which were taken directly from the original report. Still, both sets of data match strikingly well,
corroborating that indeed the hypothesis that fumarate production
and growth rate are coupled in the  strain
seems to hold up to scrutiny. We also calculated the carbon
partitioning toward fumarate in the  strain
during the multiple cultivations carried out (C). This was calculated based on the average
optical density and fumarate concentration, between each two subsequent
sampling points. Optical density was converted to gram of dry biomass
based on a previous report. The plotted
carbon partitioning is an average of individual values obtained for
each time interval with standard deviation. We did not see any significant
changes in carbon partitioning irrespective of the biomass specific
light flux (C). This indicates that irrespective of the growth rate, as long
as cells are illuminated, the fumarate yield on biomass is constant.
This result also supports theoretical predictions stating that fumarate
production is only affected by environmental conditions to the extent
that the latter affect growth rate. In other words, fumarate production
is stoichiometrically and obligatorily coupled to growth. It is important
to note that the carbon partitioning values reported here are comparable
with most of those obtained using more conventional metabolic engineering
strategies for a wide variety of products. Genetic Stability of Fumarate Production by the  Strain Although we show that the  strain produces fumarate in a growth-coupled fashion, this is no
evidence of its (improved) genotypic stability, compared to traditional
metabolic engineering approaches. As explained before, the root of
the instability comes from Darwinian selection for fitter (i.e., faster
growing under the selected conditions) strains and the occurrence
of random mutations in the genome. For cyanobacterial cell factories,
production pathways compete directly with cellular fitness, thus mutations
resulting in the suppression or elimination of the production pathway(s)
are positively selected for. Our strain on the other hand integrates
fumarate production with biomass production, using an evolutionary
stable approach. This approach is more stable for two main reasons.
First, fumarate production is enabled via the removal of the  gene, a strategy which is stable as long cells do not
re-evolve a new fumarate assimilation pathway—an event which
we expect to be highly unlikely even on the longer time-scales potentially
deployed in industrial settings. Second, detrimental mutations impacting
the production rate can only occur in pathways that will also lower
fitness, hence evolutionary pressure will counter-select nonproducing
mutants. To test the stability of our  strain and compare its improved stability to conventional cell factories,
we performed a short-term evolution experiment. We chose conditions
in which cells are under strong selection pressure for faster growth
and in which the propagation bottlenecks are small, as these are predicted
to result in the fastest drop in productivity. Such conditions are best met under turbidostat cultivation, and so these cultivations provide the harshest
test ground to assess the stability of our production strains. We cultivated the  strain under turbidostat
conditions at its maximal growth rate (i.e., without light limitation),
for a period of over 600 h. During this period, we did not observe
any significant changes in production rate (D), a true testament to the genetic stability
of our fumarate producing strain. As a control, we tested a similar
cell factory, engineered using classical approaches, for the production
of lactate, under the same conditions.
Lactate production in SAA023 was achieved by the heterologous expression
of lactate dehydrogenase from ,
yielding an initial carbon partitioning comparable to the one here
reported for fumarate. As expected, lactate production was lost within
5 to 10 days for a culture of this strain (D). This result reinforces the stringency
with which this regime selects for fitter cells, which—when
using our novel engineering method—means the producing ones. Night-Time Production of Fumarate To address night-time
fumarate production, we once again turned to the  GSMM. We approximated night-time metabolism by simulating chemoheterotrophic
conditions with constrained glycogen utilization in the absence of
light. As for the objective function,
we initially chose to maximize ATP consumption, as  does not grow during the night but is still metabolically active,
presumably to cover cellular maintenance costs. However, these initial simulations predicted that there would be
no fumarate production for a  strain under
night-time conditions. This prediction is in contrast to our experimentally
measured night-time fumarate production rates from our  strain (A).
As mentioned previously, fumarate is produced as a byproduct of anabolic
reactions. Our data then suggests that although  does not grow at night, it still has residual anabolic activity.
We therefore decided to use the maximization of a heterotrophic growth
equation as our objective function, which also accounts for ATP consumption,
for the sake of a qualitative proxy for night-time metabolism. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00289/suppl_file/sb9b00289_si_001.pdf In the interest of further increasing
the night-time production
of fumarate, we used the algorithm OptKnock to identify gene deletions that would redirect night-time metabolic
flux toward fumarate production (). The gene of which deletion was predicted to be most significant
is , or more commonly known as . The product of the  gene catalyzes the first
reaction in the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (OPPP). FBA predicts
for the  strain under these night-time
conditions, the OPPP to be the primary mode for the production of
energy in the form of electron carriers. Additionally, the OPPP is predicted to provide precursors
for glycine production. Therefore, simulations of a Δ double mutant predict that night-time fumarate
production will increase, relative to the Δ strain, for potentially two reasons: (i) fumarate is produced as
an end-product of the TCA cycle, which provides energy carriers and
(ii) fumarate is produced as a byproduct of -proline degradation
as an alternative pathway for the production of glycine precursors.
Of these two sources, the TCA cycle is predicted to be the predominant
contributor, supplying 73% of flux associated with the increase in
night-time fumarate production. We tested the production of
fumarate by the  strain in a 12 h–12 h sinusoidal day–night
rhythm and compared its performance with the  strain. During this cultivation we used the photonfluxostat to adjust
light intensity to biomass density, in order to extend the range of
stable exponential growth. This allowed us to collect multiple samples
from similar conditions, without the complications of a turbidostat.
The biomass density and fumarate concentration were measured daily
at the beginning and end of each day period, so we could calculate
the production rate of fumarate for day and night separately. After about 100 h of cultivation, we found the  strain to reach a slightly higher biomass density (A), while the  strain produced more fumarate (A), suggesting more carbon was diverted into
fumarate by . After calculating
the specific production rate of fumarate for both strains in day and
night separately (B), we found both strains to produce fumarate at similar rates
during the day (Two-sided  test, H0:  = ,  = 0.2377).
During the night, however,  turned
out to produce fumarate at more than twice the rate of  (B). The  is designed to only produce fumarate in a growth
coupled fashion as mentioned before. However, although no significant
growth was observed during the night, we did observe fumarate production
in  during that period (B). As discussed before, this
finding supports the idea that anabolic reactions are still active
during the night. With the  strain producing as predicted by our model, we have further evidence
for anabolic reaction being active during the night. One explanation
may be found in  preparing for the day.
A more detailed study of the night-time behavior of these strains
may reveal how these reactions are regulated. We have no indication
of phenotypic instability in the  fumarate producing strain, and expect
it to be as stable as the  strain since
both were created using the same metabolic engineering design principles,
that is, relying solely on gene deletions. The evolution of a new
Zwf-like protein, as argued for the FumC, is something that is likely
to take a much larger evolutionary time than the ones typically used
in industrial settings. Stable fumarate
production around the circadian clock. (A) Cell
growth (squares), extracellular fumarate production (triangles), and
(B) fumarate productivity of both the  (dark green) and the  (green)
strain in a batch Multi-Cultivator under the 12-h-day/12-h-night cycle.
OD and fumarate concentrations were measured at every
perceived dawn and dusk. Fumarate productivity was calculated separately
for each day and night period, using the fumarate concentration differences,
while both dividing by the average OD and the time interval
between dawn and dusk. Cell dry weight was calculated based on a conversion
of OD into 148 mg L OD. The error bars indicate the standard deviations
of four replicates for the  and three
replicates for the  strain.
If an error bar is not visible, it is smaller than the size of the
symbol. We engineered a new
dual strategy cyanobacterial cell factory for
the production of fumarate, by exploiting day- and night-time metabolism.
Using a published GSSM, and the FRUITS and OptKnock algorithms, we
were able to couple fumarate to growth, during the day, and to fitness,
during the night, by introducing only two gene deletions. This is,
to the best of our knowledge, the first cyanobacterial cell factory
exploiting day- and night-time metabolism separately, in the same
host. When compared to other cyanobacterial production hosts constructed
using conventional metabolic engineering strategies, our day-time
specific productivity of fumarate comes close to the one published
for the production of butanol. This ranks
our strain in the middle among all the cyanobacterial production hosts with two very important advantages: (i) it has
been proven to be stable and (ii) it also displays night-time production.
We also showed our approach to be more stable over time when compared
to a cell factory constructed using conventional metabolic engineering
strategies. This achievement demonstrates it is possible to obtain
obligatory coupled production of carbon-rich compounds to fitness,
even in conditions without net growth. Additional insight into day-
and night-time metabolism will help to identify other pathways that
can be exploited with similar approaches. Although the contribution
of night-time production is relatively small, in the industrial settings
where these cell factories are to be implemented, similar environmental
dynamics are likely to be expected. Our
proposed metabolic engineering strategy demonstrates avenues to exploit
these dynamics. Finally, not only do we report here the first truly
stable method to produce fumarate directly from CO but
also the final production parameters obtained are the highest for
a fitness-coupled method using a photoautotrophic cell factory. Moreover,
since the coupling achieved is obligatory, evolutionary pressure can
be exploited to obtain further improvements to fitness, and consequently,
also to fumarate production. The approach taken here is applicable
to other production systems. This is of particular relevance to production
processes that, while striving for maximum production, also need to
be robust against genetic drift and need to cope with environmental
fluctuations, such as the ones exploited here in the form of day and
night. Molecular cloning was performed
in  DH5α growing either in liquid Luria–Bertani
(LB) broth at 37 °C in a shaking incubator with a shaking speed
of 200 rpm, or on solidified LB plates containing 1.5% (w/v) agar.
Antibiotics were added, when appropriate, in the medium for propagation
of a specific plasmid. Concentrations of antibiotics used, alone or
in combination, were 100 μg mL for ampicillin
and 50 μg mL for kanamycin. Glucose-tolerant  was obtained from D. Bhaya, University of
Stanford, Stanford, CA. Basic cultivation was performed in BG-11 medium
at 30 °C in an shaking incubator shaking set at 120 rpm (Innova
43, New Brunswick Scientific), under constant moderate white-light
illumination (∼30 μmol photons m s, measured with a LI-250 light meter). For  mutant construction, we added kanamycin or
nickel sulfate to the medium with a final concentration of 50 μg
mL or 20 μM, respectively. Plates with  cells were incubated at 30 °C in an incubator
with white light (∼30 μmol photons m s) and 1% CO Plasmid and
Strain Construction http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00289/suppl_file/sb9b00289_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00289/suppl_file/sb9b00289_si_001.pdf All plasmids, strains,
and primers are listed in . For
the marker-less deletion of a gene in the  chromosome, two plasmids were required (). Plasmid one contains up- and downstream homologous regions
(∼1 kb each) of the target gene, while the second plasmid has
an extra selection cassette flanked between both homologous regions.
The selection cassette consists of a kanamycin resistance fragment
and a nickel-inducible  expression fragment.
As an endoribonuclease that cleaves mRNA at any ACA triplet sequence,
MazF acts as a general inhibitor for the synthesis of all cellular
proteins. For  gene
knock out plasmids, each homologous region was amplified by PCR, using
genomic DNA of  as a template. The two
fragments were fused together and completely amplified with  DNA Polymerase (Thermo Scientific). The resulting blunt
DNA fragment was purified with a gel extraction kit (Thermo Scientific),
and provided with one extra 3′-adenosine (“A”)
by  DNA Polymerase (Thermo Scientific). Through
TA cloning, the obtained DNA fragments were ligated to the BioBrick
“T” vector pFL-AN, resulting
in pWD060. Due to the extra XbaI restriction site introduced through
primers between the two homology regions, a selection cassette with
an XbaI on both sides (from pWD42) can be easily inserted into pWD60.
The resulting plasmid is named pWD061. The  gene
knock out plasmids were constructed following the same method, with
the plasmid name pWD84 (with only  gene homologous
regions) and pWD085 (with an extra selection cassette flanked between
both  gene homologous regions). All the fragments
amplified in this study were confirmed by Sanger sequencing at Macrogen
Europe (The Netherlands). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00289/suppl_file/sb9b00289_si_001.pdf The  and  gene deletion in  was
achieved using two rounds of transformation as previously reported
(). In the first round the selection cassette is integrated into the
chromosome. The second round is to remove the selection cassette.
Briefly, for both rounds of transformation, corresponding  cells were collected either directly from
plate or from liquid culture. After being washed twice with fresh
BG-11 medium through centrifugation at 5 000 rpm for 5 min,
cells were further concentrated to a total liquid volume of 200 μL
(OD ≈ 2). Either pWD61 for  and pWD086 for  (first round) or pWD060 for  and pWD085 for  (second round)
was mixed with cells to a final concentration of 10 μg mL, and then the mixture was illuminated under moderate
light (∼30 μmol photons m s) for 4 to 6 h. Next, the mixture was spread on a commercial membrane
(Pall Corporation), resting on a BG-11 plate, with neither kanamycin
nor nickel sulfate, and incubated at 30 °C. After further illumination
for 16–24 h, the membrane with the mixture of cells was transferred
to another BG-11 plate with kanamycin (first round) or nickel sulfate
(second round). After about 1 week, the colonies that appeared were
picked and scratched sequentially on a new BG-11 plate with kanamycin
or nickel sulfate, respectively. Colonies which grew on a BG-11 plate
with kanamycin but not with nickel sulfate (first round), or on BG-11
plate with nickel sulfate but not kanamycin (second round), are candidates
for PCR confirmation (with 35 cycles). Further segregation by serial
dilution in liquid culture was applied when necessary. Strains Cultivated
in Multi-cultivator Precultures
from the glass flasks at OD around 1 to 1.5 were used
for inoculation to the Muti-Cultivator MC1000 (PSI, Czech Republic),
at a starting OD of approximately 0.05. Continuous low
light (30 μmol photons m s) was given overnight, and then light was switched to 120 μmol
photons m s until the end
of the cultivation. During the experiment, 1% CO and 99%
N was provided to the cultures through a gas mixing system
GMS 150 (PSI, Czech Republic). The growth curves were monitored by
measuring OD (Spectrophotometer Lightwave II, Biochrom),
and the supernatant was further processed for either fumarate or lactate
quantification. Batch Cultivation, Day–Night Batch
Cultivation, Prolonged
Cultivation, Fumarate and Lactate Quantification http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00289/suppl_file/sb9b00289_si_001.pdf.