Genetically encoded biosensors
represent powerful tools in strain and protein engineering as they
enable the high-throughput screening of large variant libraries by
linking an often inconspicuous production phenotype to a readily detectable
output signal. In the past years, different
biosensor concepts were introduced, namely, transcription factor (TF)-based
biosensors, Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) biosensors,
as well as RNA-based biosensors. Especially
TF-based biosensors received a lot of attention as they are easy to
construct and result in a relatively strong fluorescence signal. Biosensors of this type take advantage of transcriptional
regulator proteins, which specifically bind the molecule of interest
and drive or repress expression of a reporter gene (usually encoding
for a fluorescent protein or a selection marker). Examples for the
application of these TF-based sensor-selector systems include screening
campaigns for identifying improved producers from mutant libraries
and selecting for suitable synthetic pathway variants. Additionally, biosensors find application in synthetic sensor-actuator
systems to enable the dynamic feedback regulation of heterologous
pathways. In combination with fluorescence activated cell sorting
(FACS), such transcriptional biosensors unleash their true potential
as they allow for ultrahigh throughput screening on single cell level
and isolation of producing single cells from very large libraries. However, when considering the larger number of biosensors
constructed
over the past couple of years, studies combining transcriptional biosensors
with FACS are rather scarce. For the most part, published biosensor
screening applications are limited to agar plate or microtiter plate
screenings, or the constructed and characterized biosensors are not
put to any use at all. The transition from biosensor construction/characterization
to meaningful applications involving FACS could be hampered by several
factors. For instance, the engineered organism carrying the biosensor
might provide a good fluorescence response in cultures, but give only
a heterogeneous fluorescence response at the single cell level prohibiting
any FACS-based screening. In addition,
diffusion of the target metabolite from strong producing cells to
weak or nonproducing strain variants could result in the isolation
of mainly false-positive clones, demanding an individual and thus
laborious and expensive characterization of many individual clones. In this manuscript, we present suitable strategies by which these
causes of failure can be efficiently tackled to yield robust and reliable
biosensor-based FACS-ultrahigh-throughput screenings for protein and
metabolic engineering campaigns. In this context, we describe construction
and application of a transcriptional phenylpropanoid biosensor, which
was used to engineer an ammonia lyase in . Bacterial Strains, Plasmids, Media, and Growth
Conditions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00149/suppl_file/sb9b00149_si_001.pdf All bacterial strains and plasmids used in this
study and their
relevant characteristics are listed in . For recombinant DNA work and library construction,  DH5α and  TOP10 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) were used, respectively.
For recovery after electroporation, SOC-medium (super optimal broth
with catabolite repression) was used (20 g/L tryptone, 5 g/L yeast
extract, 0.6 g/L NaCl, 0.2 g/L KCl, 10 mM MgCl/MgSO, and
20 mM glucose, pH 7). All strains were routinely cultivated at 37
°C on plates or in liquid culture in either Lysogeny broth (LB)
medium (10 g/L tryptone, 10 g/L NaCl, and 5 g/L yeast extract) or
Yeast nitrogen base (YNB) medium containing carbenicillin (50 μg/mL)
or kanamycin (25 μg/mL), where appropriate. For the preparation of 1 l of YNB medium, 100 mL of ten-times-concentrated
YNB, containing 5.1% (cultivations 48 well and 96 well microtiter
plates) or 12.6% (protein expressions) glycerol was added to 900 mL
YNB base medium. YNB base medium contained 6 g/L KHPO, 3 g/L KHPO, and 10 g/L 3-(-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid (MOPS), pH 7. As  DH10B is leucine auxotroph, -leucine
was supplemented to a final concentration of 2 mM for all cultivations
using YNB-medium. Online monitoring
of growth and formation of fluorescence was performed in 48 well microtiter
FlowerPlates (FPs) using the BioLector cultivation system (m2p-laboratories
GmbH, Baesweiler, Germany). Formation of biomass
was recorded as the backscatter light intensity (wavelength 620 nm;
signal gain factor 25). The enhanced yellow fluorescence protein (EYFP)
fluorescence was measured as fluorescence emission at 532 nm (signal
gain factor of 30) after excitation at a wavelength of 510 nm. Specific
fluorescence was calculated as 532 nm fluorescence per 620 nm backscatter
using Biolection software version 2.2.0.6 (m2p-laboratories GmbH,
Baesweiler, Germany). The cinnamic acid
(CA) and -coumaric acid (pHCA) production assays
were performed using single
colonies from fresh plates or 10 μL from a fresh glycerol culture
to inoculate LB medium in 96 well V-bottom plates (BRAND GMBH + CO
KG, Wertheim, Germany) with a total volume of 200 μL per well.
Precultures were cultivated for 18 h (single colonies) or 8 h (inoculation
from glycerol culture) in a Multitron Pro HT Incubator (Infors AG,
Bottmingen, Suisse, 37 °C, 900 rpm, 75% humidity, 3 mm throw).
Of this preculture, 100 μL were used to inoculate 900 μL
YNB medium followed by 20 h incubation in the same Incubator. Subsequently,
YNB precultures were cooled to 25 °C and 100 μL preculture
were used to inoculate 900 μL YNB medium containing 130 μM -arabinose and either 3 mM -phenylalanine or 3 mM -tyrosine, respectively. After 16 h of cultivation (25 °C,
900 rpm, 75% humidity, 3 mm throw), product titers were determined. Standard Techniques for Molecular Cloning http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00149/suppl_file/sb9b00149_si_001.pdf Polymerase
chain reactions, DNA restrictions and ligations were performed according
to standard protocols. Enzymes were obtained
from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA) and used following
the manufacturer’s recommendations. Genes were amplified by
PCR using Pfu UltraII polymerase (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA).
Cloning of the amplified PCR products was performed using restriction
enzyme digestion and subsequent ligation or Gibson assembly. Synthesis of oligonucleotides and sequencing
of DNA using Sanger sequencing were performed by Eurofins MWG Operon
(Ebersberg, Germany). All oligonucleotides used in this study are
listed in . Error-Prone
PCR and Ammonia Lyase Library Construction The  gene was amplified
from plasmid pCBJ296 using the Clontech Diversify kit (Takara Bio
Europe, Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France) incorporating 2.3 or 4.6 mutations/kb
and assembled with pBAD plasmid, previously amplified using PCR, using
Gibson assembly. The resulting plasmid library was purified and transformed
into One Shot TOP10 electrocompetent  cells according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Plasmid
preparations were performed using Midi kits according to the manufacturer’s
recommendation (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The plasmid library was
retransformed into  pSenCA. Preparation of electrocompetent cells and electroporation
of the plasmid library was performed as described elsewhere. Deletion of
chromosomal genes
was performed using Lambda (λ)-Red recombineering. Here, the recently published plasmid pSIJ8 was used according to
the published protocol instead of the original two plasmid approach
described by Datsenko and Wanner. Fluorescence
Activated Cell Sorting (FACS) Single-cell
fluorescence was determined and cell sortings were performed using
a BD FACSAria II cell sorter (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ,
USA) equipped with a 70 μm nozzle and run with a sheath pressure
of 70 psi. A 488 nm blue solid laser was used for excitation. Forward-scatter
characteristics (FSC) were recorded as small-angle scatter and side-scatter
characteristics (SSC) were recorded as orthogonal scatter of the 488
nm laser. A 502 nm long-pass and 530/30 nm band-pass filter combination
enabled EYFP fluorescence detection. Prior to data acquisition, debris
and electronic noise were excluded from the analysis by electronic
gating in the FSC-H against SSC-H plot. Another gating step was performed
on the resulting population in the FSC-H against FSC-W plot to exclude
doublets. Fluorescence acquisition was always performed with the population
resulting from this two-step gating. For sorting applications, cells
were diluted to an OD below 0.1 where necessary using
YNB base buffer, and 200 000 cells were sorted into 5 mL reaction
tubes (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany), prefilled with 3 mL LB medium
using an in-house built adapter for 5 mL reaction tubes that was described
earlier. To minimize residual sheath
fluid in the recovery tube, sorted cells were centrifuged (10 min,
3000, 4 °C), after removal of 3 mL supernatant
and addition of 4.5 mL fresh LB medium, regeneration was performed
(16 h, 37 °C, 170 rpm.) Sort precision was always set to purity
setting and the total event rate while sorting never exceeded 16 000
events per second. FACSDiva 7.0.1 (BD Biosciences, San Jose, USA)
was used for FACS control and data analysis. FlowJo for Windows 10.4.2
(FlowJo, LLC, Ashland, OR, USA) and Prism 7.04 (GraphPad Software,
San Diego, CA, USA) were used to produce high-resolution graphics
of FACS data. Protein Purification and Enzyme Assays Selected Xal encoding genes () were recloned to enable
their expression
as fusion proteins with an N-terminal hexa histidine (His6)-tag in  DH10B Δ. Single
colonies were used to inoculate 5 mL LB and grown at 37 °C for
4 h. Afterward, 500 μL culture was used to inoculate 15 mL YNB
(0.51% glycerol as carbon source) precultures. After 16 h of cultivation
at 37 °C, these precultures were used to inoculate 100 mL YNB
(1.2% glycerol as carbon source) cultures to an OD of
0.2, which were cultivated (2 h, 37 °C, and 130 rpm) prior to
the addition of -arabinose to a final concentration of 1.3
mM. Gene expression was performed (20 h, 25 °C, and 130 rpm)
and cells were harvested (15 min, 4000, 4 °C).
After resuspension in 15 mL sonication buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 500
mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, pH 7.5) cells were disrupted using an ultrasonic
cell disruptor (Branson Ultrasonics Corporation, Danbury, CT, USA,
eight sonication cycles of 30 s, 4 °C, duty cycle 34 and output
control 8). From this, crude extracts were prepared by centrifugation
in an Avanti J25 centrifuge (Beckmann Coulter Life Sciences, Indianapolis,
IN, USA. 19 000 rcf, 45 min, 4 °C using a JA25.5 rotor).
The supernatant was applied to a gravity flow column filled with Nickel-nitrilotriacetic
acid (Ni-NTA) affinity agarose (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany, 1 mL bed
volume). Protein loaded onto the column was washed subsequently with
10 mL sonication buffer and 10 mL wash buffer (sonication buffer with
30 mM imidazole) prior to elution with 3 mL elution buffer (sonication
buffer with 300 mM imidazole) in 500 μL fractions. Protein containing
fractions were pooled and the protein solution was transferred to
a hydrated Slide-A-Lyzer dialysis cassette (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Schwerte, Germany, molecular cutoff of 10 kDa) and placed in 1 L dialysis
buffer/assay buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 at 30 °C, with 150
mM NaCl and 10% glycerol). Dialysis was performed (20 h, 4 °C,
30 rpm) and enzyme assays were always performed directly after protein
purification. Enzyme assays were performed in 96 well plates
with UV-transparent, flat bottom (Corning, New York, USA) in a Tecan
M1000 plate reader (Tecan Group, Maennedorf, Switzerland), by following
the increase in absorbance at 276 nm (CA) or 310 nm (pHCA). Twenty
μg purified enzyme was transferred to each well and warmed to
30 °C for 60 s. Directly afterward, the substrate was added to
a final volume of 200 μL using an E4XLS 100–1200 μL
multichannel pipet (Rainin Mettler-Toledo, Giessen, Germany, three
mixing steps, 100 μL mixing volume). Product formation was linear
in the 80 s used to determine the initial product formation rate and
proportional to the protein concentration used. No product formation
was detected in absence of substrate or purified enzyme. All standards were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). CA and pHCA concentrations in
cell-free cultures were determined using high performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) 1260 Infinity system equipped with an Infinity Diode Array
Detector module (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). For this, 250 μL
culture broth were centrifuged in 96 well V-bottom plates (BRAND GMBH
+ CO KG, Wertheim, Germany) in a Heraeus Multifuge X3 centrifuge (Heraeus,
Hanau, Germany, 30 min, 6000 and 8 °C) and
200 μL supernatant was transferred to a new 96 well V-bottom
plate and directly applied to the HPLC (8 °C sample chamber temperature).
LC separation of 2 μL samples was carried out with a Kinetex
1.7u C18 100-Å-pore-size column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA,
50 mm by 2.1 mm [internal diameter], 40 °C). For elution, 2%
acetic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile supplemented with 2% acetic
acid (solvent B) were used as the mobile phases at a flow rate of
1 mL/min. A gradient was used, where the amount of solvent B was changed
over the course of analysis (min 0 to 5, 15% to 90%; minute 5 to 5.5,
90% to 15%). CA and pHCA were detected by determining the absorbance
at 295 and 310 nm, respectively, and concentrations were calculated
using an appropriate standard curve. Dose–response data of
the pSenCA biosensor construct was fit using the [Agonist]  response function (variable slope) of Prism 7.04 (GraphPad
Software, San Diego, CA, USA) with a constraint of the minimal fold
induction (μ) to 1.μ, fold induction (also referred
to
as induction factor); , inducer concentration; , Hill coefficient/Hill slope; EC50, inducer concentration
resulting in an induction of 50% μ. For
the DNA sequence analysis of isolated  variants, all DNA sequences obtained from Eurofins
MWG Operon were aligned with the original  sequence for identifying single nucleotide
polymorphisms using the Clonemanager Professional software, version
9.51 (Scientific & Educational Software, Denver, CO, USA). Construction
and Characterization of the -Cinnamic Acid Biosensor
pSenCA In bacteria, plants and
fungi, ammonia lyases catalyze the nonoxidative deamination of the
aromatic amino acids -Phe (then best referred to as phenylalanine
ammonia lyases, PALs; EC 4.3.1.24) and -Tyr (then best referred
to as tyrosine ammonia lyases, TALs; EC 4.3.1.23) yielding the phenylpropanoids cinnamic acid (CA) or coumaric
acid (pHCA), respectively. This reaction
represents the committed step in the biosynthesis of biotechnologically
and pharmaceutically interesting polyphenols such as flavonoids, stilbenes,
and lignans. The biotechnological production
of plant polyphenols using microorganisms requires the functional
implementation of whole plant pathways into the producing cells. In the context of engineering microorganisms for this purpose, generally
low PAL- and TAL-activities were identified to be limiting the overall
performance of the heterologous pathway in the respective microbial
hosts. Driven by the motivation to engineer a PAL/TAL-enzyme toward
increased activity for future applications in microbial plant polyphenol
production, a biosensor for -cinnamic acid (CA)
was designed and constructed.  can catabolize
a broad range of aromatic compounds including phenylpropionic acid
(PP) and phenylpropanoids such as CA,  a dioxygenolytic
pathway, which is partly encoded by the  gene
cluster. Transcription of the  cluster is induced by HcaR, which is a LysR type transcriptional
regulator (LTTR), in the presence of PP or CA. Therefore, HcaR and its target promoter, P were selected for the construction of the plasmid-based
CA biosensor pSenCA. The biosensor pSenCA harbors the regulator gene , under control of its native promoter, P, the target promoter of HcaR, P, and the first 45 bp of  () transcriptionally fused to the -gene encoding
for the enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) (A). This translational fusion
was designed and constructed, because previous experiments with other
regulator/promoter combinations showed that the interplay between
the promoter and the 5′-end of the original open reading frame,
which has been fine-tuned by evolution, enhance the overall biosensor
response. Earlier work on the  operon showed strongly reduced expression of  in cultivations with glucose as carbon and energy source,
as the expression of  is subject to catabolite
repression. Consequently, glycerol was used
as sole carbon and energy source, resulting in a strong and homogeneous
fluorescence response upon CA supplementation. To circumvent degradation
of CA over the course of cultivation, the  operon
was subsequently deleted in  DH10B, resulting
in strain  DH10B Δ Cultures of  DH10B Δ pSenCA (hereafter referred to as  pSenCA),
were supplemented with CA and also pHCA at different concentrations
ranging from 1 μM to 1000 μM. The dose–response
curve for CA was sigmoidal, with an operational range stretching from
3 μM CA to 300 μM CA thus spanning 2 orders of magnitude
( B). The inducer
concentrations resulting in 5% (EC5) and 95% (EC95) of the maximal
fold induction are 7.5 μM CA and 126 μM CA, respectively.
The maximal fold induction determined in specific EYFP fluorescence
was 120-fold. In contrast, presence of pHCA in the culture medium
triggered a minor fluorescence response (2-fold) of pSenCA, showing
that this biosensor is indeed CA-specific. -Cinnamic acid biosensor pSenCA. (A) Schematic
of the sensor principle. Upon binding of supplemented CA, the HcaR
regulator undergoes conformational changes that enable binding to
the target promoter P and activation
of  and  expression.
(B) Dose–response plot, CA (circles) or pHCA (filled circles)
were supplemented extracellularly in eight different concentrations
ranging from 1 to 1000 μM. The biosensor response after 24 h
is shown as fold change in specific EYFP fluorescence in comparison
to the background fluorescence (no inducer). Error bars represent
standard deviations calculated from three biological replicates. CA, cinnamic acid; pHCA, coumaric acid;
EC5, inducer concentration that results in 5% of maximal fold induction;
EC95, inducer concentration resulting in 95% of maximal fold induction. Optimization of Heterologous
Gene Expression Enables CA Production
and Biosensor-Mediated Product Detection in http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00149/suppl_file/sb9b00149_si_001.pdf Subsequently, a codon-optimized synthetic gene for the
aromatic amino acid ammonia lyase Xal, originating from , was introduced into  pSenCA. In a previous study, this enzyme stood out among 21 other
ammonia lyases as highly active enzyme having both PAL- and TAL-activities. Here, the -arabinose (-Ara)
inducible pBAD expression system was used for  expression in  as it allows for tightly controlled and titratable heterologous
gene expression. For optimization of  expression in the resulting
strain  pSenCA pBAD- at microtiter plate scale, five -Ara concentrations (13 μM, 130 μM, 1.3 mM, 13
mM, and 130 mM) were evaluated. All cultivations were performed with
supplementation of 3 mM -Phe, which served as Xal substrate. The performed microtiter plate cultivations in a biolector
allowed for the monitoring of EYFP fluorescence over the whole cultivation
time of 48 h ().
Interestingly, low inducer concentrations (13 μM and 130 μM)
ultimately resulted in the highest specific biosensor response, whereas
induction of gene expression at higher -Ara concentrations
(1.3, 13, and 130 mM) appeared to impede formation of fluorescence.
In addition, with increasing -Ara concentrations, growth
rate and final biomass formation were reduced. Since different -Ara concentrations are not known to be problematic for the
cellular metabolism, it was concluded that the reduced fluorescence
formation is a consequence of the metabolic burden of high level  expression. Therefore, cultivations with supplementation
of 13 μM and 130 μM -Ara were characterized
in detail with regard to CA formation and pSenCA response to identify
suitable conditions for FACS-based screenings. Noteworthy, heterologous -expression using 130 μM -Ara yielded a fluorescence response close to the saturation
of the biosensor, which was similar to the performed control experiments
without -expression
but supplementation of 3 mM CA (A). Under these conditions,  pSenCA pBAD- accumulated
84 μM CA in the supernatant within 4 h of cultivation (B). This means that
induction of gene expression with 130 μM -Ara would
be too high for distinguishing improved Xal variants
from wild-type Xal during FACS-based screening campaigns
using pSenCA, but allows reliable discrimination of CA-producing cells
from nonproducers. In contrast, induction of gene expression with
13 μM -Ara leads to less pronounced fluorescence response
far from biosensor saturation, enabling the isolation of more active
Xal variants from genetically diverse enzyme libraries
(A). Hence,
consecutive rounds of FACS screening, first under “strong”
gene expression conditions (130 μM -Ara) to reliably
enrich CA-producers, and then under “weak” gene expression
conditions (13 μM -Ara) to enable selection of the
best variants within that pool of CA-producing cells could be a feasible
FACS screening strategy. Influence of induction of heterologous  expression with 13 μM -Ara
or 130 μM -Ara on biosensor response and CA production
in  pSenCA pBAD-. After cultivation for 3 h in the presence
of different -Ara concentrations, either 3 mM -Phe (circles and triangles) or 3 mM CA (squares) was added. Samples
were taken at four time points depicted by dotted lines (A) Specific
fluorescence is shown (EYFP fluorescence × biomass formation, arbitrary units). (B) CA concentration in  culture supernatants. (C) FACS measurement
of EYFP fluorescence of 62 000 representative single cells
in the histogram representation. Abbreviations: CA, cinnamic acid; -Ara, -arabinose; and -Phe-phenylalanine. Prevention of Biosensor Cross-Talk Is a Prerequisite for Any
FACS Applications Using pSenCA http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00149/suppl_file/sb9b00149_si_001.pdf Many small molecules of biotechnological
interest readily diffuse over biological membranes or are taken up
by carrier-mediated transport (facilitated diffusion or active transport). This aspect poses a major challenge during biosensor-based
FACS-screenings as biosensor cross-talk between producing and nonproducing
variants would lead to a high number of isolated false-positive variants.
Induction of -expression
in  pSenCA pBAD- with 13 μM -Ara allows
for a product titer of 12 μM CA after 4 h of cultivation after -Phe addition, which might already promote an undesired pSenCA
cross-talk. With the aim of detecting any pSenCA cross-talk and developing
a cultivation strategy for minimizing this effect prior to conducting
any FACS screenings, defined mixtures of  pSenCA pBAD- cells
(CA) and  pSenCA cells (CA) were analyzed by FACS over the course of cultivation
time. In this experiment, a 50% CA/50% CA mixed culture was inoculated to a starting OD (iOD) of 0.5 and cultivated for 8 h (3 h  expression and 5 h cultivation after -Phe addition) before the top 5% fluorescing cells were isolated
by FACS. Performed colony-PCRs revealed that 30% of these cells did
not carry pBAD- (). Reason for this could
be either spontaneous mutations in pSenCA leading to constitutive  expression in the CA cells, or CA
uptake from the supernatant by the CA cells, which
activated the biosensor. However, since none of the isolated CA cells showed fluorescence in the absence of CA, it
was concluded that the uptake of CA from the supernatant was the reason
for the isolation of false positive CA cells. These
results indeed showed that pSenCA cross-talk between individual cells
occurs, impeding any future FACS-screening campaigns. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00149/suppl_file/sb9b00149_si_001.pdf Driven
by the idea that reduction of the inoculum (iOD) might
be useful strategy for minimizing biosensor cross-talk, four different
CA/CA ratios (20% CA/80%
CA; 50% CA/50% CA; 80% CA/20% CA; 100% CA/0% CA) at four different iOD (0.5;
0.1; 0.02; 0.004) were compared with regard to fluorescence at single
cell level and FACS sorting efficiency (). Noteworthy, the median fluorescence intensity
of the culture with 100% CA cells decreased with decreasing
inoculum size, and a smaller population of highly fluorescing cells
became apparent. This observation hints toward population heterogeneity
with regard to either -expression or stochastic HcaR-binding events in the low-CA
accumulation range and subsequent CA production in these otherwise
genetically homogeneous cultures. In combination with the biosensor
cross-talk, the observed heterogeneity provides an explanation for
the homogeneous looking population at an iOD of 0.5
as the increasing number of CA-producers among the 100% CA cells also produced more CA, which was then taken up by the nonproducing
cells. Consequently, with a decreasing share of CA cells
at different CA/CA ratios and decreasing
iOD tested, the number of CA-producing cells was more
and more reduced, resulting in a decreased median fluorescence of
the respective cultures, but also a more pronounced small population
of highly fluorescent CA-producing cells (). This indicates that a reduced inoculum
reduces the biosensor cross-talk between CA and CA cells presumably enabling for the efficient biosensor-guided
isolation of CA cells by FACS. Subsequently performed
FACS experiments in which only the top 5% fluorescent cells of the
20% CA/80% CA and 50% CA/50% CA cultures with an iOD of
0.02 or 0.004 were isolated and characterized, confirmed this assumption
as all isolated cells were CA cells (). EYFP fluorescence of
various mixed cultures of -cinnamic acid producing
and nonproducing  strains during cytometric
analysis. All cultures were started using
different inoculums (iOD) as indicated. All cultivations
were performed in the in the presence of 13 μM -arabinose
for induction of heterologous  expression and 3 mM -Phe as XAL-substrate always
added 3 h after starting each cultivation. FACS measurements were
performed 5 h after substrate addition. Strains: CA,  pSenCA pBAD-; CA,  pSenCA pBAD. Directed Evolution of an
Ammonia Lyase by Multistep FACS Screening The previously
established and optimized gene expression and cultivation
conditions were subsequently used to screen a diverse XAL library for isolating enzyme variants with an improved activity
in . For this purpose, a randomly mutated  library of 2.3 ×
10 variants was constructed by subcloning of  error-prone PCR products into the
pBAD vector, and transformation into electrocompetent  pSenCA cells. A multistep FACS enrichment strategy was performed
in which always the top 5% fluorescent cells were collected and recultivated
for the next enrichment step (). During this campaign, the average CA production
of the recovered cells in the culture was determined by HPLC after
every step to judge successful enrichment of CA producing cells. The
first FACS enrichment steps were performed under strong -induction conditions with supplementation
of 130 μM -Ara to reliably enrich CA producing variants.
In parallel, during each round of enrichment, the respective  cultures were also analyzed by FACS under weak -induction conditions (13
μM -Ara) for comparison and also without any induction
of  expression (no -Ara) or addition of the Xal substrate -Phe for identifying false positive variants bearing spontaneous
mutations leading to constitutive  expression.
In the course of the enrichments under strong -induction conditions, the CA titer
increased from 232 to 651 μM (1st FACS-enrichment step), from
651 to 706 μM (2nd FACS-enrichment step), and from 706 to 734
μM (3rd FACS-enrichment step), respectively, without a detectable
increase in fluorescence in the false positive controls (). A subsequent fourth
enrichment step was performed with lower induction of heterologous
gene expression (13 μM -Ara) for identifying the best
CA producers in the enrichments. The strategy was changed as the third
step with high induction of gene expression resulted only in a small
increase of the CA titer by 28 μM. Presumably this was the case
because most remaining cells in the third enrichment were already
CA producers, promoting strong fluorescence under high induction of
heterologous gene expression (130 μM -Ara). Surprisingly,
this fourth enrichment step in the presence of 13 μM -Ara resulted in the occurrence of a pronounced fluorescent population
as a shoulder in the histogram of the control FACS experiment without -Ara or -Phe, indicating that false positive variants
were enriched under these conditions. Hence, an additional control
experiment was performed, in which a fifth positive FACS screening
of the library in the presence of 13 μM -Ara (positive
sort under weak induction conditions) was conducted (, dotted line). As expected,
a decreasing average CA-titer (688 μM CA) of the enriched culture
was determined as the false positives variants were further enriched.
The solution was a final negative FACS-step (no -Ara and -Phe supplementation) and sorting of the 5% least fluorescing
cells to exclude false positive variants. This increased the average
CA-titer of the library to 850 μM upon recultivation. During the FACS campaign, the stepwise enrichment
resulted in a
culture of  variants, which accumulated
up to 20% more CA in the supernatant in comparison to a culture of
the starting variant  pSenCA pBAD- that accumulates 713 μM
CA. For comparison, prior to any FACS enrichment, the randomly mutated
and unsorted Xal-library accumulated 232 μM CA,
which is 70% less CA compared to the starting variant. The  cells recovered after the fifth
enrichment step were spread on LB agar plates and 182 single colonies
were individually cultivated and characterized with regard to their
respective CA production capabilities (A). These experiments revealed that 8% of
these variants accumulated less CA compared to the starting variant,
whereas 16% could not be distinguished from this control. In contrast,
76% of the strains accumulated significantly (>10%) more CA, with
the upper 20% accumulating 30% to 50% more CA compared to the starting
variant  pSenCA pBAD-. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00149/suppl_file/sb9b00149_si_001.pdf Subsequently, the pBAD- plasmids of the 15 best variants and five
randomly selected
variants with significantly higher CA accumulation compared to the
starting variant were isolated and retransformed into  pSenCA to exclude the potential influence of undesired random genomic
mutations (A). The resulting strains were compared to  pSenCA pBAD- regarding
their CA and pHCA accumulation from supplemented -Phe and -Tyr, respectively ( B). In parallel, the DNA sequence of all 20  variants was determined.
All variants accumulated 10% to 60% more CA or pHCA in the supernatant
when -Phe or -Tyr were supplemented, respectively.
Interestingly, DNA sequencing revealed that 6 strains have mutations
in the P-promoter upstream of , whereas 14 variants exclusively
carry mutations in the  open reading frame (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00149/suppl_file/sb9b00149_si_001.pdf Nonetheless, the increased CA titer of these 14
strains could be
also due to improved heterologous expression of  and thus higher Xal abundance
and does not necessarily have to relate to altered enzyme kinetics
of the enzyme. With the aim, to preclude any undesired expression
effects, an  characterization of seven Xal variants with purified proteins was performed. Seven muteins,
including Xal-F167L-K602N, Xal-N464S/V523E,
Xal-F167L/N588H, Xal-I552N, Xal-V523E/K602T, Xal-I552T/K602N, and Xal-V274A
were selected to determine enzyme kinetics . These variants accumulated the highest CA concentrations in the  experiments and did not carry mutations in the  gene or in the P promoter
(except for Xal-I552N comprising P-a10g). For the  enzyme assays, all
genes were individually recloned into the pBAD-N6XHIS vector allowing
for the generation of N-terminally His-tagged fusions proteins and
subsequent Ni-NTA affinity chromatography. Protein purification yielded
4–5 mg of pure protein as judged by SDS-PAGE analysis for enzyme
assays (). Six of
the seven muteins characterized in this detail exhibit an up to 12%
increased  and an increased affinity
to the substrates -Phe and -Tyr, respectively,
which explains the observed increased CA- and pHCA-titers (). Interestingly,
mutein Xal-V274A does have a reduced affinity toward -Phe (6.6 mM) but exhibits one of the highest  of the mutein set (1.38 μmol min mg). In contrast, Xal-F167L/K602N
and Xal-F167L/N588H show the lowest  for both -Phe and -Tyr (4.8 mM/4.9
mM and 0.7 mM/0.6 mM, respectively), while the  is only increased for the deamination of -Phe
in comparison to the wild-type enzyme. Stepwise enrichment
of improved CA producers from a  library using biosensor-based FACS-screening.
The continuous orange graph depicts the development of the CA titer
of the  library
at the culture level relative to the starting variant  pSenCA pBAD- (black
line). The dashed orange graph depicts the CA titer development in
a control experiment, in which another positive sorting (fluorescence)
instead of the negative sorting (no fluorescence) was performed. The
dark gray shading depicts the CA-titer range of one standard deviation
from the Xal starting variant, whereas light gray shading
depicts the CA-titer range of three standard deviations. Histograms
show the fluorescence distribution of the cultures of each cultivation
step without induction of heterologous gene expression (no -Ara) or substrate addition (no -Phe) (histogram without
pattern), with supplementation of 13 μM -Ara and 3
mM -Phe (vertical lines) and 130 μM -Ara
and 3 mM -Phe added (horizontal lines). Conditions of each
step leading to the eventually isolated  variants are highlighted in bright orange relative
to the conditions only used as controls that are shown in dim orange.
Gray boxes visualize the respective sorting gate set in each step:
Step 1–4, positive sorts (isolation of the top 5% fluorescing
events); Step 5, negative sort (isolation of the lower 5% fluorescing
events). Cultivations for CA titer determination were always performed
in triplicates, error bars depict the respective standard deviations.
The dotted line depicts development of CA production for an additional
round of positive sorting in step five (Supplementation of 13 μM -Ara), which was performed in parallel for comparison. Abbreviations:
CA, -cinnamic acid; -Ara, -arabinose; -Phe, -phenylalanine. (A) -Cinnamic acid
production of 183 FACS-isolated
Xal variants. Presented data are means of three cultivations
and error bars depict standard deviations. The dark gray shading depicts
the CA-titer range of one standard deviation from the Xal starting variant, whereas light gray shading depicts the CA-titer
range of three standard deviations. (WT cultivated as biological triplicates).
Variants selected for a more detailed analysis are highlighted in
orange. (B), CA (left) and pHCA (right) production of 19 strains selected
during the initial characterization (A), after retransformation of the respective
pBAD plasmid.
All cultivations were performed in biological triplicates, error bars
depict the standard deviation. Abbreviations: CA, -cinnamic acid; pHCA, coumaric acid. Kinetic
Characterization of Selected
Xal Muteins Obtained during the Biosensor-Based FACS
Screening Campaign Enzyme as well as strain engineering can be substantially
accelerated
when biosensor-based FACS screenings can be implemented as this technology
enables screening of vast and genetically diverse libraries with a
throughput that is orders of magnitude higher compared to other well-established
screening strategies. However, prerequisite
for the application of this powerful screening technique is the availability
of a suitable biosensor for the compound of interest, and detailed
knowledge of the biosensor characteristics with regard to dynamic
range, kinetics of the output signal, and operational range. Characterization of the pSenCA biosensor designed and constructed
in this study revealed a strong biosensor induction by CA in the micromolar
range. In comparison to other TF based biosensors, the operational
range of pSenCA is rather low. For example, the pJC1-lrp-brnF′-eyfp
biosensor for  for -methionine
and the branched chain amino acids -valine, -leucine,
and -isoleucine is characterized by a maximal fold induction
of 78 and an operational range from 0.2 mM to 23.5 mM (for -methionine). The lower operational
range of pSenCA in comparison to pJC1-lrp-brnF′-eyfp can be
explained by the role of the respective transcriptional regulators,
HcaR and Lrp, in the microbial metabolism. Lrp activates the expression
of the  operon, encoding for the branched-chain
amino acid exporter BrnFE, which is responsible for secretion of excess
amino acids to avoid cytotoxic effects of elevated intracellular amino
acid concentrations. HcaR, in contrast,
activates the expression of the  gene cluster
involved in the catabolism of aromatic acids, which can serve as valuable
carbon and energy sources in absence of other more preferred substrates. A strong expression at low inducer concentrations is therefore beneficial
to compete with other microorganisms for such valuable resources. However, despite a low operational range, a biosensor can be used
in FACS screenings if screening conditions are selected, in which
the expected product concentrations match with the biosensor characteristics.
In the case of the directed Xal evolution performed in
this study, only the two lowest inducer concentrations for heterologous -expression enabled pSenCA-guided FACS screening. As
alternative for optimizing cultivation conditions, the biosensor itself
can be adapted. For example, alteration of the operational range of
a transcriptional biosensor can be achieved by engineering the transcriptional
regulator toward reduced affinity to the ligand, thereby enabling
a graded fluorescence output for higher ligand concentrations. This approach was followed recently to optimize
the operational range of a whole-cell biosensor for the detection
and quantification of the macrodiolide antibiotic pamamycin produced
by . By rational engineering of the binding pocket of the PamR2 repressor,
a mutein with reduced affinity for pamamycin could be constructed,
extending the upper detection limit of the sensor system from 1 mg/L
to more than 5 mg/L. Additionally, given that the constructed
biosensor does not provide
sufficient dynamic range, often because of incompatibility between
the host strain and heterologous regulatory elements, the target promoter
of the regulator incorporated in the sensor or the promoter of the
regulator gene can be mutated. For example, a 3,4-dihydroxy benzoate
responsive biosensor based on the  gene under
control of its promoter P from  was applied in . By random mutagenesis, a library of
33 000 promoter mutants was constructed and subsequently screened
using FACS. Applying positive and negative screening, three variants
with improved dynamic range were isolated. Another example is the
a biosensor comprised of PadR, a repressor specific for coumaric acid from , and its cognate
promoter in . A sensor variant with improved dynamic range was constructed by
screening a set of PRBS mutants for
variants with reduced expression of . In other
cases where neither optimization of cultivation conditions nor adaptation
of the biosensor is an option, identification of the most suitable
time-point for the FACS screening during cultivation presents a possible
solution to prevent saturation of the sensor system. Cross-talk
between producers and nonproducing cells as it could
be observed in this study impedes any biosensor-based FACS screening
if the metabolite in question can diffuse of biological membranes
or is readily taken up by the microorganism. Dilution to a starting
OD of 0.004 and short cultivation times (<8 h) successfully
suppressed cross-talk in our case, even with an excess of producing
cells in the culture. A possible alternative to dilution for preventing
cross-talk is compartmentalization of individual strain variants in
solution, , by emulsion droplets, which can be
sorted in microfluidic devices. By coencapsulation of an  strain carrying a -coumaric acid-responsive biosensor
and coumaric acid producing , yeast cells with elevated coumaric acid production capabilities could be isolated from mixtures
of different producer strains. However,
design and construction of droplet-based screening assays is most
likely more laborious, and the sorting speed in microfluidic devices
is usually limited to less than 500 cells per second when reasonable
sort efficiencies are desired. Recently, successful
sorting of double emulsion droplets in a FACS device could be demonstrated,
increasing the throughput of droplet sorting to 1000 cells per second. When performing dilution assays in this study,
a pronounced heterogeneity with respect to the fluorescent response
could be detected, which was presumably caused by heterogeneous expression
of the  gene. This
heterogeneous expression in the presence of subsaturating -Ara concentrations was described earlier and could be eliminated
by expression of the -Ara importer gene  under control of either a constitutive  or an Isopropyl-β--thiogalactopyranosid-inducible  promoter. In
this study, a transcriptional biosensor for the phenylpropanoid -cinnamic acid could be successfully designed, constructed,
and applied in a high-throughput FACS screening campaign. Key to success
was a detailed characterization of the biosensor in combination with
fine-tuning of cultivation and screening conditions to overcome hurdles
such as biosensor cross-talk, which impede the successful application
of more biosensors in the field of protein engineering or strain development.
We believe that the strategies outlined in this article will help
others to also develop elegant biosensor-based screening campaigns
using the high-throughput capabilities of FACS..