Cell-free systems that support
gene expression reactions are becoming increasingly versatile and
efficient for emulating and simplifying cellular processes. Especially powerful is the PURE system made of purified components
providing a minimal and controlled environment for RNA transcription
and protein translation. Enriching the
PURE system with more functions, gene regulatory elements, and synthetic
parts is a promising avenue toward a bottom-up realization of a self-replicating
artificial cell. Additional progress has been made in the implementation of the PURE
system in microfluidic devices, in encapsulation of
reactions in membrane-bound compartments, or confined to surfaces within silicon compartments. These approaches expand the capacity to express
multiple reaction components and support increasingly complex gene
cascaded reactions and networks. The immobilization of the components
that participate in the gene
expression reaction adds a spatial element to the reaction, and therefore
has a profound effect on reaction outcome. In particular, by anchoring
coding genes as DNA brushes and surface traps for assembly intermediates
and final products, we recently demonstrated in a PURE gene expression
reaction the synthesis and assembly of the five-protein enzyme  RNA polymerase (RNAP) and the small ribosomal subunit (SSU), composed of 20 ribosomal proteins (r-proteins) and one
ribosomal RNA (r-RNA). In addition, we previously observed a localized
signal of fluorescently labeled RNAPs and ribosomes at DNA brushes. Taken together, DNA brushes seem to facilitate efficient assembly
of protein and RNA complexes through localization of the gene expression
machinery. While RNAPs directly bind DNA and their accumulation in
DNA brushes is expected, that of ribosomes is intriguing. Could ribosomes,
coupled to transcription, penetrate dense DNA phases despite excluded
volume interactions? Are ribosomes in
the brush more concentrated than in the bulk solution surrounding
the brush? Are nascent proteins released from ribosomes within the
brush or only after ribosomes have diffused away from the brush? Can
we form patterns of active ribosomes decoupled from transcription? Here we first characterize the dynamic localization of RNAPs, ribosomes,
and nascent RNA and proteins to DNA brushes. We then provide direct
evidence that ribosomes are retained within the brush, and not just
in its surrounding, with reduced mobility and a 17-fold increased
concentration at peak activity, compared to the reaction bulk. These
active ribosome compartments lead to protein sources and interaction
profiles that could be modulated by the gene fraction within the brush.
Finally, we pattern ribosomes directly on the surface surrounding
DNA brushes, spatially decoupling translation from transcription,
and demonstrate formation of active and inactive ribosome compartments
depending on an inhibitory antisense product from the neighboring
DNA brushes. A DNA Brush Induces a Propagating
Source of RNA and Proteins We studied the effect of DNA immobilization
on gene expression
reactions by patterning fluorescently labeled DNA brushes with a diameter
of 60–80 μm on a fused silica surface coated with a photosensitive
and biocompatible polymer monolayer (A, ). Reactions
were enclosed in PDMS chambers of typical dimensions of 1 cm ×
1 cm × 150 μm and were initiated by the addition of a minimal
gene expression reaction mix and heating the reaction chamber from
17 to 37 °C (). In each experiment
a different component of the gene expression reaction was fluorescently
labeled, nonoverlapping with the DNA fluorescent label, and we monitored
the localization of the labeled species with respect to the DNA brush
pattern by total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy
(A,B, ). The DNA brushes coded for a nonfluorescent
protein unless indicated otherwise. At any given time, the TIRF signal
was proportional to the local concentration of the labeled species
in the vicinity of the brush with the decay length of the evanescent
excitation ξ ∼ 120 nm. We first supplemented
the gene expression reaction with fluorescently
labeled T7 RNA polymerase and observed a rapid increase in TIRF signal
within a few minutes after raising the temperature to 37 °C,
demonstrating the localization of the RNA polymerase to the brush.
The signal, which is proportional to the local rate of transcription,
decayed to background levels within 50 min as the gene expression
reaction gradually ended due to depletion of nutrients (C). We also detected localization of the RNA product by patterning
gene brushes coding for the  16S r-RNA with a Broccoli aptamer incorporated
into its gene sequence, transcribed by a nonlabeled T7 RNA polymerase.
The use of a long nontranslatable r-RNA prolongs its localization
to the DNA brush and ensures that ribosome binding will not complicate
the interpretation. The accumulation and decay of the r-RNA signal,
which was the net result of local RNA synthesis and diffusion away
from the brush, followed the dynamics of the RNAP signal with a delay
of a few minutes, as expected (C). The decay of the RNA signal at the brush was slower
compared to the RNAP decay, suggesting that some nonspecific physical
accumulation of RNA within the DNA brush occurred. Localization
of both the RNAP and nascent RNA to dense DNA brushes
was expected due to the direct physical attachment of RNAPs to the
DNA during the transcription reaction. Interestingly, we observed
the accumulation of fluorescently labeled ribosomes on DNA coding
for proteins (coding DNA) and their exclusion from noncoding DNA brushes
(no promoter in the sequence). Furthermore, we could directly observe
the accumulation of a Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) fused to a ribosomal
protein (S2-GFP) in the brush coding for it (B,C). This localization of the translation
machinery and product was less expected as for the RNAP and nascent
RNA, since transcription and translation are not necessarily coupled
in cell-free reactions and ribosomes could bind the mRNA (mRNA) once
released from the DNA brush. The localization of ribosomes was previously
observed. Here we measured the accumulation
and decay of the ribosome signal, which approximately matched that
of the RNA signal. The TIRF signal of nascent protein in the brush
increased linearly, saturated at about 50 min, and then decreased
marginally and slowly, representing translation in the vicinity of
the brush. These observations support the notion that nascent proteins
were cotranscriptionally synthesized in the brush by localized ribosomes,
with some fraction of them physically adsorbed within the brush while
the rest diffused away from the brush. DNA brushes
localize gene expression machinery and products. (A)
Left: Scheme of TIRF microscopy setup. DNA brush immobilized on a
biochip drives spontaneous recruitment of the gene expression machinery
and gives rise to a protein source. Right: TIRF Imaging of the DNA
brush end-labeled in red (647 nm). Scale bar: 100 μm. (B) Imaging
of biomolecules colocalized with active coding brushes in independent
experiments. T7 RNA polymerases,  ribosomes and r-protein S2 are each fused to GFP (). r-RNA is labeled with Broccoli aptamer. Free ribosomes
are recruited to active DNA brushes but excluded from noncoding ones.
The labeled species is depicted green above each image. (C) Signal
kinetics of the labeled biomolecules measured in TIRF microscopy (independent
experiments). Background was subtracted. Time  =
0 corresponds to the instance when the temperature crossed 30 °C
in its rise from 17 to 37 °C. Error bars are standard deviation
of 20–30 brushes. Ribosomes Synthesizing
Proteins Are Retained in DNA Brushes
with Reduced Mobility We sought to obtain direct evidence
for ribosomes localization inside coding DNA brushes. With a typical
1–2 kbp long DNA brush, at a density of about 1000 molecules/μm and a height of about 100–150 nm under physiological
ionic strength, the average distance between DNA molecules was previously
measured to be ∼30 nm suggesting that the
observed localized ribosomes, with a typical diameter of 21 nm, might have been excluded from the interior of
the DNA brush due to its high density and rather self-organized in
a cloud around it, dictated by the high local concentration of nascent
mRNA. To identify whether the ribosomes were actually engaged inside
of the brush or organized around it, we varied the position of a ∼400
bp gene within 2.5 kbp DNA brushes (, A, configurations
1, 2, 3). In configuration 3 and 2 the promoter was directed toward
the surface, while in configuration 1 it was pointing outward. Despite
the identical sequence of the gene and regulatory elements, the transcription
rates in configurations 2 and 3 were previously measured directly
to be 2-fold higher than configuration 1, and for all configurations
it increased as a function of gene copy number at a fixed brush density. Indeed, the TIRF signal of labeled ribosomes
was responsive to the position and direction of the gene within the
brush, with a signal hierarchy of configurations 3 and 2 higher than
configuration 1 (B). Additionally, the signal of all configurations increased as a
function of gene copy number. The sensitivity of the TIRF measurement
further revealed a difference between configurations 2 and 3 (B, blue and red),
suggesting that in each of the three configurations the ribosome distribution
in or around the brush was different. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf TIRF signals are proportional to ∫ρ() d with ρ() and  the density and distance from the surface of the fluorescent species,
respectively, and ξ the decay length of the evanescent excitation, coupling the density and position of the species.
To distinguish between the contribution of ribosome density and distance
we performed fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) experiments
on labeled ribosomes localized on DNA brushes from configuration 1,
2, 3 as well as on noncoding DNA or free in solution (, C–F, ). For each configuration,
a large DNA brush with a diameter of about 1 mm was photobleached
at well-defined positions, on an 80 μm diameter spot at different
time periods after the addition of a PURE reaction supplemented with
fluorescently labeled ribosomes. Fluorescence recovery developed through
lateral diffusion of ribosomes inside the brush and vertical exchange
with ribosomes from solution (C). The profiles of the bleached region recovered in
a mostly homogeneous way, suggesting that exchange with ribosomes
from solution dominated the process (D, ).
The kinetics of recovery were fitted in order to estimate the diffusion
coefficient of ribosomes in each configuration and found it to be
16.2 ± 1.1 μm/s, 16.8 ± 1.3 μm/s, 12.4 ± 1.1 μm/s, 6.4 ± 0.9
μm/s, and 3.47 ± 0.32 μm/s
for ribosomes free in solution, on noncoding DNA, or on DNA from configuration
1, 2, and 3, respectively (, F). These experiments
thus revealed that ribosomes in configuration 1, with genes located
at the top of the brush, had a similar diffusion coefficient to free
ribosomes in solution or above a noncoding DNA brush. In contrast,
ribosomes in configuration 3 had the slowest recovery after bleaching,
with a diffusion coefficient reduced four to five times. While the
kinetics of recovery for configuration 1 and for noncoding DNA were
independent of the lag in the bleaching time after the initiation
of gene expression, the recovery of ribosomes in configurations 2
and 3 approached that of free ribosomes the longer the lag time, most
likely due to the decrease in gene expression rate. Taken together,
the TIRF and FRAP measurements are consistent with a scenario of active
ribosomes engaged in translation inside the brush while physically
bound to RNA molecules cotranscriptionally inside a crowded environment
retarding their mobility. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf We evaluated the localized ribosome
density to be of the order
of 450 ribosomes/μm on a gene-coding brush (, ),
and at a local concentration of about 4500 ribosomes/μm within the brush volume, which is equivalent to 7 μM
(assuming ribosomes were confined inside the brush volume). In these
experiments, using fluorescently labeled ribosomes, their bulk concentration
was 400 nM (). Therefore, the accumulation
of ribosomes to DNA brushes enhanced their concentration by more than
an order of magnitude compared to the bulk concentration, only 6-fold
lower than the typical ribosome concentration found in bacteria (about
27 000 ribosomes/μm in ). Ribosome reduced mobility within DNA brushes.
(A) Scheme of 2.5
kbp DNA brushes with a 400 bp gene located at the top, middle, and
bottom of the brush. The promoter upstream of the gene is positioned
1956, 1262, and 687 bp from the tethered end of the DNA and its direction
is depicted. The  position of ribosomes dictates
their mobility and TIRF excitation. (B) TIRF signal for ribosomes
localized on the three types of brushes as a function of brush density.
Dashed lines are linear fits. Error bars are standard deviation of
3 brushes. (C) Scheme of FRAP experiment on labeled ribosomes (green)
in a DNA brush at bleaching (gray) and during recovery. Recovery takes
place through ribosome lateral mobility inside the brush and vertical
exchange with ribosomes from solution. (D) TIRF images showing fluorescence
recovery of labeled ribosomes on a NC brush and on a brush made of
DNA from configuration 3 after photobleaching of an 80 μm circular
region. Scale bars: 100 μm. (E) Normalized signal recovery after
photobleaching at different time points of labeled ribosomes localized
on brushes from configurations 1, 2, 3 as well as on NC DNA and free
in solution. Solid lines are theoretical fits (). (F) Diffusion coefficients averaged over three measurements in
the first 30 min after beginning of gene expression, extracted from
the theoretical fits (). Error bars
are standard deviation of the three measurements. Gene Copy Number Determines
RNA and Protein Localization Profiles http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf An important consequence
of ribosome localization is the emergence
of gene expression profiles, that can influence the dynamics of self-assembly
processes and gene regulation. We studied
the concentration profiles of the synthesis products, the nascent
RNA and expressed proteins. We first characterized nascent protein
profiles by patterning DNA brushes coding for a r-protein fused to
GFP and tagged with the high-affinity peptide hemagglutinin (S15-GFP-HA).
Anti-HA antibodies were patterned in a hexagonal lattice on the surrounding
surface for capture of nascent proteins and sensitive detection of
the TIRF signal (, A, ). Identical DNA brushes were organized in lines to obtain
a quasi-1D diffusion profile. Upon heating the chamber, a fluorescent
signal, dependent on the HA tag, appeared initially next to the line
of brushes and propagated laterally and symmetrically on both sides
of the source, over hundreds of microns (B, ). Modeling
the space-time profiles as a 1D diffusion process with a continuous
point source, we fitted the half-width at half-maximum (HWHM) of the
signal (, ) and evaluated the diffusion coefficient 67 ± 9 μm/s, consistent with previous evaluations of the diffusion
coefficient of GFP. The experiment was
repeated with different gene fractions φ, ranging from 0.02
to 1, at otherwise identical overall DNA density (, C). The integrated TIRF signal over the whole pattern was measured
in time and found to increase linearly with gene fraction (). To characterize the dynamics of
signal propagation, we defined the front of the signal as a threshold
value () and measured its velocity
as a function of gene fraction (C inset, ). The
propagation velocity increased with φ, from ∼0.2 to ∼1
μm/s at low and high φ, respectively. The scale of the
propagation velocity was determined by the diffusion constant of the
synthesized species (). The dependence
in φ, however, was a consequence of trapping the diffusing species
on antibodies. For low gene density, and consequently low protein
concentration, trapping depleted significantly the cloud of proteins,
slowing down the propagation of the signal. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf To characterize the propagating
profile of nascent RNA, we patterned
two lines of DNA brushes, one coding for the  r-protein S17-HA that has been shown to have fast binding dynamics
of 16S r-RNA, the other coding for the
fluorescently labeled 16S r-RNA. The two lines of brushes were separated
by a distance  = 200, 400, 600, 800 μm and
with φ = 0.5 and 0.05 gene fractions of the S17-HA brushes.
The r-RNA gene brushes were kept at a fixed brush density and therefore
fixed r-RNA production rate (D,E, ). An r-RNA
fluorescent signal propagated on the surface, only in the presence
of an HA tag on the r-protein, thereby reflecting r-RNA binding to
surface antibodies mediated by S17-HA (). Interestingly, signal propagation was nonsymmetrical,
much faster to the right of the r-RNA gene brushes than to the left.
Since the r-protein source was on the left side of the r-RNA brushes,
r-protein concentration was much higher there, saturating the surface
antibodies and excess r-protein in solution must have sequestered
the binding of the r-RNA to the surface. Indeed, reducing the r-protein
gene fraction to φ = 0.02 resulted in a change in the direction
of signal propagation toward the left (), supporting the notion that excess unbound r-protein
determined r-RNA binding to the surface. We estimated the time
and position of first appearance of the signal
for every φ and  (F), and evaluated the propagation speed of
the r-protein from the slopes of the dashed lines (, F) to be  = 0.5 μm/s and 0.2 μm/s for
φ = 0.5 and φ = 0.05, respectively. The propagation velocity
of S17-HA depended on φ, consistent with the direct observation
in C. Each
dotted line in F crosses the -axis at the position of the r-RNA
brush. Therefore, the lines represent the propagation trajectory of
the r-RNA from its brush origin to the r-protein on the surface with
time. We evaluated the r-RNA propagation speed from the slope of the
dotted lines (, F) to be  = −0.1
μm/s for r-RNA for all the lines, as expected. Localized protein sources.
(A) Schemes, Top: A line of DNA brushes
immobilized on a chip. Bottom: In each brush, transcription and translation
colocalize and nascent proteins are trapped on patterned antibodies.
(B) Top: Images of the TIRF signal that builds up symmetrically in
time on two sides of a line of brushes coding for S15-GFP-HA. Bottom:
Profiles of the signal. (C) Top: Scheme of lines of brushes, each
with a different gene fraction φ, organized on a single surface
1800 μm apart, generating fluorescent signals of different intensities
that were monitored in parallel. Bottom: Total fluorescent signal
as a function of time for different gene density φ. Inset: Velocity
of the front propagation as a function of gene density φ. (D)
Scheme: r-RNA modified with Broccoli aptamer and r-protein S17-HA
are synthesized and diffuse from nearby brushes. The binding of r-RNA
to surface antibodies is mediated by S17-HA. (E) TIRF images of r-RNA
signal buildup in time next to two lines of brushes, as in (D), with
the r-protein S17-HA at gene fraction φ = 0.5, separated by
600 μm from the r-RNA brushes. The front of the signal propagates
nonsymmetrically toward the right. Scale bar: 100 μm. (F) A
space-time plot of the position of first appearance of the r-RNA signal
(-axis) as a function of time (-axis) for different distances  between lines of
brushes, as defined in (E), with S17-HA brush gene fraction φ
= 0.5 (blue) or φ = 0.05 (green). The r-RNA brushes have a fixed
gene fraction φ = 0.5. The S17-HA brushes are positioned at
the coordinates’ origin. The r-RNA brushes are positioned at
a distance , where each dotted line crosses the -axis. Decoupling
Translation from Transcription by Surface-Immobilized
Ribosomes Inspired by membrane-bound ribosomes in the endoplasmic
reticulum of eukaryotic cells, we attempted to immobilize ribosomes
on the surface next to DNA brushes prior to initiation of the reaction,
decoupling translation from transcription. Toward that, we purified
ribosomes with one of the r-proteins in the large subunit fused to
GFP-HA and immobilized them in a hexagonal pattern onto anti-HA antibodies
(, A,B). We evaluated the ribosome density on
the surface to be of the order of 300 ribosomes/μm (), comparable to the  value found in the yeast endoplasmic reticulum. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf To demonstrate the activity of surface ribosomes,
we immobilized
DNA brushes encoding GFP with a pause sequence (GFP-SecM) next to immobilized nonlabeled ribosomes with
an HA tag. The pause sequence should delay dissociation of GFP from
the ribosomes by about 40 min, maximizing
TIRF detection on surface ribosomes. The chamber was filled with a
PURE reaction mix lacking ribosomes. Although surface ribosomes were
immobilized under conditions that preserved subunit association (), the addition of purified small ribosomal
subunits was required to reach a measurable fluorescent GFP-SecM signal
(B). By adding
an increasing concentration of small subunits to individual chambers
organized on the same surface (), we found that 1 μM small subunit was the optimal concentration
to achieve maximal signal (B). An excess of small subunits presumably saturated
the large ribosomal subunit on the surface, precluding association
of the mRNA|SSU initiation complex. This optimal small subunit concentration
was used in the following experiments. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf The GFP-SecM fluorescent
signal appeared first as a sharp ring
around the brushes, and then propagated symmetrically away from the
line of brushes, reflecting diffusion of nascent mRNA from the brush
to surface ribosomes, possibly already bound by the ribosomal small
subunit (C).
We measured the dynamics and maximal signal of GFP-SecM on the surface
as a function of the gene fraction φ and found that it increased
and reached a saturation value at a relatively low density (φ
∼ 0.1), presumably due to the small total amount of ribosomes
on the surface (). For all the
saturating φ values, the signal increased with time and started
reducing after about 30 min due to combined bleaching, release of
proteins from ribosomes and end of activity of the gene expression
reaction. Applying the 1D diffusion model used above, we fitted the
HWHM of the signal (, ) and evaluated the diffusion coefficient to be
∼12 ± 2 μm/s. The radius of gyration
of a typical mRNA molecule of ∼1000 bp long was measured to be ∼20 nm implying a theoretical diffusion
coefficient in water ∼11 μm/s according to
the Stokes–Einstein equation (). Therefore, the signal propagation measured here was consistent
with mRNA diffusion. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf Having a carpet of ribosomes on the surface,
spatially resolved
from transcription activity within the brush, we attempted to create
compartments of active and inactive ribosomes, governed by the patterns
of DNA brushes. In addition to brushes coding for GFP-SecM, we added
brushes coding for antisense RNA (asRNA) complementary to regions
of the GFP-SecM mRNA in distinct brush patterns (D). The asRNA competes with
ribosomes on binding to the mRNA, thereby inhibiting translation.
Several asRNA were tested ():
a 1200 bases asRNA complementary to almost the entire GFP-SecM mRNA
(“Long AS”), a mixture of two 100 bases asRNAs targeting
two regions of the GFP-SecM mRNA including the ribosome binding site
() (“Short AS”) and a
60 bases RNA with no specific affinity to the GFP-SecM mRNA (“Noncomplementary”).
The Long AS and Short AS transcripts reduced the signal by 55% and
48%, respectively, compared to a 12% reduction in the case of the
noncomplementary transcript, suggesting a sequence specific inhibition.
By patterning lines of DNA brushes, a central one coding for GFP-SecM,
with Long AS brushes on one side and noncoding brushes on the other
side, regions of active and inactive ribosomes were created, surrounding
the noncoding and antisense brushes, respectively (E, ). Surface immobilized ribosome carpets. (A) Scheme (top)
and TIRF
image (bottom) of fluorescently labeled ribosomes immobilized on antibodies
next to a DNA brush (dark circles exclude ribosomes) through the large
ribosomal subunit (LSU). (B) Maximum GFP-SecM TIRF signal for different
concentrations of small ribosomal subunit (SSU) in solution. Error
bars are standard deviation of 12 regions. (C) Top: TIRF signal of
GFP-SecM builds up symmetrically in time on surface ribosomes next
to a line of coding brushes. Bottom: Signal profiles in time. (D)
Top: Scheme of post-transcriptional regulation by asRNA hybridizing
with GFP-SecM mRNA, inhibiting its translation on surface bound ribosomes.
Bottom: TIRF images of maximal GFP-SecM ( = 34 min)
in the two configurations schematized below. DNA brushes coding for
GFP-SecM mRNA (red), asRNA (blue) or NC (black) are depicted as circles
with unique arrangements. (E) Top: Scheme and TIRF image of GFP-SecM
signal appearing on surface ribosomes around NC brushes but not around
AS brushes, on the left and right of a line of GFP-SecM brushes, respectively.
Bottom: Profiles of TIRF signal in time. Two configurations with reverse
positions for the NC and AS brushes were averaged to avoid artifacts
from flow. The positions of the NC (gray), GFP-SecM (red), and AS
(brown) lines of brushes are marked. Scale bar: 100 μm. Surface immobilization of DNA and ribosomes
in minimal cell-free gene expression reaction offer an opportunity
to study the spatial organization of the gene expression machinery
and reaction products under conditions of crowding and confinement.
The characterization of RNA and protein localized sources and controlled
diffusion and interactions provides the basic understanding of the
promotion of complex assembly reactions such as the recently demonstrated
biogenesis of the  small
ribosomal subunit. In a similar
scenario to gene expression reactions in the nucleoid of prokaryotic
cells, the coupling between transcription and translation was maintained
at the immobilized DNA and induced accumulation of RNA and protein
products. Using fluorescently labeled ribosomes, we directly showed
that ribosomes not only were accumulating in the vicinity of the brush,
but also were actually retained within the brush with reduced mobility
compared to nontranslating ribosomes. Two mechanisms are possible:
either the entire ribosome penetrates the brush to translate cotranscriptionally,
or it is only the labeled small subunit which attaches to nascent
mRNA, with the resulting translation initiation complex temporarily
immobilized on the DNA before associating with large subunit outside
the brush. Our demonstration that nascent protein products accumulated
inside the brush supports the former, yet direct evidence of labeled
large subunit localization in DNA brushes may substantiate it. The immobilization of ribosomes on surfaces surrounding DNA brushes
created a scenario reminiscent of the spatial separation of transcription
and translation in eukaryotic cells, providing a delay mechanism that
allowed spatial regulation by asRNA and the formation of active and
inactive ribosome compartments dictated by the layout of DNA brushes.
These capabilities could be utilized in the future to organize complex
networks of cascaded reactions based on gene expression regulation
in time and space in a bottom-up autonomous fashion. We envision that
as more of the gene expression machinery is immobilized on the surface,
more opportunities for compartmentalized reactions with increased
efficiency could be realized. The physical separation between bound
components (old) and newly made ones is valuable for the realization
of self-replicating artificial systems. Genes of  16S r-RNA and r-protein S15, S17, and S2 were amplified from the
genome of  K12 JM109 as
described in ref (). The 1542 bp long r-RNA gene, lacking its leader sequence, was cloned
in frame with the T7 promoter in the PUREfrex2.0 system control vector
(CosmoBio, Japan). Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) ribozyme sequence was
inserted at the 3′ end of the 16S r-RNA to ensure formation
of an exact 3′ end. The r-proteins
genes were cloned into pIVEX 2.3 (Roche) or in pIVEX 2.5 in frame
with a C-terminal HA-tag (THTMVPDYA) as explained in ref (). The 399 bp long gene
coding for the T4 viral protein gp25 under control of the T7 promoter
was amplified from the T4 GT7 genome (Nippon Gene, Japan) as described
in ref (). Plasmid
coding for GFP-uv3 under a T7 promoter, with a SecM arrest sequence
was a kind gift of J. Puglisi. All fluorescent protein fusions were prepared with the F64L/S65T
mutant sequence of enhanced GFP (eGFP). Fusion of r-protein S2-GFP
and S15-GFP-HA was prepared by subcloning the eGFP gene at the C-terminus
of the r-protein with a seven amino acid long linker (KRAPGTS) between
the last amino acid of r-protein and the first amino acid of eGFP.
For purification of labeled ribosomes, eGFP was fused at either the
C-terminus of r-proteins S2 or L9 with the same linker but in plasmid
pRSFduet (Novagen). The HA peptide tag was inserted immediately after
the last amino acid of the eGFP gene. For fluorescently labeled T7
RNAP, the eGFP gene was cloned into plasmid pBH161 under control of the  UV5 promoter and upstream of the ATG codon of the T7 RNAP gene. A broccoli aptamer sequence was cloned
in the loop sequence of helix 6 of the  16S r-RNA gene: gtcgaacggtaacaggaagaagctGCGGAGACGGTCGGGTCCAGATATTCGTATCTGTCGAGTAGAGTGTGGGCTCCGCtgcttctttgctgacgagtggc
(Capital letters Broccoli aptamer; small letters Helix 6 sequence). Plasmids encoding asRNA sequences complementary to bases (−61)–41
and to bases 179–270 (with bases 1–3 corresponding to
the start codon) of the GFP-SecM gene (Short AS 1 and 2), as well
as a 55-bp sequence (gcaagcagcagattacgcgcagaaaaaaaggatctcaagaagatcctttgatc)
with similar GC content but no complementarity, were inserted by inverted
PCR (iPCR) directly between a T7 promoter and an HDV self-cleaving
ribozyme aptamer sequence. Short AS sequences were designed for minimal
secondary structure by Mfold Web server so that the entire self-cleaved transcript, including the initial
5′-G nucleotides of the T7-RNAP transcripts, would be complementary
to the GFP-SecM mRNA. Long AS-coding DNA was assembled by amplifying
the GFP-SecM sequence
from the plasmid pETC1 and inserting
it in reverse orientation under a T7 promoter by Gibson assembly using
NEBuilder (New England Biolabs). Preparation of Linear Double-Stranded
DNA Linear double-stranded
DNA (dsDNA) fragments were synthesized and conjugated to streptavidin
(SA, S0677, Sigma-Aldrich) essentially as described in ref () and references therein.
Briefly, a 5′-AlexaFluor647 forward primer (F-primer) (IDT)
positioned ∼200 bp upstream to the T7 promoter and 5′-biotin
reverse primer (R-primer) (IDT) positioned downstream to the T7 terminator
were used to amplify genes by PCR with KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix
(Kapa Biosystems). Noncoding DNA was prepared similarly to coding
DNA but without the T7 promoter. Biotinylated DNA was conjugated
to SA at a 1:1.4 ratio at a final concentration of 150 nM in phosphate
buffered saline (1×PBS), supplemented with 7% glycerol to reduce
evaporation at the following DNA surface deposition. DNA Configurations
for FRAP Experiments The three DNA
configurations described in A were amplified from plasmid pIVEX containing the
399 bp long gene of 2.5-gp25 using the
following primers. F-primer:
Biotin-CACGTTAAGGGATTTTGGTC. R-primer: AlexaFluor647-GATCATGGCGACCACACCCGTC. F-primer: AlexaFluor647-GTTGGCCGCAGTGTTATCAC. R-primer: Biotin-CAATACGCAAACCGCCTCT. F-primer: AlexaFluor647-CACGTTAAGGGATTTTG. R-primer: Biotin-ATCATGGCGACCACACCCGTCC. The promoter upstream of the 399 bp long gp25 gene was positioned
1956, 1262, and 687 bp from the tethered end of the DNA fragments
in configuration 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Note that the biotinylated
primer in configuration 1 was the F-primer, while in configuration
2, 3 it was the R-primer, directing transcription in the DNA brush
outward for configuration 1, and inward for configuration 2, 3. Preparation of Linear DNA Fragments for GFP-SecM Expression Linear DNA fragments coding for GFP-uv3 under a T7 promoter, with
a SecM arrest sequence were amplified from the plasmid pETC1 using the F-primer Atto647-CATGCAAGGAGATGGCGCC
and R-primer Biotin-GTTGGCCGCAGTGTTATCAC. Purification of Fluorescently
Labeled T7 RNAP Preparation
of His6-eGFP-T7RNAP was described in a previous work. Briefly, the fused protein was overexpressed in BL21(DE3)
cells after induction with 1 mM IPTG at OD600 of 0.5 for 3 h and first
purified by Ni affinity chromatography using 2 ×
1 mL HisTrap FF columns (GE healthcare). Fractions containing appreciable
absorbance at 488 nm, eluted at 90 mM imidazole, were pooled and concentrated
using Vivaspin 20 MWCO 10 kDa (Sartorius). Following buffer exchange
to 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5; 100 mM NaCl, the sample was loaded onto
Superdex200 (GE Healthcare) gel filtration column. Fractions containing
appreciable absorbance at 488 nm were pooled and concentrated using
Vivaspin 20 MWCO 10 kDa (Sartorius). Purified His6-eGFP-T7RNAP was
stored at −80 °C in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5; 100 mM NaCl; 10
mM DTT at a concentration of 50 μM and added to a PUREfrex reaction
at a concentration of 700 nM. Purification of Fluorescently
Labeled  Ribosomes The ribosome preparation was described in a previous
work with some modifications. Briefly,
r-protein fusions S15-GFP (for the brush-coupled ribosomes) and L9-HA
or L9-GFP-HA (for unlabeled or labeled surface immobilized ribosomes)
under a T7 promoter were overexpressed in  (3 h after induction by 1 mM IPTG at OD of 0.25–0.35).
A fraction of the fusion protein was incorporated into ribosomes.
After lysis by sonication and french press in ribosome buffer (RB:
10 mM Tris-HCl, 70 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl, pH ∼ 7.8)
the ribosomes were extracted by anion exchange on a quaternary amine
column (CIM-multus, QA-8, BIA Separations) in RB + 6 mM β-mercaptoethanol
with increasing concentrations of NHCl. Concentration
and buffer exchange (back to RB) of the relevant fractions was done
on a 10 kDa MWCO concentration membrane (Sartorius). Batches were
diluted to 20–25 μM total ribosomes (as measured by absorption
at 260 nm) in RB + 30% glycerol, frozen in liquid N and
stored at −80 °C until use. SDS-PAGE analysis of the purified
ribosomes showed no bands corresponding to nonribosomal proteins.
Fluorescence measurements of S15-GFP ribosome solution  known eGFP solutions provided an estimate of ∼5–10%
of labeled ribosomes among the native . ribosomes. Purified  SSU were a kind gift of A. Yonath. These were purified from native  ribosomes by sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation
at RB with 1 mM MgCl. When added at 1 μM to a PUREΔR
expression reaction of GFP, no detectable amount of protein was produced. Biochip Prism Mounting and PDMS Chamber Arrangement The preparation of the chamber was reported in a previous work. Briefly, fused-silica slides (24 × 24 ×
1 mm, UQG Optics) were cleaned in boiling ethanol (10 min) followed
by sonication (10 min) and base piranha cleaning (HO:NH:HO; 1:1:4, heated to 70 °C
for 10 min). The slides were then coated with a photosensitive and
biocompatible polymer monolayer and exposed to 365 nm UV light (2.5
J/cm2) through a custom photomask with an array of hexagons (CAD/Art
Services) using UV-KUB (Kloe) to expose reactive amine groups. Biotin -hydroxysuccinimidyl ester (biotin-NHS, Pierce) covalently
reacted to UV exposed amine groups resulting in a biotin-patterned
surface. The slides were fixed on fused silica prisms (Zell Quarzglas
and Technische Keramik). Chambers with typical dimensions of 1 cm
× 1 cm were cut in thin PDMS sheets (150 ± 30 μm)
and placed on the slides. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf Nanoliter droplets
of SA-conjugated
linear DNA constructs were deposited in an automated way onto the
biotin-patterned surface within the PDMS chamber using GIX Microplotter
II (Sonoplot Inc., Middleton, WI) and incubated overnight in a humidity-controlled
chamber to allow formation of dense DNA brushes. Before deposition,
equimolar solutions of linear DNA constructs were mixed according
to the composition of designed brushes. Gene density was tuned by
dilution of the solutions (B), addition of genes coding for nonfluorescent proteins
(C) or addition
of noncoding DNA (E,F and ). For brushes
with fluorescently labeled DNA, the reported φ is according
to epifluorescent signal compared to 100% labeled DNA. Otherwise,
φ is given as the molar ratio of the mixture. In E, GFP-SecM genes
were mixed with genes coding for a nonfluorescent protein of similar
size (T4 bacteriophage gp8) and noncoding DNA in a ratio 5:5:90 to
avoid excess of GFP-SecM mRNA and promote competition of the two mRNAs
over the limited available translation sites. Antibodies
and Ribosome Deposition Biotinylated Anti-HA-Biotin
antibodies (50 mg/mL, High Affinity, 3F10 clone, Roche) were mixed
with SA at a molar ratio of 1:1.5 in 1×PBS and incubated 30 min
on ice, followed by dilution to 50 nM in PBS before applying them
to the chamber. The chamber was washed several times with PBS followed
by rinsing with 50 mM Potassium-HEPES buffer pH 7. For experiments
with surface-bound ribosomes, the chamber was washed with Ribosome
Buffer (RB) after antibodies deposition, and then replaced by a 2
μM solution of purified ribosomes, of which ∼100–200
nM were estimated to be modified with L9-HA. After further 2-h incubation
at 4 °C, the chamber was washed 5 times with RB to remove nonspecifically
adsorbed ribosomes. Cell-Free Gene Expression Reactions The chamber was
positioned on a temperature-controlled holder set at 17 °C and
placed on an upright microscope (Olympus BX51WI). PUREfrex2.0 cell-free
reaction was introduced in the chamber, supplemented with DFHBI-1T
(Lucerna, NY) at 60 μM when r-RNA with a Broccoli aptamer was
used. Reactions were supplemented with purified ribosomal SSU in experiments
involving surface immobilized ribosomes. The chamber was sealed with
a glass coverslip and the temperature was then switched to 37 °C
to initiate gene expression. The microscope,
positioned on a motorized stage
(Scientifica), was equipped with optical filter sets for excitation
at 488 and 647 nm and a fluorescent light source (EXFO X-Cite 120Q)
to allow epifluorescence microscopy. Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence
(TIRF) microscopy was performed by collimating a laser beam (OBIS
488–150 LS) on the side of the prism. Epifluorescence and TIRF
images were taken with Andor iXon Ultra camera (Andor Technology PLC.,
Belfast, UK) and 10× Olympus objective. The stage, the microscope,
the lasers and the camera were synchronized on LabVIEW (National Instruments). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf Images were analyzed with ImageJ and
Mathematica 11 (Wolfram Research). Background was subtracted from
fluorescent signals unless its value was negligible. In C and , the front position was defined as the location where the
signal reached twice the background value. In F, the position and time of first appearance
of the r-RNA signal were defined as the space-time region where the
signal had a value between a fourth and a third of the maximum signal
reached when  = 200 μm. Error bars represent
the full region. In this experiment, the positions of first interaction
were interpreted as points in space and time reached by the two species.
The positions lined up in a consistent way (see dashed and dotted
lines in F),
reflecting propagations from two sources at specific speeds. The dashed
and dotted lines in F depicted the trajectories of the two species. The propagation
speeds were therefore evaluated as the slopes of these lines. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf To evaluate the density
of ribosomes localized on an active brush, we imaged them in epifluorescence
microscopy in a thin chamber (height: 6 μm) to minimize background
from labeled ribosomes in solution (). The epifluorescence signal outside of the brush corresponded to
the ribosome concentration in solution  = 400 nM. Using the signal of a chamber without ribosomes as a background
measurement, we evaluated from the signal on the brush an effective
ribosome concentration  = 523 nM on
the brush. The number of ribosomes in the cylinder above the brush , with  =  the volume
of the cylinder above the brush,  the surface of
the brush,  the height of the chamber, and  the Avogadro number, was the sum of the number
of ribosomes in solution above the brush  and the number of ribosomes localized
on the brush . Here, we assumed the height of the
brush (about 100 nm) was negligible compared to the height of the
chamber (6 μm). The number of ribosomes localized on the brush
was then  = ( – ).
We deduced the density of ribosomes per unit surface of the brush:The same method was used to estimate the density
of ribosomes immobilized on surface antibodies. In that case, a regular
chamber (height: 150 μm) was used because labeled ribosomes
containing L9-GFP-HA were only on the surface and not in solution,
eliminating the background problem. Simple Model of Diffusion
of Synthesized Species from a Line
of Brushes http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf A line of brushes synthesizing proteins is effectively
equivalent to a point source in 1D diffusion with the relevant dimension  perpendicular to the line. The probability density function
for a point source at  = 0 is given bywith () =  the total amount of proteins synthesized
after a time ,  the protein production
rate, and  the diffusion coefficient of the protein.
The mean square displacement is deduced from the probability density
function:In , we used the expression  to approximate the half width at half-maximum
(HWHM) of the fluorescent signal and fitted the data to evaluate . The actual fitting expression was , where  and  were added to account
for the width of the brush and the delay to
initiate translation, respectively. The uncertainty on  was calculated from the 99% confidence interval in the fitting procedure. As a matter of fact, this model describes a situation quite different
from the experimental one. Experimentally, we observed the labeled
species bound to the surface and not freely diffusing in the volume.
The species diffused from a source to a sink, filling up the available
sites on the surface. Applying this simple model required the zero-order
assumption that the population bound to the surface actually reflected
the population in the volume. The assumption was justified by the
high affinity between species and traps. It obviously broke down once
traps were saturated but until then, it was reasonable to use the
model to get rough estimates of diffusion coefficients. Scale of
the Propagation Velocity of Synthesized Species from
a Line of Brushes We can estimate the scale of the propagation
velocity of the synthesized objects, as measured in C, from a line of brushes,
in two ways. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf The simplest estimate relies on the fact that for
a 1D diffusion process, the mean squared displacement obeys: ⟨⟩ = 2 (the factor
2 should be removed if we consider a 1D point source as derived previously.
In any case, this factor is irrelevant when estimating the scale of
the process). The measured signal propagates on a distance  in a time , so with an
average velocity . Considering that the velocity was measured
at  ∼ 10 min (see ) and with  = 67 μm/s
as evaluated in the main text, we find  ∼
0.5 μm/s as the velocity scale. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00613/suppl_file/sb0c00613_si_001.pdf We can also estimate the
propagation velocity directly from the
probability density function (,) derived previously. To do so, we recall that
we defined experimentally the front of the signal as a threshold value, , as a point of constant concentration that propagates
in space and time. Let (,) be the number of objects at position  and time , then the front propagation obeys d(,) = 0, reflecting
the constant number of objects at the front. This condition is equivalent
toImplying:Using the notations
introduced previously: (,) = ()(,), leading toConsidering that
we measured experimentally
the front velocity at  ∼ 10 min and  ∼ 500 μm (see ), and with  = 67 μm/s as determined in the main text, we find again  ∼ 0.5 μm/s as the velocity scale. Theoretical
Diffusion Coefficient for an RNA Molecule in Water We used
the Stokes–Einstein relation to evaluate the diffusion
coefficient  of a typical 1 kbp RNA molecule in
water:with  the Boltzmann
constant,  the temperature,  the viscosity of water, and  the radius of gyration
of the RNA molecule. Labeled ribosomes
were photobleached
using an Ar–Kr laser (Innova 70; Coherent, Inc.) coupled into
a single-mode optical fiber (OZ Optics) and focused on the sample
through the microscope 10× objective during 15 s. A circular
region of about 80 μm diameter was illuminated on a ∼1
mm diameter DNA brush. Recovery was imaged using TIRF microscopy.
In E, FRAP
traces () were normalized by the
final fluorescent value after recovery and fitted to evaluate the
diffusion coefficient value using the expression:with  = /4 the diffusion time scale,  = 40 μm the radius
of the photobleached region,  the diffusion coefficient,  and  the modified
Bessel functions..