The emergence of several examples of the reconstruction of genome-sized DNA has been stimulating the demand for genomic DNA with a −designed sequence. The creation of a novel genomic DNA, however, still depends on chemical synthesis, which generates unsatisfactory DNA in terms of both size and the fidelity of construction. As a result, these DNAs would require multiple assembly and sequencing steps to obtain a genome-sized DNA. To reduce the number of iterations required, a method for assembling large numbers of DNA fragments simultaneously is desired. The Ordered Gene Assembly in  method (OGAB), developed in 2003, can efficiently assemble a dozen DNA fragments at once. The method incorporates a  plasmid transformation system that includes several unique processes: a double-strand break of DNA on the cell surface, incorporation of either single-strand DNA from the cutting site, and cyclization of the DNA inside the cell (). Like other assembly methods, OGAB assembly connects DNA blocks according to the sequence identities of the ends of the two relevant DNA blocks. Except for a yeast system that harnesses multiple DNA fragments , recent popular DNA assembly methods using  as a host, such as SLIC, Golden Gate, CPEC, Gibson, and SLiCE, require  connection (or recombination) products having a circular form. The mechanism underlying the formation of the circular product with multiple components is complicated, because two different types of connections, intramolecular and intermolecular, are both required. Indeed, the efficiency of intramolecular ligation is affected by a variety of factors, such as DNA fragment length and the concentrations of polyethylene glycol and cation. However, it can be said that efficiency decreases as the assembly scale increases, because the timing of intramolecular ligation for a ligating product is limited to when the product has the same number of DNA components with the assembly scale or with just multiples of the assembly scale, while intermolecular ligation proceeds simultaneously irrespective of the preferable timing of intramolecular ligation. For example, in the case of 6-fragment assembly, the timing of cyclization for a ligating product might appear 1/6, while in the case of 51-fragment assembly the timing might appear to be only 1/51 over the ligation duration. This might explain why cyclization with multiple components is inefficient. In contrast, OGAB requires an  ligation product possessing multiple assembly units in one molecule in the manner of a tandem repeat. This is achieved only by intermolecular ligation and is free from the timing problem ( and ). The redundancy () of the tandem repeats of an  ligation product is the most critical determinant of assembly accuracy and efficiency in the OGAB method. The minimum value required for  is more than 1, but higher  is preferable (). To obtain a ligation product with higher , the material DNA fragments, called OGAB blocks, should be close to equimolar concentrations, although in practical terms it is impossible to achieve complete equimolarity (). In the original OGAB method, however, it would be laborious to adjust even a dozen OGAB blocks to a molar concentration as the coefficient of variation of molar concentration (CV) ≈ 20%, due to the difficulty of adjusting the molar concentration of OGAB blocks with size variations (). To reduce the CV value toward a larger-scale assembly, we must strictly standardize the size of all OGAB blocks to an almost uniform length irrespective of genetic function, and then clone the blocks into the same vector (). From this, two advantageous features emerged. One is that this standardization makes it feasible to adjust the molar concentration of an OGAB block in the state of an intact cloning plasmid (hereafter we refer to this as OGAB block plasmid). Thanks to the precise stoichiometric magnification of the weight concentrations of the OGAB blocks by the vector portion, the same weight concentration between OGAB block plasmids can be regarded as the same molar concentration between relevant OGAB blocks. It is also expected that even if there is a certain degree of coefficient of variation of the sizes (CV) of the OGAB blocks, the deviation would be buffered by using a CV of the full size of the plasmid. The other advantage is that OGAB blocks after restriction digestion can be separated from the vector portions in a single electrophoresis by treating the integrated equimolar mixture as one solution. To demonstrate the merits that come from the strict standardization of OGAB block size, we performed two types of DNA assemblies: reconstruction of the lambda phage genome and synthesis of a −designed operon. Each assembly is comprised of more than 50 OGAB blocks. Additionally, the theoretical aspects and the feasibility of larger-scale assembly using this improved method are discussed. Design outline of the OGAB blocks for lambda phage genome reconstruction To demonstrate the performance of this improved method, we applied it to the reconstruction of 48.5 kb of a complete lambda phage genome (). We designed the OGAB blocks by taking the following points into account. First, the blocks should be different in size from the cloning vector, because the they must be completely separated from the vector by a single electrophoresis. The next point concerns the selection of restriction enzymes to produce OGAB blocks with short protrusions at both ends that are responsible for the ligation order and orientation by T4 DNA ligase. Type IIS restriction endonuclease, which digests DNA outside of the recognition sequence, was designed to prepare OGAB blocks without leaving any trace of the restriction enzyme recognition sequence (). Especially, a series of Type IIS restriction endonucleases that generate a protrusion with an arbitrary 4-nucleotide sequence at the 5’ end was considered useful for the excision of OGAB blocks. The size and number of possible OGAB blocks were simulated by varying both the combination of enzymes and the lengths of potential OGAB blocks to achieve a certain solution in which every OGAB block was assigned a restriction enzyme that did not cut inside of the relevant OGAB block. As a result, 48.5 kb of the lambda genome DNA was determined to be dissected into 50 OGAB blocks averaging 970 bp in length, which were prepared by any of three restriction enzymes: AarI, BbsI, and BsmBI (). Precise design of 50 OGAB blocks for seamless assembly Supplemental Materials and Methods Supplemental Materials and Methods Supplemental Materials and Methods The protrusions should be unique at each junction in one assembly. We chose 60 pairs of 4-base 5’ protrusions in advance as candidates according to the nucleotide compositions and sequence. These 60 pairs are comprised from 44 protrusion pairs that contain two A or T and two C or G nucleotides, but not palindromes, and 16 protrusion pairs that contain one A or T and three C or G nucleotides where the three C or G are not thrice in a row (). To realize seamless assembly, the 4-base protrusion candidate was searched from a sequence around the ideal dissection border (970 bp pitches) in the objective sequence (, ). We assigned the specific protrusion by computer simulation to minimize the size deviation of 50 OGAB blocks as CV = 0.65% (970.4 ± 6.3 bp, average ± standard deviation) (, ). The selected restriction enzyme site was added at each end of the OGAB block in a convergent manner with the block in order to generate the specific protrusion sequences for the PCR amplification (). Purification of the OGAB block plasmids The OGAB blocks thus designed were cloned into a conventional  cloning plasmid, pMD19 (2,692 bp; Takara), and confirmed by sequencing. At this time point, the CV of the 50 OGAB block plasmids was only 0.18% (3691.4 ± 6.5 bp). Crude plasmid extracted from  culture using a kit (QIAprep Miniprep Kit; Qiagen) would have at most several dozen percent of contaminated genome DNA (). To eliminate this, the plasmid was further purified using Plasmid-Safe DNase (Epicenter), an ATP-dependent exonuclease (). The weight concentrations of the obtained pure OGAB block plasmids were measured by a microvolume spectrophotometer known to have 2% measurement error under normal conditions (NanoDrop 2000; Thermo). They were then adjusted to 100 ng/μl by dilution with TE [10 mM Tris·HCl (pH 8.0), 1 mM EDTA], and the actual concentration was ascertained by repeated measurement with the microvolume spectrophotometer. Preparation of equimolar OGAB blocks Five hundred nanograms of each plasmid was transferred into one of three tubes that were marked AarI, BbsI, or BsmBI, according to plasmid design. The restriction enzyme AarI, BbsI, or BsmBI was added to the corresponding tube and incubated at 37 °C (or 55 °C for BsmBI) for 2 h (). After incubation, the same volume of phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1, pH7.9) was added to each reaction and vortexed to inactivate the enzyme. The water-phenol mixtures of the three tubes were integrated into one tube, followed by phenol extraction and subsequent ethanol precipitation. At this point, we confirmed that the mixture was really sufficiently equimolar in concentration, based on a CV value of 7.0% or less (as a measurement-error-corrected value) by quantitative PCR (). The resultant DNA was then size-selected by electrophoresis using low-gelling-temperature agarose gel (). The obtained OGAB block mixture was confirmed to be perfectly retained as a 6.6% CV (). A solution containing 50 OGAB blocks at an equimolar concentration was added to an equimolar amount of the  vector plasmid pGETS118-AarI () to obtain a 3 fmol/μl equimolar mixture. Ten microliters of this mixture was added to 11 μl of 2 × ligation buffer and 1 μl of T4 DNA ligase (4 Weiss units/μl; Takara), and then ligated at 37 °C for 4 h (). The resulting ligation product was used to transform competent cells of  BUSY9797. Among the 230 tetracycline-resistant transformants that appeared, 12 clones were randomly selected, of which 4 showed the correct restriction pattern (). We confirmed that the nucleotide sequences of all four of these clones were completely identical to the designed one. Furthermore, to confirm the biological activity of these four clones, their plaque formation ability was tested and confirmed to be normal (). We also confirmed the existence of intended mutation in the phage genome DNA (). Thus, we demonstrated that this improved method could feasibly be used to assemble more than 50 OGAB blocks. construction of artificial mevalonate operon from 55 OGAB blocks To further confirm the feasibility of this method, we attempted to construct a completely artificial sequence from short synthetic oligonucleotides. An artificial mevalonate operon with a −designed sequence of 5,951 bp, which originally was yeast genes but was optimised for  codon usage, was constructed (). Fifty-five OGAB blocks with a CV value = 4.2% (108 ± 4.5 bp) were designed (). OGAB blocks constructed from synthetic oligo DNAs by the method of Rossi using the AarI site for protrusion generation were cloned into pMD19 and sequenced. Actually, in the state of OGAB block plasmids the difference was buffered to only CV = 0.16% (2828.2 ± 4.5 bp). The obtained equimolar amount of 55 OGAB blocks and assembly vector pGETS151-AarI were ligated () and used for  transformation. Among the 154 colonies formed on the selection plate, plasmids of 24 randomly selected colonies were checked. Of these, two had the expected restriction digestion pattern (), and the sequence integrity of each was confirmed by sequencing. As shown above, we successfully demonstrated gene assembly from more than 50 DNA fragments in one step. The key point must be the redundancy () of the tandem repeats of an  ligation product, but there is no information about the allowable fluctuations in concentration. To assess this, computer simulations of the  ligation were performed using hypothetical fragments containing an average of 640 molecules for identical OGAB blocks with defined CV. The simulation was performed under the condition that only intermolecular ligation was permitted; intramolecular ligation was prohibited since our adopted ligation condition doesn’t form circular DNA. The ligation simulation ran until all canonical ligation pairs were exhausted (). For each assembly scale (6, 13, 26, and 51) and for each CV (from 0 to 20%, 1% interval), 20 simulations were performed using an independently prepared randomised initial value, resulting in a total of 1,680 simulation plots ().  shows the effect of the degree of CV of OGAB blocks on  (the number of OGAB blocks in one molecule of ligation product), which summarises the simulation results. A fitting curve for  (average  value) revealed that this parameter can be described simply according to the following equation, regardless of assembly scale: This equation means that when CV of prepared OGAB blocks is 1%, we can expect ligation products accommodating 173 OGAB blocks on average, whereas when CV is 20%, the expected block number drops to only 8.6. Because this equation doesn’t give any information about distribution, we then analysed the population distribution of  for each ligation simulation condition. The outline of distributions, at a glance, was exponential distribution such as a monotonic decrease as a function of . However, ligation products were periodically absent where  equalled to just multiples of the fragment number of assembly. This is obviously different from a canonical exponential profile. Exponential distribution () is expressed as a function of  as follows: where λ is the rate parameter of exponential distribution. Since the logarithmic transformation of  is as follows: λ can be calculated from the slope of a linear approximation of plots on -Ln(), with Ln() corresponding to the logarithmic-transformed count of ligation products in . Hereafter, λ calculated this way is denoted as λ. The λ values obtained from all of the simulation conditions were plotted on a CV-λ coordinate (), revealing that λ can be expressed as a function of CV almost regardless of the difference in assembly scales, as follows: On the other hand, λ can be calculated in a different way using the average value of exponential distribution, which corresponds to  Hereafter, this λ is presented as λ. According to , λ can be converted as follows: Since λ closely resembles λ, it can be said that this profile well follows an exponential distribution. Thus we heuristically regarded this ligation product population profile as exponential distribution, and performed further simulation using the following approximation by choosing λ as a rate parameter. This equation simply indicates that the value of CV is the only determinant for the distribution, regardless of the assembly scale (). Since the value of  is given as: This equation means that as the assembly scale becomes larger, the precision of the adjustment of the OGAB blocks to an equimolar concentration would increase in an inversely proportional manner; in the case of a 6-fragment assembly, even though the fluctuation was as high as CV = 20%, 82% of the OGAB blocks were incorporated into the ligation product with  > 1. However, if a 60-fragment assembly is projected, it might require CV = 2% for the same ligation profile of a 6-fragment assembly, meaning a 10-fold greater precision would be needed. Of course, the results of computer simulations can only be considered useful for the quality control of OGAB blocks if they functions well in actual experiments. To assess this, a regression analysis for lambda genome reconstitution was performed. First, we analysed the inconsistency of molar concentration of OGAB blocks between the initial values calculated by optical absorption of 260 mm and the values measured by quantitative PCR (). Since certain OGAB block plasmids showing lower DNA concentration by quantitative PCR in  would have higher optical adsorption ratio of 260 nm/230 nm at OGAB block plasmids level comparing with the rest of plasmids, it was probable that difference in impurity concentration among the OGAB block plasmids leads higher CV value. We think that it isn’t easy to go lower CV value than 7% in the current technology, because we couldn’t improve this situation even though performed three trials (Fig. 8B and ). Next, to identify the problems that led to the incorrect assembly of plasmids, all eight of the incorrect plasmids were sequenced, and the problems were attributed to misligation of OGAB blocks (). However, the occurrence ratio was only 46 junctions per misligation junction, or nearly as low as one misligation per construct. On the basis of this result, we considered that the misligation problem did not seriously affect . Next we investigated the ligation yield by kinetic analysis for all 51 junctions, and confirmed that all ligation reactions were completed under the conditions used (37 °C for 4 h) (). Finally, the actual length distribution of the  ligation products that were used with OGAB blocks with CV = 6.6% was compared with a distribution profile derived from a computer simulation using hypothetical OGAB blocks with the same CV value (). The two profiles were almost identical in terms of the shapes of the simulation results at 98–100% ligation efficiency; for example, the maximum density of DNA appeared at around the 40 kb region. Thus we confirmed that the simulation results well described the actual experiment and would be applicable to the quality control of OGAB blocks. Notably, these results indicate that we may assemble multiple DNA fragments, as many as 100 at once, if we can control the concentration fluctuation within 3.3%. The assembly is completed within 5 days if all OGAB plasmids are ready to use (). Using this method, OGAB blocks can be freely designed in terms of both size and number, and the resulting blocks might be constructed using a synthetic DNA. The assembled DNA may be applicable to the production of genome-sized constructs using the  genome vector platform. Supplemental Materials and Methods The assembly vector pGETS118-AarI-pBR is a shuttle vector between  and  constructed from pGETS118 in several steps, as indicated in . Two AarI sites, whose protrusion sequences are 5’-ATTA-3’/5’-TAAT-3’ and 5’-AAAA-3’/5’-TTTT-3’, were used for the assembly. Another assembly vector, pGETS151-pBR, was constructed by truncating plasmid origin of  of pGETS118-AarI-pBR as indicated in . The obtained linearised plasmid DNAs then were named pGET118-AarI and pGETS151-AarI, respectively. Preparation of OGAB block plasmids The OGAB blocks were amplified by PCR using the primers listed in . PCR was performed using KOD DNA polymerase (Toyobo). An A-protrusion at the 3’ end was added to the obtained PCR fragment using A-attachment Mix (Toyobo) according to the instruction manual. The obtained DNA was ligated into pMD19 (simple) (Takara) using Mighty Mix ligation mixture (Takara), and then was used to transform each of the  strains TOP10, JM109, and DH5α. Transformants of these plasmids were cultivated with LB medium supplemented with 100 μg/ml of carbenicillin (Wako, Japan). OGAB plasmid was purified from 1 ml of the culture using QIAprep Miniprep Kit (Qiagen) according to the instruction manual. The obtained crude plasmid solution was further purified enzymatically using Plasmid Safe DNase (Epicenter) as follows. Crude plasmid (5 μg/50 μl) was added to 6 μl 10 × buffer for Plasmid Safe DNase, 2.4 μl of 25 mM ATP, and 2 μl Plasmid Safe DNase. This reaction mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h, then incubated at 70 °C for 30 min to inactivate the enzymes. The resulting solution was cleaned up by using a conventional column-based cleanup kit and then eluted in a small volume of TE (pH 8.0) (<25 μl). Preparation of equimolar mixture A microvolume spectrophotometer determined the weight concentration of the purified OGAB block plasmid. Typically, the concentration ranged between 100 and 250 μg/μl. The purified OGAB block plasmid was then diluted to give 100 μg/μl solution with TE, after which the microvolume spectrophotometer confirmed that the concentration was very close to 100 μg/μl. The concentrations obtained here were used to calculate the precise volumes for just 500 ng to an accuracy of three significant digits. Restriction endonuclease AarI was obtained from Thermo. Restriction endonucleases BbsI and BsmBI were purchased from NEB. Restriction digestion of the plasmid mixture was performed while preserving the equimolar relation as follows. One volume of plasmid mixture was added to two volumes of sterilised water, 1/3 volume of 10 × buffer for the restriction enzyme, and 1/3 volume of the restriction enzyme. In AarI digestion, a manufacturer-supplied 50 × oligonucleotide solution was added for the preparation of OGAB blocks for the lambda phage, but it was not added for the preparation of blocks for the artificial mevalonate operon, in order to prevent contamination of the oligonucleotide in the OGAB blocks due to size similarity. The incubation temperature of BsmBI was 55 °C, while that of the other enzymes was 37 °C. After 2 h digestion at the appropriate temperature, 5% of the reaction mixture was sampled, and then 5 μl of that was checked for digestion integrity by electrophoresis. Inactivation of restriction enzymes The enzymes in the mixtures were inactivated by adding the same volume of phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol = 25:24:1 (Nakalai Tesque) and mixing. The resulting emulsions were integrated into one tube, followed by the usual phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol extraction and subsequent ethanol precipitation. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and subjected to phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol. The supernatant was then transferred to another new tube, and mixed with 500 μl of 1-butanol and centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 20 s. After the upper butanol phase was removed, fresh butanol was added and the solution was further mixed. This dehydration was repeated until the water phase fell below 450 μl. The DNA was precipitated by the addition of 2.5 volumes of ethanol after 50 μl of potassium acetate (300 mM, pH 4.8) was mixed with the water phase. The precipitated DNA was rinsed with 70% ethanol, dried, and dissolved in 20 μl of TE. Size selection of OGAB blocks by agarose gel electrophoresis Two types of agarose gels were used. As a low-gelling-temperature agarose, 2-Hydroxyethyl agarose (Sigma) was used. The electrophoresis was performed as follows: gel concentration, 0.7%; buffer, 1 × TAE [40 mM Tris-acetate (pH 8.3) and 1 mM EDTA]; strength of electric field, 3 V/cm; running time, 3 h. After staining with ethidium bromide, gel blocks containing the OGAB blocks were excised from the main part by 365 nm UV illumination. The excised gel block (up to 500 mg) was filled up to 650 μl with 1 × TAE buffer and melted at 65 °C for 15 min. The gel solution was added to 500 μl of phenol-saturated TE buffer (Nakalai Tesque) and mixed by a vortex, followed by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 5 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and subjected to phenol extraction until the gel debris that would be positioned at the surface between the phenol and water had disappeared. The supernatant was transferred to another new tube, then mixed with 500 μl of 1-butanol and centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 20 s. After removal of the upper butanol phase, fresh butanol was added and mixed in. This dehydration was repeated until the water phase fell below 450 μl. The DNA was precipitated by the addition of 2.5 volumes of ethanol after 50 μl of potassium acetate (300 mM, pH 4.8) was mixed with the water phase. The precipitated DNA was rinsed with 70% ethanol, dried, and dissolved in 20 μl of TE. For the size selection of OGAB blocks for the artificial mevalonate operon, general agarose gel (UltraPure agarose; Invitrogen) was used in place of the low-gelling-temperature agarose, because short DNA is not tolerant to 65 °C. The electrophoresis was performed as follows: gel, 2.5% agarose with 1 × TAE buffer; strength of electric field, 3 V/cm; running time, 3 h. After separation, the gel was dissected into two parts, the main part and the size marker part, and only the latter was stained with ethidium bromide. After staining, gel blocks containing the OGAB blocks were excised from the main part by referring to the size of the stained gel by 365 nm UV illumination. The OGAB blocks were purified using a MinElute Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen) according to the instruction manual, except that DNA was eluted with 10 μl of TE (pH 8.0) instead of the buffer included in the kit. Ligation for tandem-repeat linear form A 2 × ligation buffer for linear form DNA [132 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.6), 13.2 mM MgCl , 20 mM dithiothreitol, 0.2 mM ATP, 500 mM NaCl, 20% (w/v) polyethylene glycol 6000 (Wako Pure Chemical)] was prepared and used. The NaCl concentration in this buffer was higher than that of the former buffer. Ten microliters of this mixture (3 fmol/μl each) was added to 11 μl of 2 × ligation buffer, and 1 μl of T4 DNA ligase (4 Weiss units/μl) was added. After reaction at 37 °C for 4 h, 8 μl of ligation products was subjected to electrophoresis to confirm the ligation. Competent  BUSY9797 cells were prepared using the two-step culture method developed by Anagnostopoulos and Spizizen. An overnight culture of  (50 μl) in LB was inoculated onto 925 μl medium TFI containing 25 μl of 2% casamino acid. The TFI medium contained 1.4% KHPO, 0.6% KHPO, 0.2% (NH)SO, 0.1% trisodium citrate, 0.5% glucose, 0.02% MgSO·7HO, 0.05 mg/ml tryptophan, 0.05 mg/ml arginine, 0.05 mg/ml leucine, and 0.05 mg/ml threonine. After shaking with vigorous aeration for 3.75 h at 37 °C, 100 μl culture was transferred into 900 μl of TFII medium. The TFII medium contained 1.4% KHPO, 0.6% KHPO, 0.2% (NH)SO, 0.1% trisodium citrate, 0.5% glucose, 0.02% MgSO·7HO, 0.01% casamino acid, 0.005 mg/ml tryptophan, 0.005 mg/ml arginine, 0.005 mg/ml leucine, and 0.005 mg/ml threonine. After 90 min of incubation at 37 °C, a 100 μl aliquot of the cell culture was used for transformation. Supplemental Materials and Methods Colonies on a plate were picked up by a toothpick and inoculated into 2 mL of 10 μg/ml tetracycline-containing LB medium. After the culture reached the late-log to stationary phase at 37 °C, the plasmid copy number was amplified by the addition of IPTG (Isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside) to the culture at a final concentration of 1 mM, followed by cultivation for another 3 h. The alkaline–SDS method described by Bron was used as indicated in . K.T., M.T. and M.I. designed research; K.T., Y.S., Y.K. and M.G. prepared DNA fragments for assembly; K.T., M.I., M.H. and T.T. prepared assembly vectors; K.T., Y.S. and Y.K. performed assembly; and K.T., M.T. and M.I. wrote the paper. : Tsuge, K.  Method of preparing an equimolar DNA mixture for one-step DNA assembly of over 50 fragments. 
, 10655; doi: 10.1038/srep10655 (2015)..