The central goal in synthetic
biology is to engineer living systems that exhibit new behaviors and
functions. The most common approach is to start with a set of standard
biological parts or modules and to combine them in new ways to give
rise to desired properties. To design increasingly complex systems,
larger sets of characterized parts are required. Several groups have
addressed the challenge of refining and standardizing biological parts
and devices by assessing the activity of different promoters in cell-based
transcriptional assays, designing synthetic ribosome binding sites,
engineering directed transcript cleavage by RNase, creating libraries
of simple logic gates, and constructing orthogonal bacterial expression
systems. These studies have generated diverse, well-defined modules, and
collections of many well-characterized molecular components can be
found in the Registry of Standardized Parts () and at BioFAB (). Most of the
parts currently used for biological design are directed toward regulation
at the level of transcription or translation, and the set of reagents
available for post-translational control is limited. A small number
of protein interaction domains, including coiled coils, PDZ, SH3,
and GBD domains, have been used to localize or oligomerize proteins.
These have been applied in both scaffolding and signaling applications
with impressive results, but the limited number and diversity
of well-characterized domains restricts the complexity that can be
designed. A larger repertoire of interaction reagents could facilitate
the implementation of more complex systems. Coiled coils, structures
in which α helices intertwine to
form superhelical bundles, are the simplest of all protein interaction
motifs and have a rich history of use in molecular engineering. Coiled
coils of only ∼20–50 residues can fold and oligomerize
into homo- or heteromeric 2-to-4 helix bundles, and many of the sequence features that govern coiled-coil
interaction specificity are known. Coiled-coil sequences
have a repeating seven-residue pattern, termed a heptad repeat, that
is denoted (). Hydrophobic residues occupy many of the  and  positions, forming a well packed interface, and  and  positions on opposing helices tend
to be electrostatically complementary. Homodimerizing coiled coils
have been used to stabilize complexes, study self-assembly, and dimerize artificial
transcription factors. Beyond using protein interactions for self-oligomerization,
heterodimerizing coiled coils allow the creation of more complex systems
by bringing different components together. Recent studies have applied
coiled-coil heterodimers to nanofiber formation three-dimensional
organization of nanoscale particles, the
engineering of protein-based hydrogels, and signaling pathway modulation  recruitment
of kinases/phosphatases. These studies
indicate there is a promising future in using coiled-coil reagents
in biomolecular engineering, one limitation being the small number
of interacting partners to choose from. Reinke  recently reported a set of 23 synthetic
heteroassociating coiled coils called SYNZIPs. The SYNZIPs were originally designed to interact heterospecifically
with the leucine-zipper regions of human bZIP transcription factors
as parallel coiled-coil dimers and in this context were referred to
as anti-bZIPs. Following assessment of
the interaction of the anti-bZIPs with their human protein targets, the designed proteins were tested for pairwise
interactions among themselves using a coiled-coil microarray assay. Twenty-three peptides were selected as potentially
useful heteroassociating interaction modules on the basis of minimal
self-interaction and strong heteroassociation with one or more of
the other designs. These 23 anti-bZIP peptides were renamed SYNZIPs.
Comprehensive analysis of pairwise SYNZIP interactions revealed many
interesting network patterns, such as orthogonal interaction pairs
and hub-spoke motifs. Crystallographic studies of 2 of the interacting
pairs, SYNZIP1:SYNZIP2 and SYNZIP5:SYNZIP6, demonstrated that these
form parallel, dimeric coiled coils. Although  array studies have established
that many SYNZIP pairs form tight, heterospecific complexes, more
information about their interaction properties is required if they
are to be employed as standard molecular interaction parts. Furthermore,
SYNZIP interactions have yet to be validated inside cells. To facilitate
the use of these modules for diverse purposes, we here present extensive
biophysical characterization of numerous SYNZIP interactions  and report the ability of many pairs to interact
with the anticipated specificity in yeast. Maximal utility of the SYNZIPs,
for applications in molecular engineering,
demands knowledge of their interaction geometries and affinities.
Although the SYNZIPs share many sequence features in common with bZIP
leucine zippers, which form parallel coiled-coil dimers to allow the
transcription factors to bind DNA, it has also been observed that
even a single amino-acid change can alter the oligomerization state
or helix orientation of coiled coils. Crystal structures of
two SYNZIP complexes revealed that these form parallel heterodimers,
and Reinke  further argued that many other
SYNZIP pairs are likely to do so. However,
establishing this experimentally requires extensive biophysical characterization,
which we report here. For synthetic biology applications, SYNZIPs
must form the expected
interactions in cells when fused to a variety of domains. To test
whether SYNZIPs expressed as fusion proteins can interact similarly
to shorter coiled-coil peptides, we carried out  studies using MBP fusions. We chose 14 SYNZIPs for  testing, selecting proteins that had many interaction partners in
the prior coiled-coil microarray tests or that interacted with a SYNZIP
that had many interaction partners. We also tested SYNZIP fusions
for function in cells, assaying 22 SYNZIPs as Gal4 DNA-binding and
activation-domain constructs in a two-hybrid screen and 14 SYNZIPs
as Msg5- and Ste5-fusions in a MAPK signaling assay. Oligomerization state
is a critical parameter for interaction reagents. For example, it
was recently demonstrated that varying the number of protein interaction
sites on a synthetic scaffold can tune the output of synthetic metabolic
pathways. Thus, we developed a moderate-throughput
strategy to assess the oligomerization state of numerous SYNZIPs and
SYNZIP complexes. SYNZIPs have a molecular weight of ∼5
kDa, which is one of their advantages as interaction modules. Their
small size precludes easy determination of oligomer state using size
exclusion chromatography (SEC), but using MBP fusion proteins allowed
us to separate oligomers based on molecular weight changes of ∼50
kDa, which corresponds to a significant difference in hydrodynamic
radius. Interacting SYNZIP-MBP fusions are composed of two globular
domains attached to a rigid coiled-coil linker, and this unusual shape
could potentially influence their elution profiles. Thus, we used
the SYNZIP1:SYNZIP2 heterodimer with each peptide fused to MBP as
a dimer standard and made a homotrimeric
mutant of the yeast bZIP GCN4, GCN4-pIqI fused to MBP as a trimer standard. SEC results for SYNZIP1:SYNZIP2
and SYNZIP19:SYNZIP21 are shown
in Figure a, and results for all other tested
pairs are summarized in Table  and detailed
in the . The majority
of individual SYNZIPs eluted as monomers, as expected in the absence
of a heterodimerization partner, but there were exceptions. Several
constructs eluted later than most monomers and/or had asymmetric tailing
peaks (Figure a, ). It is not unexpected that SYNZIP monomers would have
some affinity for the column matrix, as leucine-zipper monomers are
mostly unfolded and expose many hydrophobic residues. The degree of
residual structure in SYNZIP monomers could also vary with sequence.
Several zippers that appeared to form homo-oligomers at 10 μM
injection concentrations were further tested for self-association
using fluorescence polarization at lower concentrations (see below). In cases where the individual zippers eluted as monomers,
it was
very clear when a dimer formed upon mixing because there was a shift
of almost all protein to a dimer peak. For example, in Figure a, the left panel shows the elution profiles of
SYNZIPs 1 and 2. SYNZIP1 eluted primarily in a peak at the size expected
for a monomer. Most of SYNZIP2 eluted slightly later than observed
for other monomers. The SYNZIP1:SYNZIP2 mixture gave a strong peak
in the dimer size range. SEC could also be used to detect cases where
a monomeric species was mixed with a homo-oligomerizing partner, forming
a preferential heterodimer. For example, SYNZIP21 alone eluted as
a dimer, and SYNZIP19 eluted later than most monomers. It was nevertheless
clear that a dimeric complex was formed by the mixture, because monomeric
species all but disappeared from the elution profile and instead most
of the protein eluted in the dimer-size peak (Figure a, right panel). When two homodimerizing SYNZIPs were mixed
and gave a large peak at the expected dimer elution volume, the SEC
data could not be used to confirm interaction. Nevertheless, such
experiments supported the formation of dimers rather than higher order
species, and pairs showing this behavior (, SYNZIP14:SYNZIP21, ) were further characterized
using orientation and affinity assays (Table ). Biophysical
properties of SYNZIPs. (a) SEC elution traces. The
left panel shows SYNZIP1 in green, SYNZIP2 in blue, the SYNZIP1:SYNZIP2
mixture in red, and the GCN4-pIqI trimer control in black. The right
panel shows SYNZIP21 in blue, SYNZIP19 in green, the SYNZIP19:SYNZIP21
mixture in red, and the GCN4-pIqI trimer control in black. (b) The
cartoon shows a schematic of the FRET assay, and the bar graph shows
FRET efficiencies for selected pairs. Hatched bars are the N-terminal
donor/N-terminal acceptor mixes, and gray bars are the C-terminal
donor/N-terminal acceptor mixes. (c) Representative FP titrations
plotted as the fraction of the fluorescein labeled protein bound.
Each plot shows reciprocal measurements, with each interaction partner
used in turn as the labeled species. Raw data, showing millipolarization,
is available in .
(d) Competition between strong and weak SYNZIP pairs. Observed interactions
are summarized in graphs at the top of each plot, where circles represent
SYNZIPs, bold lines indicate strong interactions, and dotted lines
indicate weak interactions observed in this assay. The fluorescence
polarization of different mixtures is shown in the bar graphs. “F”
and “R” in the legend of each plot designates the species
labeled with fluorescein or rhodamine, and the curves show the best
fit to the data (see ). Error bars
show ±1 SD over three (b and c) or four (d) replicates. SYNZIP Pair Biophysical Properties Determined from the SEC, FRET, and
FP data. From best fit, or average of the
two best-fit  values when each species
was labeled for the assay. No upper baseline was obtained in
the assay. Elution trace
with a leading edge
slightly larger than dimer. Mixture of two homo-oligomerizing
species. Although certain sequence
features suggest a parallel arrangement of SYNZIP helices, we sought to confirm this experimentally because
knowing the interaction geometry can be critical for molecular engineering.
For example, knowledge of helix orientation was necessary in the design
of artificial transcription factors using coiled coils fused to DNA
binding domains, as demonstrated with zinc fingers and polyamides. To determine
the interaction orientation of SYNZIP helices, we employed a FRET
assay in which the first partner was labeled with a fluorescein donor
on either the N- or C-terminus, and the second partner was N-terminally
labeled with a rhodamine acceptor (Figure b). In a parallel complex, an N-terminal fluorescein will exhibit
greater FRET efficiency than a C-terminal fluorescein when transferring
energy to a rhodamine acceptor conjugated to the N-terminus of an
interaction partner. An antiparallel interaction would exhibit greater
FRET efficiency when a C-terminal fluoresceinated peptide was mixed
with an N-terminal acceptor. Because this is a population assay, it
reports only the prevailing helix orientation, and thus it is possible
that mixtures of orientations are present in some cases. The crystal
structures of the SYNZIP1:SYNZIP2 and SYNZIP5:SYNZIP6 pairs confirm
a parallel orientation for these complexes, so these were used as
parallel controls. The coiled-coil Acid-a1/Base-a1 was used as an
antiparallel control (Figure b). For all but one of the SYNZIP interactions
measured, we observed
a greater FRET efficiency for the N-donor/N-acceptor mix than for
the C-donor/N-acceptor mix, supporting a predominantly parallel helix
orientation (Table ). This was true regardless
of which peptide was labeled with fluorescein and which was labeled
with rhodamine; each complex was tested using both combinations (). When we tested the SYNZIP6:SYNZIP21
pair that did not interact on the peptide microarrays or by SEC, no
FRET signal was observed. Figure B shows differences
in FRET efficiencies for 4 parallel SYNZIP pairs. SYNZIP17:SYNZIP18
gave the opposite pattern, indicating an antiparallel interaction
similar to the antiparallel control pair Acid-a1/Base-a1 (denoted
Facid + Rbase in Figure b). This pair eluted
as a dimer in SEC, indicating the structure is likely that of an antiparallel
heterodimer. Manual inspection of the sequences of SYNZIPs 17 and
18, as they would interact in an antiparallel heterodimer, suggests
two possible alignments that maximize the helix–helix overlap
and predict electrostatic complementary at adjacent interfacial  and  positions (). Knowledge of the affinities
of SYNZIP complexes is necessary for determining the concentration
range at which they will be effective interaction reagents. It has
also been demonstrated that changing the affinity of a coiled-coil
interaction in a MAPK signaling assay can tune the effect of a modulator
and create complex pathway responses. We
assayed 27 SYNZIP pairs using a fluorescence polarization (FP) assay
in which fluoresceinated MBP-fusion SYNZIP was mixed with increasing
concentrations of an unlabeled MBP-fusion partner. Supplementary Data 1 and Figure 1 The majority
of SYNZIP interacting pairs tested were very stable, with dissociation
constants less than 10 nM (Figure ). Quantifying
affinities tighter than this is beyond the sensitivity of the assay.
Thus the reported  values for tight
binders can be considered an upper limit. Overall, the affinity data
agree well with data from other assays. Strong hetero interactions
detected in the previous coiled-coil array study and by SEC all had very tight affinities as measured by
FP. For weakly interacting pairs, , those not
previously observed to interact and those that interacted only weakly
on protein microarrays, interactions were observed only at higher
concentrations, if at all, and we could not detect an upper baseline
even at concentrations approaching 20 μM (). Finally, most of the self-interactions
originally detected by SEC exhibited a slow increase in polarization
with increasing concentration, inconsistent with cooperative two-state
binding (). Figure c shows titration binding curves for three tight
SYNZIP interactions and one weak interaction. We also tested
whether a tight pair could compete effectively with
a weak pair. For example, the SYNZIP18:SYNZIP21 pair showed no signal
on the coiled-coil microarrays and showed
weak interaction in FP studies ( >
250
nM). When SYNZIP18 labeled with fluorescein was mixed with a high
concentration of SYNZIP21, we detected an interaction between the
two as indicated by an increase in polarization. However, when a high
concentration of SYNZIP16, which forms a tight complex with SYNZIP21,
was included in the mixture, the weak interaction no longer occurred
(Figure d). Similar trends were observed for
other pairs, as shown in Figure d. SYNZIP Interactions in a Yeast Two-Hybrid Assay The
yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) assay provides a straightforward and widely
used way to assess the ability of SYNZIPs to mediate protein association
in cells. The proteins to be tested are individually fused to the DNA-binding
(bait) and activation domains (prey) of the Gal4 transcription factor.
In our version of the assay, a SYNZIP–SYNZIP interaction reconstitutes
the transcription factor, which then drives expression of  and  reporter genes. A positive
readout requires that the fusion proteins be expressed, localize to
the nuclei of living cells, and interact. Thus, Y2H can be used to
determine whether SYNZIP fusions are toxic to cells, and whether concentrating
them in the nucleus affects their interaction behavior. We tested
all pairwise combinations of 22 SYNZIPs both as DNA-binding and activation
domain fusions for both selection assays. Figure a and c summarizes our observations that many SYNZIP pairs
did not support growth, as expected, and that rapidly growing colonies
were often detected reciprocally in both fusion contexts. For all
of the SYNZIPs in each fusion context, we observed comparable growth
rates on selection media for plasmid maintenance only, indicating
that constitutive expression of these SYNZIP fusion constructs had
no noticeable effect on cell viability. There were 3 autoactivating
DNA-binding domain fusions (SYNZIPs 4, 11 and 18) that permitted growth
alone and regardless of partner. We did not observe any autoactivating
activation-domain fusions, indicating that the SYNZIPs did not directly
bind the promoters of the reporters in this system. The Y2H assay
showed good overall agreement with interaction profiles observed in
previous work using coiled-coil microarrays. On the basis of comparisons of 235 pairs (see ) under -histidine selection, 12 strong interactions observed by
Y2H were not seen on the arrays and 12 strong array interactions were
not detected by Y2H, for an overall discrepancy of ∼10% (Figure b). The -uracil selection data allowed us to compare
237 pairs, and we found that 7 strong interactions observed by Y2H
were not seen on the arrays, and 23 strong array interactions were
not detected by Y2H, for an overall discrepancy of ∼13% (Figure d). We observed several interactions involving SYNZIP8
that were not detected in the original study, including pairs 8:2,
8:14, and 8:21. We also did not see a previously strong interaction
between SYNZIPs 13 and 15, although this interaction was detected
in the MAPK assay described below. These results indicate that many
of the SYNZIP pairs can function as general interaction reagents in
a yeast nuclear context. The full data sets are available in . SYNZIP interactions detected
by Y2H. (a) Histidine selection with
100 mM 3-AT, 12 days growth, represented in greyscale with white as
no growth and black as strongest growth. (b) Heat map comparing Y2H
data with coiled-coil microarray data, with Y2H in the lower left
and microarray in the upper right. Red ×'s indicate an interaction
observed in Y2H but not seen on the microarray or . Y2H data is shown as black, strong interaction; gray, undetermined
interaction; white, no interaction; blue, two autoactivators (see ). Microarray data is the maximum of the
two reciprocal measurements ranging from no interaction (white,  > 1) to strong interaction (black,  = 0). (c, d) Uracil
selection, 12 days
growth and heat map comparison with microarray, as in panel b. Repressing Yeast α-Factor Response Using SYNZIPs as Recruitment
Domains for a Negative Pathway Modulator Bashor  recently demonstrated how the output of the yeast mating
pathway can be modulated by recruiting kinases or phosphatases to
the protein scaffold Ste5 in the yeast cytoplasm. A heterodimeric variant of a native bZIP protein dimerization
domain was used in the original application. In our version of this assay, one SYNZIP was fused to the Ste5 scaffold
to provide a binding site for a second SYNZIP that was fused to the
phosphatase Msg5 (Figure , inset). The effect
of recruiting Msg5 to Ste5 on the mating response was detected using
a GFP reporter gene. Following α-factor induction of the MAPK
signaling cascade, we expected that an interacting SYNZIP pair would
result in reduced reporter activation compared to a control in which
Msg5 was not fused to any SYNZIP. We tested 13 pairs expected to interact
and 29 pairs expected not to interact on the basis of prior studies. Figure  shows the normalized
mean fluorescence
intensity of GFP in cells 120 min after α-factor induction (raw
data available in ).
Tested pairs are ordered from those that gave the lowest GFP expression,
at left, to those that gave the highest GFP expression at right. Those
pairs observed to interact on coiled-coil microarrays are show in
green, and these gave the most reduced pathway outputs, as expected.
Two exceptions where expected interactions did not lead to transcriptional
down-regulation are shown in yellow. For example, the SYNZIP2:SYNZIP13
interaction was very strong on the coiled-coil arrays and in the Y2H
-histidine selection, but weak in this scaffolding assay. We also
observed that in one fusion context the SYNZIP6:SYNZIP20 pair, a strong
interaction in our other assays, had less effect than some of the
weak or undetected pairs. Weak SYNZIP pairs and self-interactions,
shown in blue, had less effect on pathway output than tight pairs,
as expected. The SYNZIP18:SYNZIP21 pair gave a moderate response in
the scaffolding assay, although it was not detected using microarrays,
in Y2H or by SEC, and gave a  of >250
nM by the FP assay (). The few differences in activity observed between the scaffolding
assay and Y2H are not unexpected, as the interactions are being tested
in different cellular environments and at different concentrations.
Overall, the MAPK signaling data indicate that many SYNZIPs can interact
in a cytosolic environment, with low to moderate expression levels,
while maintaining the specificity of the interactions. Cell fluorescence
as a measure of MAPK pathway modulation by SYNZIP
pairs. SYNZIP pairs are rank ordered, left-to-right, by the relative
mean cell fluorescence induced when the pair was used to recruit Msg5
to Ste5 (inset). The first SYNZIP listed was fused to the Ste5 scaffold
protein and the second was fused to Msg5 phosphatase. Green bars indicate
interacting pairs as determined by Y2H and coiled-coil microarray.
Two instances where SYNZIPs that interacted on the array showed little
MAPK pathway down-regulation are highlighted in yellow. Average signals
from 4 replicates are reported relative to the average signal for
a Ste5-SYNZIPX:Msg5-nozipper control, with X the corresponding SYNZIP
for the Ste5 fusion. Error bars show 1 SD of 4 measurements. Multifaceted characterization
of SYNZIP interactions has allowed us to compile detailed biological
specification sheets for 27 SYNZIP pairs (). Figure  shows a specification
sheet for the SYNZIP1:SYNZIP2 pair. For this pair, we present the
sequence alignment of the interaction based on the crystal structure,
although in most cases we present a probable alignment based on electrostatic
complementary at –′
positions and other specificity determinants such Asn-Asn pairing
at ′ positions (primes indicate a position on the opposite helix). Next, a table
summarizes all of the interaction data we collected, including experimental
observations and additional comments. The original protein microarray
data are presented using  values, as defined
in ref (), where
numbers approaching zero indicate strong binding. Yeast two-hybrid
data are reported qualitatively, and increasing numbers of “+”
symbols indicate larger yeast colonies for interacting SYNZIP pairs.
Instances of non-reciprocal interactions with respect to DNA-binding  activation-domain fusions and instances of autoactivation
are noted. The α-factor MAPK repression is reported as the fractional
repression of pathway output in each fusion context. The coiled-coil
oligomerization state, helix orientation, and  based on the SEC, FRET, and FP assays are reported, with
notes advising of any deviations from ideal behavior in the assays.
We also present data for the biophysical assays, interactions with
other SYNZIPs detected in any assays, constructs that are available,
any associated PDB codes, and other comments. The SYNZIP specification
sheets are intended to facilitate use of these reagents in a variety
of molecular engineering applications. SYNZIP interaction specification sheet
for pair SYNZIP1:SYNZIP2. Several properties of the SYNZIPs suggest
they will find utility as reagents in synthetic biology, nanotechnology,
and other fields. First, the SYNZIPs predominately form high-affinity
dimers, indicating they can be used for the stoichiometic assembly
of fusion partners. Recent reports describe several orthogonal protein
interaction domains that can be used for multiple recruitments events;
however there is a limitation in the number of such pairs available.
Furthermore, the affinities of the several common reagents in use,
PDZ, SH3, and GBD domains, are in the upper nanomolar to lower micromolar
range. SYNZIPs could provide additional orthogonal
interaction pairs, but with much higher affinity, allowing recruitment
at lower expression levels. Next, for all but one of the tested pairs,
our assays indicate that parallel assemblies are forming, providing
a common structure for modular design. At the same time, the one instance
of an antiparallel coiled coil (SYNZIP17:18) could also be useful;
we are exploring the design of additional antiparallel components.
Finally, tight and weak pairs have large affinity gaps and high heterospecificity.
Affinity differences could allow competitive displacement strategies,
where a weakly interacting partner is displaced by a stronger one,
as shown in several examples in Figure d.
Although we have only put an upper bound on the 's of most interacting SYNZIP pairs, there are likely
to be differences among these affinities, and competitive displacement
may be possible in this regime as well. Alternatively, overexpression
of one partner with respect to another could lead to partner switching.
Characterizing the kinetics of exchange in future work will be important
for developing displacement as a design feature. A unique feature
of the SYNZIPS, compared to interaction modules such as PDZ, SH3,
and GBD domains, is that they can form combinatorial pairwise interactions
and thus provide access to rich sets of network motifs. To facilitate
visualization and selection of such motifs, we have provided several
interaction data sets in a format easily readable by Cytoscape, including two sets of yeast two-hybrid data
(using 2 different reporters) and the protein microarray  from the previously published work (). Here we discuss several sets of the best characterized
SYNZIPs that can be used to construct interesting and potentially
useful network motifs. Linear Interactions: SYNZIPs 2:19:21:4 One type of
interaction network that we see among the SYNZIPs has a linear topology
(Figure a). In this type of motif, two interacting
pairs (2:19 and 21:4) share an interaction between them (19:21). Although
these interactions are very tight, one could imagine their use in
competition experiments using stoichiometric variations. For example,
a desired final state of an interaction between 2 and 19 could be
inhibited by a higher amount of 21 sequestering 19. The interactions
could then be switched in the presence of an excess of 4, which would
bind 21, thus freeing 19 and allowing the desired final state. The
off rates for several leucine zippers are in the range 10 to 10 s, indicating that
such a competition strategy could be reasonable. Network motifs constructed
from SYNZIP pair interactions: (a) linear,
(b) ring, (c) hub, and (d) orthogonal-pair motifs. Proteins are denoted
as circles, with the SYNZIP number indicated. Strong interactions
are shown with solid lines, and weak interactions with dashed lines.
SYNZIPs that are not connected by an edge did not interact in the
Y2H or previous coiled-coil microarray assays. All interactions and
some non-interactions were confirmed  in
this work. The asterisk indicates an antiparallel interaction between
SYNZIP17 and SYNZIP18. Ring Interactions: SYNZIPs 18:19:21:20 A second type
of interaction network has a ring topology (Figure b). This motif has strong interactions among 4 SYNZIPs that
make up the perimeter of a ring, with a much lower affinity interaction
between 18 and 21 and no interaction observed between 19 and 20.  data indicate that in the presence of other tight-binding
partners, cross-reactivity of 18 and 21 is minimized (Figure d). This type of interaction could be used in a
single-SYNZIP recruitment/single-SYNZIP competition arrangement, , SYNZIP19 could be used to recruit both 18 and 21,
and overexpression of SYNZIP20 would competitively eliminate both
interactions with 19. Hub Interactions: SYNZIPs 17:18:19:20 A hub interaction
motif can be formed by removing SYNZIP21 from the previously described
ring motif and adding SYNZIP17 (Figure c).
An interesting property of this interaction set is the inclusion of
an antiparallel partner. One could imagine an application of this
motif as a way to localize several proteins, using just one recruitment
domain. For example, the hub partner 18 could be fused to a cellular
membrane protein that is expressed at high levels. If expressed at
lower levels, the remaining SYNZIPs could all be localized to the
membrane. Orthogonal Interactions: SYNZIPs 1:2, 3:4 Finally,
the lack of interactions among several SYNZIPs provides orthogonal
pair motifs (Figure d). These interactions
allow multiple interaction events to be insulated from each other.
Many applications for this type of motif can be envisioned, , partners from multiple orthogonal pairs could be linked
together and used as a fully synthetic scaffold, or multiple pathways
could be modulated by recruitment events with minimal crosstalk. We would like to emphasize that these network motifs are inferred
from interactions tested in 2-component mixtures. With some exceptions,
we have not confirmed that the expected dimers are the primary species
that form in solution when multiple SYNZIPs are mixed. For example,
it is possible that in some combinations more than two SYNZIPs assemble
into higher order complexes. Reinke  showed
that 4-component mixtures (of SYNZIPs 1, 2, 3, and 4 or SYNZIPs 1,
2, 5, and 6) formed the expected pairs, implementing the orthogonal
pair-type motif shown in Figure d. Here we
have demonstrated that in several three-component mixtures, the strong
interaction forms preferentially over the weak interaction (Figure d). It is likely, given the dimer-like sequence
characteristics of the SYNZIPs, that other SYNZIPs will form the expected
heterodimers even in complex mixtures, but for the majority of cases
this remains to be experimentally verified. In summary, the
SYNZIPs comprise a large set of well-characterized
synthetic protein interaction reagents. SYNZIPs have properties that
make them well suited for use in the design of biological systems.
They form highly specific, high affinity interactions, allowing them
to mediate interactions at low concentrations. They are small, between
30 and 50 residues, and should incur a small metabolic cost for the
cells in which they are used. Fusion proteins that we have made to
SYNZIPs are soluble and well behaved , and
cell toxicity in  and yeast appears to be
limited. Finally, SYNZIPs participate in diverse interaction motifs,
providing access to complex connectivities that go beyond simple one-to-one
interactions. With the extensive biophysical characterization and
yeast-cell validation presented here, the SYNZIP interaction reagents
greatly increase the number of available protein–protein interaction
tools for scientists to use for engineering systems at the post-translational
level. Cloning, Purification, and Dye Labeling Supplementary
Figure 4 and Supplementary Table 1 Synthetic genes
encoding SYNZIPs with stop codons were
initially PCR-amplified and ligated into pENTR vectors using D-TOPO
cloning (Invitrogen). Subsequent addition of N- or C-terminal Cys-Gly
residues and removal of stop codons was done by PCR mutagenesis using
the initial pENTR-SYNZIP vectors. SYNZIPs were then recombined into
appropriate destination vectors using LR Clonase II (Invitrogen) in
5 or 2.5 μL reactions (see  for constructs). Synthetic
genes used for the MAPK assay were designed with yeast optimized codons
using Gene Designer, synthesized by PCR
and then cloned into vectors using standard digestion and ligation
procedures. For protein expression, SYNZIPs bearing N- or C-terminal
Cys residues were recombined into a pMAL (NEB) derivative vector including
a TEV protease cleavage site (not used) between maltose binding protein
(MBP) and the Gateway linker region, and a C-terminal His6X. These
destination vectors were transformed into BL21(DE3) cells (Agilent).
Liquid cultures (500 mL) were induced with 1 mM IPTG at OD 0.6 for 4 h at 37 °C. Cells were pelleted, resuspended, and
then lysed by sonication, and proteins were purified from the supernatant
using NiNTA agarose (Qiagen) under native conditions. There was little
variation in growth rate or peptide yield among different SYNZIPs,
indicating overexpression of these fusion constructs did not have
noticeably adverse effects on the cells. NiNTA-purified proteins were
dialyzed and concentrated into PBS (2 mM KHPO, 10 mM NaHPO, 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl) pH
7.4, 1 mM DTT, 37% glycerol and stored at −20 °C. Control
proteins GCN4-pIqI, Acid-a1 and Base-a1 (see below) were designed
with  optimized codons using DNA Works, gene synthesized by PCR, ligated into the pENTR
vector using D-TOPO cloning, recombined into the pMAL derivative expression
vector, and purified as above. Cys-containing MBP-SYNZIP-His6X
proteins were labeled using maleimide chemistry with fluorescein-5-maleimide
(N-terminal or C-terminal) or Rhodamine Red C2 maleimide (N-terminal
only) (Invitrogen). A 50 pmol portion of protein from glycerol stocks
was reduced with 1 mM TCEP-HCl (Pierce) and then buffer exchanged
into degassed PBS. The fluorophore was added at 10-fold molar excess
and incubated at room temperature overnight with rotation. After labeling,
free dye was removed by a desalting spin column (Pierce), followed
by an additional amylose (NEB) and then NiNTA (Qiagen) column purification.
Efficiently labeled protein yielded an ∼1:1 ratio of fluorophore
to protein concentration for a sample, based on measuring the absorbance
at 495 nm (fluorescein, ε = 68,000 M c, Thermo Scientific instruction bulletin 0359.2) or
573 nm (rhodamine, ε = 119,000 M c, Molecular Probes Handbook, 11th edition) in PBS for the dye and
280 nm in 6 M guanidine HCl for the protein. We ensured the applicability
of this metric by testing several samples using analytical HPLC, indicating
free dye had been eliminated and a single population of labeled protein
remained. Size-Exclusion Chromatography (SEC) Assay Unlabeled
MBP-SYNZIP proteins were prepared either alone at 10 μM or in
pairs at 10 μM each in PBS pH 7.4, 1 mM DTT. Mixtures were either
incubated at room temperature for 2 h or, for those mixtures with
a partner that exhibited homo-oligomerization, incubated overnight
at 37 °C and then cooled to room temperature for 2 h. Samples
(50 μL) were run on a Waters HPLC system over a Superdex 75
10/300 column (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min in PBS
pH 7.4, 1 mM DTT while monitoring absorbance at 215 nm. Empower software
(Waters) was used to analyze the elution profiles. A trimer control
was based on the homotrimeric GCN4-pIqI protein, with the sequence RMKQIEDKIEEILSKQYHIENEIARIKKLIGER, which
was cloned into the MBP destination vector described above. Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) Assay The fluorescence emission of N- and C-terminally fluorescein-labeled
constructs was measured alone and, when mixed with N-terminally rhodamine-labeled
partner, in triplicate. Samples (100 μL) were mixed at 100 nM
concentration of each protein in PBS pH 7.4, 1 mM DTT, allowed to
incubate 2 h at 37 °C, and then equilibrated 1 h at room temperature.
Samples were excited at 480 nm, and emission at 525 nm was monitored
at 25 °C. Protein concentrations were determined by the absorbance
of the attached fluorophore in PBS pH 7.4, 1 mM DTT using an extinction
coefficient of 68,000 cm M for fluorescein and 119,000 cm M for rhodamine. Samples were assayed in 384-well black plates (Corning)
using a SpectraMax M5 plate reader (Molecular Devices). The FRET efficiency
was calculated from the average of three samples as Equilibration of the peptide mixtures
was assessed by remeasuring plates after overnight incubation at 4
°C and re-equilibration at room temperature for 1 h, which gave
no appreciable change in FRET efficiencies. The antiparallel heterodimerizing
proteins Acid-a1 (AQLEKELQALEKELAQLEWENQALEKELAQ),
and Base-a1 (AQLKKKLQANKKKLAQLKWKLQALKKKLAQ) were cloned into the
MBP destination vector described above and used as controls. Fluorescence Polarization (FP) Assay MBP-SYNZIP fluoresceinated
proteins at 10 nM were mixed with unlabeled MBP-SYNZIPs at concentrations
ranging from 60 pM to 20 μM, depending on the affinity range
of the interaction, in PBS pH 7.4, 1 mM DTT in 384 well black plates
(Corning), at a total volume of 100 μL. The concentrations of
all proteins were determined by measuring absorbance at 280 nm in
6 M guanidine HCl. Samples were incubated at 37 °C for 2 h and
then allowed to equilibrate at room temperature a minimum of 1 h.
Polarization was monitored at 480/525 nm excitation/emission using
a SpectraMax M5 plate reader (Molecular Devices) at 25 °C. Equilibration
of the interactions was assessed by remeasuring plates after overnight
incubation at 4 °C and re-equilibration at room temperature for
1 h, and no appreciable change in polarization signal was observed.
For the FP competition assay, 20 nM labeled protein was mixed with
each unlabeled partner at 1 μM, incubated at 37 °C for
2 h, and then equilibrated at room temperature for 1 h before being
read as described above. Raw fluorescence of the labeled protein was
also measured for each well to ensure a constant amount of labeled
protein, and a small number of outliers were removed. Dissociation
constants ('s) were determined by curve
fitting using Excel. The average polarization of replicates was normalized
to fraction bound () using the equationwhere  is the measured signal,  is the signal of the lower baseline, and  the upper baseline, selected on the basis
of best fit after multiple curve fitting analyses of the data. Binding
curves were then fit to the equationwhere  is the
dissociation constant,  is the initial
concentration of the unlabeled protein, and  is the initial concentration of labeled protein.  values were fit using non-linear least-squares
and the Solver plug-in for Excel. In some cases, the initial fit of
the curves to the data was poor, but fits assuming a lower concentration
of the labeled species gave dramatic improvements. Because of the
potential for nonspecific binding of the labeled species to the plastic
used in the assay, it is realistic that the labeled probe concentration
might be lower than 10 nM. Thus, in cases where the fit poorly matched
the data, we fit both the  and the labeled
species concentration (within the range 1–10 nM), and in all
cases a lower concentration of labeled species improved the fit to
the data significantly. The interaction of SYNZIP pairs
was tested using the ProQuest two-hybrid system (Invitrogen), in which
an interaction reconstitutes Gal4 activity and drives  and  expression, allowing identification of
interactions based on growth on selective media. SYNZIPs fused to the Gal4 activation domain
(ADSZs) were transformed into the yeast strain MaV103; SYNZIPs fused
to the DNA-binding domain of Gal4 (DBDSZs) were transformed into the
strain MaV203 (both strains a gift of M. Vidal). Two liquid cultures
inoculated from single colonies were independently grown overnight
at 30 °C, aliquoted into 96-well plates, mixed with interaction
partners in duplicate from the opposite mating type, and pin stamped
onto YPD plates, resulting in four replicates in total. After overnight
growth at 30 °C, colonies were replica plated onto synthetic
complete media lacking leucine and tryptophan, to select for yeast
carrying both plasmids, and incubated at 30 °C. Liquid cultures
were then grown overnight, aliquoted into 96-well plates, and pin
stamped onto synthetic complete media either without uracil (high
stringency) or without histidine and with increasing concentrations
of 3-AT (Sigma) from 10 to 100 mM (low to high stringency), as well
as selection for plasmid maintenance. Autoactivation controls for
both ADSZs and DBDSZs were performed using the same method without
the mating step, with plating on appropriate dropout media. Colony
size was imaged after 12 days for growth without uracil (-ura) and
without histidine supplemented with 100 mM 3-AT (-his). CellProfiler was used to determine the area of the colonies,
and analysis of processed image data was performed in Matlab. To compare the two-hybrid data to the published coiled-coil array
data and to summarize the differences graphically, we symmetrized
the yeast data by taking the stronger of the two observed interaction
signals for pairs that were tested reciprocally. We binned the 253
resulting pairs into those that showed strong growth (59 pairs -his,
37 -ura), no growth (174 pairs -his, 187 -ura), or medium/indeterminate
growth (14 pairs -his, 23 -ura). The indeterminate pairs, as well
as 6 additional pairs that involved interactions between two autoactivators,
were excluded from further analyses. The array results were processed
using  reported by Reinke , where low scores indicate strong interactions.
For the analysis reported in the text we used a cutoff of  < 0.6 to identify high-confidence array interactions.
A less strict cutoff of  < 0.75 also
gives good agreement with the yeast data. MAPK pathway testing followed
the protocol described by Bashor () Msg5-SYNZIP fusions were integrated into the  locus of the yeast strain CB011 using a pRS305-derivative
vector and expressed with a constitutive moderate strength promoter
from . These strains were then transformed a
second time with Ste5-SYNZIPs expressed on a CEN/ARS low copy number
pRS316-derived plasmid driven by the  promoter.
Liquid cultures of dual transformants were grown overnight and then
diluted and grown to an OD of ∼0.6. Cultures
were treated with 2 μM α-factor, and expression was stopped
at 120 min with cycloheximide at 5 μg/mL. The GFP reporter was
allowed to mature at room temperature for 1 h, and then the mean cell
fluorescence of populations of approximately 10,000 cells was measured
on an LSR II FACS equipped with a high-throughput sampler using FACSDIVA
software (BD Biosciences) followed by data analysis using FlowJo software
(Treestar Inc.). For each interaction tested, measurements were done
in quadruplicate by picking four initial colonies into separate cultures
and performing the assay for each culture. Because of variability
in the overall scale of the fluorescence signals between days and
strains, signals were corrected for the pre-induction baseline and
also normalized using results for strains with no SYNZIP fused to
Msg5. The following formula was appliedwhere  is
the mean cell fluorescence after 2-h α-factor induction,  is mean cell fluorescence before α-factor
induction, and  and  are the corresponding post- and pre-induction
signals for strains harboring the appropriate Ste5-SYNZIP along with
Msg5 without a SYNZIP fusion..