Obtaining
a predictive understanding
of information propagation and decision-making in cellular pathways
is one of the paramount goals of systems biology. A first step in generating this understanding is to be
able to map the structures of the underlying gene-regulatory networks
and the causal relationships between their molecular components. Learning of networks structures is typically accomplished using
bulk data describing the average response of a population. Although
informative, these data often fail to establish causal relationships,
resulting in nonunique solutions where multiple different topologies
can represent the same data pool equally well (Figure A). It has recently been suggested that utilization of cell to
cell
variability in a population might improve the discriminatory power
of network identification methods. Variability in protein expression,
or “molecular noise”, is a ubiquitous feature of biological
systems that results from the probabilistic production, degradation,
and collision of biological molecules (Figure B). Such variability can be accurately quantified by measuring levels
of specific proteins in single live cells using genetically encoded
fluorescent reporters and high throughput assays such as flow cytometry. We now have substantial understanding of the nature, sources, propagation, and information content of gene
expression noise. Furthermore, noise at steady-state has been shown
to provide information on regulatory pathway membership and used to elucidate regulatory mechanisms. These studies used static snapshots of noise in a pathway to gain
such understanding, and revealed that despite the new information
that could be gleaned from these measurements, they are often insufficient
to reveal relationships between components. Namely, while these data could reduce the number of underlying possible
topologies, they cannot pinpoint unique causal connectivities. Therefore,
dynamic evolution of variability in a pathway, as measured by change
of the population’s distribution as a function of time, might
be necessary to discriminate among alternate regulatory relationships. This idea was recently explored in a study that used an approach
called the Finite State Projection to
compute stochastic distributions that can result from different models
of the hyperosmolarity pathway in yeast. These distributions were then used to identify a model that was
most predictive of the experimentally measured noise dynamics of mRNA
expression. This method was capable of identifying a predictive model
of the transcriptional dynamics in this system. However, this approach
heavily relies on extensive parameter identification, a factor that
might limit its scalability. In this work, we present a new
approach for the identification
of regulatory connections in a network using dynamic noise data. Our
approach is based on the premise that if a regulatory link between
two nodes in a network is present and active, then variability in
the upstream node should propagate downstream. This propagation results
in a time-dependent and link-specific relationship between noise profiles
of the two nodes. To exploit this feature, we present a mathematical formalism describing
noise propagation under nonsteady state conditions. By comparing model
predictions and experimental measurements of noise, we can provide
evidence for or against a putative regulatory interaction. Conveniently,
our method requires estimation of only two kinetic parameters, both
of which can uniquely be determined from single cell gene expression
data. We first illustrate how this methodology can extract regulatory
connectivity in a circuit using  data. Then,
we demonstrate the usefulness of our approach using  data collected from synthetic networks constructed in the budding
yeast . Mean might be insufficient
to distinguish between alternate network
topologies. (A) Example of mean expression of two genes, A and B,
and two alternate network topologies that fit these data equally well.
Population variability (inset) provides additional information. (B)
Sources of noise can be divided into two components: intrinsic noise
due to the stochastic nature of biochemical reactions, and propagated
noise from upstream regulators. Using
the Chemical Master Equation to Derive Moment Equations The
formulation that we assume in our model consists of a homogeneous
system in which each cell is treated as a well-mixed bag of  molecular species. The state of the system
is represented by a -length integer vector () denoting the number of molecules of
each species at time . The  possible
reactions that can occur among these species are represented by state
transitions in a Markov chain. Transitions occur in discrete steps
at random time intervals and depend only on the previous state of
the system (“memoryless” process). The probability that
a reaction  will happen in the next time interval,
(,+ τ) as τ →
0, is (())τ + (τ). Occurrence
of reaction  changes state () according to the stoichiometric vector ϑ, which defines how the reaction changes number of each reactant
species. The probability of the system being in state  at time  can be represented by the joint probability
function (,).
The chemical master equation (CME) gives us how this probability evolves
over time: Based on previously published work
by Engblom, we can express propensities () in the form of a first-order
Taylor series expended around the expected value  = If we assume that
the higher order terms in the Taylor series expansion
are negligible, the time dependent mean equation for the th species is given by Finally, for any
two species  and , we can also
obtain a first-order approximation of the derivative
of their covariance : These equations provide a predictive model that links the topology
of a network to the dynamic evolution of its mean behavior and to
the time-dependent evolution of the second moment of its distribution
across a population of cells. The strategy we propose below is to
check the solution generated by an equation based on the second moment
and the mean for a given expected network connectivity against data
to test whether this topology is likely. In this way, we augment the
information from the mean with that from variability to discriminate
between different possible connectivities in a network. Importantly,
our approach relies on measurements during dynamic network operation,
therefore exploiting regimes where noise propagation is most likely
to occur. Dynamic Noise Propagation Equations As a proof of principle,
we consider two simple transcriptional systems in which protein A,
constitutively expressed at rate:  = α, either
activates:  = α/( + ), or inhibits:  = α/( + ), expression of gene B. Here, a and b represent the mean
copy number of proteins A and B, respectively. The proteins A and
B are degraded at first order, linear rates,  = γ, and  = γ. We define noise of A or B as the squared coefficient
of variation, η = / and η = /, respectively, and derive dynamic equations
for these quantities as described above (eqs  and ; See  for specific derivations):Here,  is the susceptibility of B to
A as defined at steady state:  = (∂ ln b)/(∂
ln ) ≈ ∂ ln(/)/(∂ ln). For the activation system, the susceptibility is  = /( + ), and for the inhibitory
link:  = /( + ). We also derive an equation for the shared noise,
η = /, which is a measure of covariation of A and
B. It is
given by The noise
equations of A and B (eqs  and ) can be decomposed into intrinsic and propagated
components. Noise of A, η, has an intrinsic component only originating
from stochastic expression and degradation of the protein. Because
the expression of B is regulated by A, its noise (η) has both intrinsic
and propagated components which sum up to the total noise: η = η + η. The dynamic evolutions
of η and η can be extracted from eq . Evidently, the intrinsic noise of B does not depend
on the shared noise η. Terms containing
η reflect
noise propagated from A to B. The resulting dynamic intrinsic and
propagated noise equations for B are Supporting Information
Figure S1 and Table 1 The derived dynamic noise equations converge at steady-state
to
known expressions (Paulsson). Furthermore,
we validate these equations in the dynamic regime using data obtained
from stochastic simulations (SSA) of
the regulatory circuits using different parameter sets (Figure , and ). Noise computed using dynamic equations
matches SSA and converges
near steady state to established stationary equations. (A) Example
of protein expression of a two-node system in which A (α = 567 and 2491, γ = 1.9) inhibits B (α = 4.796E10, γ = 2.25,  = 870,  = 3); population
mean (dark solid lines), trajectories of individual cells ( = 1000) obtained from SSA (thin, light lines). (B) Total
noise in A and B: measured (dotted lines) and noise computed using
dynamic equations (solid lines) and steady-state approximation (dashed
lines). Solutions converge as the system approaches steady state.
(C) Noise in B decomposed into intrinsic and propagated components. Strategy for Using Dynamic
Noise Equations to Predict Causal
Relationships in a Circuit Noise transmission depends on
the regulatory relationship between two genes. Therefore, the propagated
noise equation (eq ) offers an opportunity
to test for the existence of a causal connection between two components
of a circuit. Specifically, if expression of A and B are measured
simultaneously in single cells as a function of time, we can determine
how their means ( and ), downstream
propagated noise (η) and shared noise (η) evolve over
time. By using these measured values in the noise equation for either
the activation or inhibitory model (eq ), we
can calculate for every time point the rate at which propagated noise
should be changing (dη/d) and subsequently
compute the entire time-course trajectory of the propagated noise
η(). If for a given tested model, this predicted
trajectory coincides with the experimentally measured trajectory,
it is an indication that this model is likely to represent the causal
relationship present in the network. Evidently, we can repeat this
procedure to test for activating or inhibitory interactions, as well
as for all permutations of the circuit (e.g., A activates B or B activates
A). Estimation of Necessary Parameters To implement the
strategy outlined above, we must first estimate parameters that are
necessary to compute  and  in eq  and that cannot be directly measured from dynamic expression data.
There are three such parameters, all defining the production rate
of the downstream protein: the Michaelis–Menten parameter , the hill coefficient  and the maximum
rate of synthesis α. All other values in eq , the means and noise of the proteins, are directly
measurable. At steady-state, mean expression of B is linearly
related to the steady-state susceptibility : ω =  –  where ω
is a constant (for activation ω = γ/α and for inhibition ω = γ/α; see  for detailed
derivations). Since both the mean and susceptibility can be accurately
obtained from distributions, this relationship allows us to uniquely
identify  from two steady-state measurements: one
at the steady-state before circuit induction and another at the new
steady-state after induction. Furthermore, inspection of eq  reveals that at steady-state, propagated noise is
given by η = η, where for activation  = /( + ) and for inhibition  = −/( + ). With  calculated
as above, and η, η, and  experimentally measured,
we can also uniquely determine  using  = η/(η – η) for activation or  = −(η + η)/η for an inhibitory connection. Using the obtained values of  and , the trajectory of η for a given assumed topology can be
determined from the noise equations (eq ).
Calculated and measured values of η can then be compared
for all time points, for example by looking at the linear correlation
between these two quantities. It is worth noting that due to the structure
of the equations, measured and estimated η will differ by
a constant scaling factor corresponding to the synthesis rate of the
upstream node (either α or α whose
exact value does not need to be determined since it has no bearing
on the quality of the correlation between these two quantities (Figure B lower panel). Reconstruction of an  network in which
gene A activates gene B. (A) Mean expression of proteins A (α = 80 and 320, γ = 1.3) and B (α = 1207, γ = 1.8,  = 428,  = 1) as a function
of time. (B) Test of an activation link between A and B. Comparison
of measured noise of either A or B and dynamic noise predictions for
different permutation of an activation model. Quality of prediction
is quantified as a correlation between measured and estimated noise
for the particular topology (lower panels). (C) Test of an inhibitory
link between A and B. In both cases, correlation between estimated
and measured noise is poor. The zero correlation indicates that the
numerical integrator failed to solve the noise equation. Supporting
Information Figure S2 Supporting Information
Figures S3 and S4 We first
tested our method  using data obtained from
stochastic simulations of activation and inhibition motifs. We randomly
sampled the parameters of these motifs (see ) and generated time-dependent distributions.
We used these distributions to extract propagated and shared noise
values as a function of time, to which we then applied the procedure
detailed above. For the correct regulatory relationship and directionality,
we were mostly able (∼75%) to accurately predict how propagated
noise fluctuates over time in the downstream gene. Noise trajectories
predicted for the incorrect regulatory relationship (for example,
activation instead of inhibition) or reversed topology (B upstream
of A instead of A upstream of B) failed to match the  data (Figure , and ). As expected, the networks for which
we were unable to deduce the correct regulatory relationships corresponded
to regimes where noise either was insignificant or did not propagate
between the two nodes (). We next subjected our method to an  test.
For this purpose, we designed and built synthetic networks implementing
transcriptional activation and inhibition motifs in the yeast . To build the activation circuit, we placed
the transcription factor MSN2 tagged with YFP under the galactose
responsive promoter, pGAL1 in a  strain,
allowing the fusion protein to provide the sole Msn2 activity in the
cell. In the same strain, we integrated an RFP protein under the control
of the Msn2-responsive HSP12 promoter. In the inhibitory circuit,
the pGAL1 promoter was used to drive expression of the TetR protein
tagged with RFP. To monitor the activity of TetR we integrated GFP
under the control of a TetR-repressible Adh1 promoter (Adh1). As a control, we implemented a third network in which reporter
proteins, GFP and RFP driven by pGAL1 promoter were integrated at
separate loci. This final stain has no direct interactions between
the two reporters, but they are coregulated by the transcription factor
Gal4 (Figure A) . All three strains were grown in noninducing raffinose containing
media and then induced by addition of galactose. We subsequently measured
single cell abundance of the fluorescent proteins in ∼5000
cells every 20 min for 12 h by flow cytometry. These data were processed
and the mean and standard deviation of the per-cell fluorescence signal
and the correlation between the RFP and GFP signals computed for each
time point. Using these data along with the analytical propagated
noise equation (eq ), we then tested for regulatory
relationships. Supporting Information Figure S5 First, we tested whether the information contained
in the mean
alone could uniquely identify the underlying networks. To do so, we
used ODE models of different regulatory mechanisms (causal, i.e.,
activation or inhibition, or noncausal, i.e., having no relationship
between A and B) to mimic the behavior of the data. We found that
the data could be fit equally well by all models (), indicating that mean information
alone cannot discriminate between the possible alternate topologies. We next moved to testing whether the measured distributions could
be exploited to provide discrimination using our noise propagation
methodology. Using eq , we indeed determined
that the propagated noise trajectory predicted using the topology
that correctly reflects the true relationship (Msn2 activates Hsp12)
matches the experimental results (correlation of 0.98 between predicted
and measured propagated noise along the trajectory of the system).
At the same time, noise trajectories predicted by assuming the incorrect,
reverse topology (Hsp12 activates Msn2) cannot recapitulate the data
(correlation of −0.15). Furthermore, predictions made assuming
the wrong regulatory mechanism (inhibition instead of activation)
do not match experimental results regardless of circuit permutation
(Figure C, D top). Our methodology was
equally efficient at pinpointing the right
regulatory relationship for the inhibitory synthetic circuit. There
again, we could discriminate between the correct topology (correlation
of 0.87), TetR-RFP inhibits GFP, and other possible network permutations.
Notably, the predicted trajectory for the reversed inhibitory relationship,
GFP inhibits TetR-RFP, shows clear mismatch with the data (correlation
2.8 × 10) (Figure C, D center). Similarly, predictions using the activation model fail
to match experimental results regardless of network permutation. For the control network in which GFP and RFP were coregulated,
predicted propagated noise does not match the experimental data regardless
of the assumed regulatory mechanism or network permutation, correctly
indicating that these genes have no causal interactions (Figure C, D bottom). However, in such cases, we cannot
in general rule out the existence of a regulatory relationship between
the two genes since the relationship might not manifest itself in
the data due to poor noise propagation or inactivity of the regulatory
link under the tested conditions. Despite the ability of our method
to provide hints about the lack of causal relationship between the
circuit components, in this case, further tests are needed using different
input schemes to uniquely determine the correct topology. Reconstruction of three
distinct  synthetic
networks using noise information. (A) Schematics of the three networks
in which A activates B (top), A inhibits B (center), and A and B are
coregulated by the same transcription factor (bottom). (B) Mean expression
profiles of proteins in each of the three networks measured over a
course of 12 h. (C) Noise trajectories predicted using dynamic equations
for topologies in which B is assumed to either activate or inhibit
A. (D) Noise trajectories predicted using dynamic equations for topologies
in which A is assumed to either activate or inhibit B. In the circuit
in which A and B are coregulated, we were not able to predict noise
correctly for either circuit permutation, suggesting that A and B
have no direct regulatory relationship (bottom). Technologies that provide expression measurements
in single cells are ubiquitous, but the measured population variability
data are seldom meaningfully exploited. This variability, its magnitude
and frequency of fluctuations, can be information-rich, and when analyzed
rigorously can be particularly useful for informing the structure
of gene regulatory networks. Some early studies tested for regulatory relationships by
attempting to directly score the linear correlation between the noise
trajectories of a pair of genes. Such correlations can potentially
pinpoint active connections particularly when taking time dynamics
into consideration. However, the relationship
between noise in different components of a circuit is governed by
potentially complex relationships as depicted by eqs  and, therefore, might be poorly quantified by linear pairwise
noise correlation (Figure ). This is because
the fidelity with which noise propagates depends on factors such as
the susceptibility of a gene to the upstream fluctuations, the amount
of the upstream noise, and rates at which the protein is able to respond
to upstream change. All of these factors change over time, most rapidly
in the dynamic range where proteins concentrations change the most,
conditions under which most experiments are usually conducted. Supporting Information Figure S9 By contrast, our approach takes into account the noise dynamics,
allowing us to integrate how fluctuations in gene expression are amplified,
dissipate and propagate for a postulated network topology. Our computational
investigations and experimental data both support the notion that
propagated noise, if sampled at intervals that capture the dynamics
of the system (), can be sufficient to discriminate between alternate topologies
when causal relationships exist between different network components.
Our approach is similar to that used by Cox et al. in that both approaches
rely on comparing measured noise to that predicted based on an assumed
model of the underlying system. This comparison is then used to provide
evidence for or against a tested system topology. Nonetheless, two
main differences exist between the two approaches. While our study
only uses the magnitude of the noise, the Cox  study scores both magnitude and frequency content of the noise.
On the other hand, by exploiting the structure of the noise equations,
breaking the identification process into pairwise comparisons, and
leveraging different quantities that can be directly measured, we
are able to proceed without estimation of a model’s kinetic
parameters. This advantage is not afforded by the Cox et al. approach.
We envision that a method marrying the two that proceeds by matching
both the measured magnitude and frequency of the noise to models of
pairwise components combinations will capitalize on the strengths
of both approaches. In this work, we only presented results
pertaining to genes that
are regulated by a single input. However, genes are often regulated
by more than one upstream component. In the case where multi-input
regulation is competitive, only one regulatory link is active at a
time, our method can be directly applied to test which of these regulatory
links is active under changing conditions (condition dependent rewiring).
For cases where multiple inputs simultaneously regulate expression,
the necessary equations can be derived. This method is easily scalable
when the two inputs are additive because, in this case, noise is also
additive and we can sum up the contributions of both inputs in eq  to predict the dynamic trajectory of the propagated
noise. As a proof of concept, we demonstrated reconstruction
of networks
with two nodes. Isolating and considering only two genes at a time
allows us to test for regulatory relationships without a priori knowledge
or assumptions about the network’s topology. Because our method
relies on solving differential equations, it has low computational
cost and we expect it to scale for larger, multinode networks. We
envision that it can be extended by carrying out combinatorial, pairwise
connectivity tests for many genes simultaneously. Furthermore, because
our approach provides a rigorous, mathematically supported method
to exploit noise information, it can be incorporated into existing
mean-based network inference methods to facilitate reconstruction
of complex, multigene regulatory structures. In summary, as
the development of increasingly sophisticated single
cell measurement techniques accelerates, there
is increasing need for approaches that utilize population distribution
information. Our approach provides a solid first step in that direction. Linear correlation
between the noise profiles of two nodes in a
network is not a reliable predictor of their connectivity. Noise of
A and B in a simple model: (d/d) = (α/ + ) – γ shows
a nonlinear relationship. Inset: mean expression of A (α = 65 and 192, γ = 1) and B (α = 2732, γ = 2,  = 696) as a function of time. Plasmids and Strain Construction Galactose responsive
constructs were constructed by amplification of the Gal1 promoter
(defined as −1 to −625 nucleotides relative to the Gal1
ORF) from the yeast genome by PCR followed by restriction enzyme cloning
into a single integration Trp1 or His3 marked vector upstream of Venus
(YFP), yeGFP (GFP), or mKate2 (RFP). Msn2 was amplified from the genome
and cloned in front of a Gal1 promoter with a Venus C-terminal tag
in a Trp1 marked vector. TetR was amplified and cloned in front of
a Gal1 promoter with a mCherry C-terminal tag in a His3 marked vector.
The Hsp12 promoter consisting of 700bp directly upstream of the HSP12
start codon was amplified from the genome and inserted upstream of
mKate2 (RFP) in a Ura3 marked vector. The Adh1(tet) promoter was cloned
as described previously using amplification of the 700 bp upstream
of the ATG and cloning in front of GFP in a His3 marked vector. W303A yeast were transformed serially
with combinations of the above constructs using standard LioAc protocols.
Transformants were selected on appropriate drop-out media and single
colonies were picked for downstream use. Growth and Fluorescence
Measurements by Flow Cytometry Yeast strains were grown to
saturation overnight at 30 °C in
3 mL of synthetic complete media with 2% rafinose (SCraf) as a carbon
source. Cells were diluted 1:100 into deep 96 well plates (Corning)
and grown for 6–8 h at 30 °C on orbital shakers (Elim)
to an OD of ∼0.1. All data were collected using a high-throuput
automated flow cytometry system. To induce
expression of constructs, galactose (Sigma, 20% stock) was added to
the media to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were taken from
the primary culture every 20 min and an equal volume of fresh media
added. Cytometry measurements were made on a Becton Dickinson
LSRII flow cytometer, along with an autosampler device (HTS) to collect
data over a sampling time of 4–10 s, typically corresponding
to 2000–10000 cells. GFP and YFP were excited at 488 nm, and
fluorescence was collected through HQ530/30 bandpass filters (Chroma),
mCherry and mKate2, were excited at 561 nm and fluorescence collected
through 610/20 bandpass filter (Chroma) . Data analysis was done
using custom MATLAB software. In order to minimize error due to uneven
sample flow through the cytometer, we removed the first second and
last 0.25 s of data. To control for cell aggregates, as well as cell
size and shape, we excluded the bottom and top 5% of the forward (FSC)
and side (SSC) scatter..