Synthetic
biology strives to
develop novel genetic circuits that can be employed in a variety of
applications. The construction of cell therapy systems for use in
human medicine is an important emerging subfield within this context.
Several chassis have been used for synthetic drug delivery, including
bacteriophage, bacteria, bacteria-derived lipid
vesicles, and eukaryotic cells. In this review, we focus on the current state
of the art in applications with bacterial chassis as we believe this
holds much promise for the development of microbiota-derived therapeutics. synthesis and delivery via cell therapy
has several important advantages over systemic treatment. First, the
required dosage of the therapeutic agent is reduced by several orders
of magnitude to achieve a comparable therapeutic effect. This helps in reducing undesired side effects, both at the site
of delivery and elsewhere in the body. Second, the route of administration
is less invasive than intravenous or subcutaneous injection. For example,
certain diseases of the gastrointestinal tract could be treated, by
oral administration of a synthetic bacterium that can traverse to
the desired location, engraft, and start delivering a drug. This is
especially useful for proteinaceous compounds that would not naturally
survive passage through the acidic stomach environment. Third, multiple
therapeutic agents can be produced by the same cell simultaneously
as a combination therapy. Finally,  production
and delivery by a synthetic chassis provides a more cost-effective
treatment as it obviates the need for purification and formulation
of the active compound(s). Despite the many advantages, synthetic
cell therapy raises issues surrounding safety, containment, and the
public opinion on using genetically modified organisms in medicine. To cause minimal undesired impact upon introduction of a synthetic
strain, it is important to understand the dynamics of the microbial
ecosystem already present at the body niche of interest as well as
the potential effect on the immune system. An emerging theme is that
some diseases are related to an imbalance (termed “dysbiosis”)
in microbe-host interactions, but the
precise disease mechanisms and the small molecules that mediate interactions
under normal, healthy conditions are still largely unknown. One example
of such a microbiome-related disease is  associated diarrhea (CDAD). This chronic intestinal infectious disease
is highly contagious, especially in hospital settings where patients
receive antibiotic treaments, and difficult to cure with classic approaches
such as the antibiotics vancomycin, metronidazole, or fidaxomicin.
Recent studies have shown very promising results as the condition
can be treated by fecal transplant from a healthy donor, or in a simplified format as a cocktail containing
six different gut bacterial strains that aid in the re-establishment
of health-associated commensals and thereby displace  in a mouse model. Despite these promising
treatment options, the disease state remains poorly understood on
a molecular level, and this would be a requirement if a more directed
approach with synthetic bacteria expressing small molecule natural
products is to be offered as an alternative. We envision that
the next generation of bacterial cell therapy
systems will be autonomous microbial “physicians”, integrating
the capacities to diagnose human disease, make decisions on the appropriate
treatment and bring it into effect, and self-eliminate from the human
host when the condition is alleviated (Figure ). In this review, we will highlight current examples of modules
that are employed in each of these functions in a synthetic system,
as well as speculate about future directions for their implementation. Features
of an autonomous synthetic bacterial “physician”. An
important capability of synthetic bacterial therapies will be
the detection of small molecules or cellular markers associated with
a certain human disease (Figure ). Desirable
characteristics of such a module are a high degree of molecular specificity,
sensitivity, and dose-dependency. When detection systems are available
for the desired molecules or condition, they can be implemented in
the construction of diagnostic sensing modules. On the other hand,
if no known sensor system is available, one could be engineered via
protein design, directed evolution, site-directed mutagenesis, or
domain swapping. Bacteria monitor
changes in their surroundings by sensing a variety
of small molecules, for example, through transcriptional regulators,
extracytoplasmic function sigma factors, and two-component signal
transduction systems. Many of these parts are already
available for the synthetic biologist, each one capable of sensing
a different specific molecule or cue. An added advantage is that they
can be rewired to generate new signaling pathways. Two-component systems function in sensing a wide variety of environmental
signals. A typical two-component signaling system consists of a histidine
kinase and a response regulator. Upon binding of a small molecule
inducer, the histidine kinase autophosphorylates and transfers the
phosphate group to the response regulator, thereby activating it to
transcribe genes under the control of a dedicated promoter sequence.
A different mode of bacterial signaling is quorum sensing (QS). In QS, bacteria synthesize and secrete a strain-specific autoinducer
molecule, for example an acyl homoserine lactone or a small peptide.
When a certain density or “quorum” of extracellular
autoinducer molecules is reached, the autoinducer binds to a dedicated
transcriptional regulator, thereby activating transcription of specific
genes. A QS system allows for bacteria to sense their population density
based on nearby autoinducer concentration and in response synchronize
their gene expression. The attractive characteristics of QS
have led to its integration
as a versatile module for synthetic systems. Integration of the QS
sensor device from the pathogen  into an  chassis enables  to detect the presence of  via its autoinducer molecule and mount a killing response. In a different study, a squamous cancer cell
line of the head and neck was targeted with “nanofactories”
consisting of a fusion protein between an antibody and autoinducer-2
(AI-2) synthase. These nanofactories
bind to the epidermal growth factor receptor (which is more densely
expressed on the cancer cells), where they catalyze the synthesis
of  AI-2, a chemoattractant that can recruit
engineered therapeutic bacteria to the site. Sensing of hypoxic
environments in the human body is used as a
cue for the presence of tumor tissue.  formate
dehydrogenase () is strongly induced after transition
from aerobic to anaerobic growth, and its promoter has been used to
drive expression of the  invasin adhesion protein. This allows
for β-1 integrin receptor-mediated uptake of  into several cancer-derived cell lines; the same bacteria are not
invasive under aerobic conditions. In a different report,  expressing the invasin protein was shown to invade
xenografted human colon cancer cells in an  mouse experiment. A study with the
naturally tumor-targeting  serovar
typhimurium chassis employs the anaerobic-inducible  promoter for expression of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand (TRAIL) in a mouse model of melanoma. Other examples of specific environmental sensing devices include
a powerful multi-input miRNA-based cell classifier circuit that can
distinguish between different cancer cell types and the use of the  nitric oxide
(NO) sensing system NorR to detect this important marker for gut inflammation
in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Dietary supplements can be administered to exert control over synthetic
delivery systems. Delivery of keratinocyte growth factor-2 (kgf-2)
by an engineered strain of  has
been put under the control of dietary xylan. This system provided significant improvement in mice with dextran
sodium sulfate-induced colitis. In a different study, a  based system was developed to allow for acetylsalicylate-
or salicylate-induced gene expression and this was used to drive expression
of the  cytosine deaminase. This deaminase converts the prodrug 5-fluorocytosine into
the cytotoxic compound 5-fluorouracil. A significant reduction in
tumor growth was reported when this system was introduced in an  mouse model. Most of the current sensing systems are specific for a small molecule.
We envision that the next generation of sensing modules will be able
to identify target human cell types based on the receptors on their
surface. In addition, the number of small molecule metabolites that
microbes can detect with specific receptors is likely to increase,
enabling the construction of bacteria engineered to monitor multiple
molecular components of their environment. Intracellular Signal Integration Bacterial therapeutic devises are expected to increase in complexity,
and this will require the integration of multiple sensory signals
in order to generate an appropriate response to a specific disease.
To achieve specificity in this response with minimal impact on healthy
cells or resident microflora, multiple environmental cues will have
to be assessed during the diagnosis stage, bringing into account the
disease state, magnitude, and location in the host. From this information,
the synthetic bacterium will have to decide on an appropriate response
and relay the signal to different outputs such as migration, initiation
of invasion, and production of a therapeutic at a level governed by
feedback loops (Figure ). Genetic logic circuits
can be built to integrate the signals and to generate a tailored response. Complex decision-making and effector programs can be generated for
example by using networks of logic AND, OR, and NOT gates. Decisions have to be made regarding the required promoter strength
for a specific application and how promoters can be tuned to result
in simultaneous or individual expression of multiple target genes. While the application of signal integration
systems for therapeutic microbes is still in its infancy, some successful
examples are discussed below. An example of a synthetic system
with a product-dependent feedback
loop is the mammalian circuit engineered to decrease and stabilize
blood urate concentration. The closed-loop
device senses urate levels via the HucR transcriptional repressor
from  R1. In the presence
of urate, HucR dissociates from its  recognition
motif and in turn allows for the expression of the -derived urate oxidase, resulting in a drop in extracellular
urate. This circuit could be used to treat patients with hyperuricemia
and has been tested in a mouse model, where it was shown to control
urate levels and shuts down when physiologic concentrations are attained. Two studies have explored the use of synthetic
systems to store
an environmental signal as genetic memory. A FimE recombinase-based
DNA switch was designed for the NO sensing  chassis. Upon activation, this switch
remains in a permanent on-state that is inherited by the progeny after
cell division. The concept of environmental signal sensing followed
by genetic memory recording was expanded in a recent study that describes
the integration of a tetracycline-responsive memory circuit in . The memory element
was derived from the phage λ cI/Cro switch and proved stable
over many generations and after passage through the mouse gut. As logic circuits grow more complex, the need arises for the identification
and characterization of additional orthogonal regulators that can
be used as parts in their construction. Factors that could contribute
to this increased complexity include the integration of multiple feedback
loops from compound production as well as a constant monitoring of
the therapeutic effect on the alleviation of the disease. Moreover,
as we gain a better insight in the molecular environment of pathogens
or malignant cells, more signals from the presence or absence of certain
metabolites can be integrated to ensure specificity of the bacterial
therapeutic. Production and Delivery of a Small Molecule
Therapeutic An important module in a synthetic therapeutic
system is the synthesis
and delivery of the active compound. Production usually involves heterologous
expression of a gene encoding a therapeutic protein, a gene cluster
encoding the biosynthesis of a small molecule or knockdown of eukaryotic
gene expression by bacterially delivered small RNAs. Many different
aspects of cellular function and metabolite synthesis are encoded
by gene clusters and provide convenient building blocks for synthetic
biology. However, recurring problems
in heterologous expression of these clusters are low production efficiencies
and unpredictable gene expression levels, often due to cryptic regulatory
elements. An attractive solution to the unpredictability of native
gene clusters is to refactor them by reconstructing them from known
parts. This bottom-up approach reduces
gene cluster complexity without changing functionality and removes
any form of regulation that might cause unexpected outcomes when applied
in an  setting. While refactoring at present
constitutes a large effort, a better understanding of the regulatory
and biochemical mechanisms behind the biosynthesis of key compounds
will expedite future endeavors. In the near future, synthetic
bacterial therapy systems will likely
involve the production of therapeutic proteins or peptides. Production
and delivery of small molecules that are currently in use as antibiotics
(e.g., polyketides, nonribosomal peptides, and aminoglycosides) will
be a lot more challenging, but as an intermediate step, ribosomally
synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides such as lantibiotics
and thiopeptides are good candidate compounds. These often have potent
activity and stability, and their biosynthesis is encoded by relatively
small biosynthetic gene clusters. An
added advantage of using lantibiotics, such as the food-grade compound
nisin, is that their regulation is well studied and that they have
an associated two-component system that allows for QS, based on the
actual lantibiotic itself. This enables
control not only of the level of producer cell density but also of
the level of antibiotic produced, allowing for fine-tuning production
specific to the needs of the environment. Nisin-based gene expression
in  has many desirable characteristics
to implement in a synthetic system, such as the ability to detect
extracellular nisin, no detectable leaky expression, and high level
of control because of a linear induction with dose-responsiveness
to over a 1000-fold. A nisin-inducible
signaling system has been engineered in a  NZ9000 chassis to control the delivery of bioactive single-chain
insulin in the small intestine. In most current case studies of bacterial cell therapy, the compounds
that are produced are proteinaceous. For example,  has been engineered for delivery of the cytokine IL-10 in the treatment
of murine colitis. This system is the
only example of a bacterial therapeutic to date that made it to tests
involving human patients. A similar approach
was taken for the secretion of anti-tumor necrosis factor α
(anti-TNF-α) nanobodies by , resulting
in a reduction of inflammation when tested in a mouse model for colitis. The probiotic strain  Nissle 1917 has been used as a chassis for treatment of diabetes.
Extracellular glucose concentration is sensed via a glucose-responsive
promoter element and the bacteria respond by secreting insulinotropic
proteins that are fused to a cell-penetrating peptide to facilitate
rapid uptake by the epithelial cells. The engineered strain stimulated Caco-2 intestinal epithelial cells  to secrete insulin up to 1 ng/mL. This current
system could be expanded by integrating a negative feedback loop to
decrease secretion of the insulinotropic proteins after glucose levels
drop again. Synthetic bacterial antigen delivery systems will
be cost-effective
treatments that could replace traditional purified antigen formulations.  has been engineered to express
a  protective antigen fused to
a dendritic cell-targeting peptide. Upon administration as an oral
vaccine, the synthetic strain provided the same protection against
infection as pure antigen. Synthetic
bacteria can also be used to prevent viral infections. A  DNA vaccine delivery platform for immunization
against influenza induced complete protection when tested in a mouse
model. This vaccine system has the added
advantage of rapid adaptability to emerging influenza strains by introducing
different combinations of hemagglutinin and neuraminidase. A second
example of protection against pathogenic viruses involves the vaginal
commensal , which has been
engineered to express the HIV-1 entry inhibitor protein cyanovirin-N.
Macaques colonized with this strain were repeatedly challenged with
simian HIV and showed a 63% reduction of acquisition and a 6-fold
lower viral load was observed in macaques with breakthrough infection. Effector molecules could also serve as
decoys to trick bacterial
pathogens. Since QS small molecule inducers are strain-specific, they
can be hijacked to target pathogens that naturally use them to regulate
their virulence.  produces the autoinducer
molecule CAI-1 (()-3-hydroxydecan-4-one), which
is sensed by the CqsS sensor kinase. A LuxO response regulator downregulates
expression of virulence factors (cholera toxin and toxin coregulated
pilus) when a high level of CAI-1 is reached. When tested as a preventive
treatment in an infant mouse model, a CAI-1 producing  strain increased survival after  ingestion
by 77–92%. Additional engineering
of this system for eradication of  will
be required as it now mainly serves as a preventive measure that attenuates
virulence. In a different approach to combat , an  strain expressing a ganglioside GM
mimic (the target of cholera toxin) successfully reduced virulence
after prior challenge. Once small
molecules are produced, they need to be delivered outside
the bacterial cell. Depending on the type of molecule, this can be
done in different ways. Gene clusters encoding small molecules often
contain dedicated transporter proteins to secrete the products into
the extracellular environment. In order to secrete heterologously
expressed proteins on the other hand, a bacterial transport signal
sequence has to be added for recognition by the Sec or Tat secretion
machinery. Secretion of the proteinaceous
product can be additionally optimized by engineering this signal sequence.
More complex transporters such as the  type
III secretion system could be rewired for efficient export, or to inject protein directly into eukaryotic
cells. An alternative protein delivery
method involves intracellular production of the active compound and
subsequent lysis of the bacterial chassis. The aforementioned  killing  system functions
in this manner by expressing two toxic proteins. When the presence of  is
sensed, production of the bacteriocin pyocin S5 is induced. This antibacterial
protein accumulates inside  until a second
toxic protein (E7 lysis protein) is expressed and causes the producer
cell to lyse. The released pyocin S5 can in turn kill . This strategy could be applied to the delivery of different types
of small molecules since no specific transport system is required. Optimization of heterologous expression systems will benefit the
variety of small molecules that can be produced by a synthetic microbe.
An important consideration regarding the choice of active compound
is its activity spectrum. Narrow-spectrum compounds are ideal candidates
to target a specific pathogen with minimal disturbance of the resident
microflora. Intensive studies of substrate promiscuity in bacterial
transporters and secretion systems will allow for the determination
of a set of rules to which a transported compound needs to adhere.
This will enable the most appropriate transport system to be used
as delivery device for a specific small molecule. Containment and
Safety Concerns A major concern regarding the use of genetically
modified organisms
is their containment. Bacterial strains used for clinical trials must
be plasmid-free to prevent horizontal gene transfer. Plasmid-encoded
systems could also display a different dynamic behavior because of  instability over time, which, when not controlled,
could lead to undesired dosage effects. Therefore, integration of the synthetic systems into genomic DNA
with the removal of integrase genes is advisable. To prevent
the synthetic strains from colonizing undesired niches
inside the human body, a bacterial chassis can be used that does not
normally colonize the host. The downside of this approach is that
therapeutic bacteria will have to be administered on a regular basis
to continue treatment. Moreover, dosages and treatment continuity
might not be as easily controlled compared to the use of a strain
that is capable of colonization and continuously monitors perturbations
in its environment and adapts its behavior accordingly. Alternatively,
an additional containment module can be built into
the synthetic therapeutic system to “switch off” or
eliminate the chassis either when the strain is no longer required
after the treatment is completed or when the chassis leaves its desired
location inside the body. An example of a containment mechanism has
been engineered into  by deleting the thymidylate
synthase gene from its genome. When exogenous thymine or thymidine
is no longer supplemented, the auxotrophic strain will be eliminated
by thymine-less cell death. In another
study,  has been engineered to initiate
programmed bacterial cell lysis after colonization of host lymphoid
tissue by placing the expression of two essential genes under the
control of arabinose. This lysis system
was shown to be functional upon colonization of arabinose-free host
tissue, and it is expected that the synthetic strain would not survive
outside the host because environmental arabinose levels are too low. The future challenges regarding safety modules lie in devising
standardized test experiments that demonstrate that the chassis does
not survive in the environment and ideally remains restricted to its
target body niche within the host. It will be critically important
to obtain well-founded proof of containment control over bacterial
therapeutics in order to convince government agencies and the public
opinion to allow for their use in medicine. Choosing an Appropriate
Chassis Based on the Target Body Niche Most synthetic systems
developed to date were built in an  chassis,
an attractive system because of its ease
of manipulation. Although this is valuable as a proof of principle,
commensal bacteria might be more suitable chassis for  applications, since they are harmless under normal circumstances,
already capable of colonizing specific niches in the human body and
interacting productively with the host immune system. Another consideration
that has to be taken into account is that it might beneficial for
public and FDA acceptance to use strains that are already used as
probiotics. Currently developed systems are mostly for applications
in the
gut and tumor cells, but the oral cavity and skin will emerge as targets
in future systems. We will briefly discuss organisms that are promising
candidates to further develop as chassis for each of these body niches.
For applications in the gut,  is a good
candidate because it is a prominent commensal. Its association with
the mucus layer and ability to produce outer membrane vesicles can
be harnessed for targeted compound delivery.  is another attractive chassis because of its current use as a probiotic
and metabolic activity in all compartments of the intestinal tract. While it is true that  is a gut commensal, it is not as prominently present  for example. For intracellular tumor-targeting applications, attenuated
strains of  that naturally colonize
tumors have been used. They have an intrinsic specificity for colonization
of tumor compared to normal tissue of 1000–10000:1 and can
remain in the hypoxic regions for a long time. Since the occurrence of bacteria in the bloodstream could lead to
undesired complications, the synthetic biologist could instead resort
to engineering T cells for therapeutic purposes in order to better
mimic natural conditions in the host. A potentially promising chassis for the oral cavity is  K12, a natural colonizer of the oral mucosal surfaces
that has been used as a probiotic strain for over 10 years. Another candidate for this niche is , which has already been developed as a mouth rinse
for treatment of oral mucosistis. For
use as a topical therapeutic on the skin, a chassis is required that
can survive this rather harsh body niche. Commensal  species would be a suitable candidate, as would . Synthetic bacterial cell
therapy is a research field that is still
in its infancy. While several proof of concept systems have been engineered
to date, the next generation is expected to be significantly more
complex, incorporating modules for diagnosis, signal integration and
decision making, compound production and delivery, and safety. Including
several of these modules into the same therapeutic bacterial strain
will contribute to achieving a greater level of control and the possibility
to fine-tune the therapy to the specific needs of the patient. An
overview of current developments and future prospects for each module,
as discussed in this review, is summarized in Table . Essential to the development of synthetic bacterial
“physicians”
is a good understanding of the underlying molecular basis for human
diseases and the ecology of healthy bacterial communities. Not only
will these insights benefit the design of specific therapeutic systems,
synthetic biology could lend a hand in these fundamental investigations,
for example by designing sensor bacteria that can measure the levels
of certain small molecules or markers  and
report this acquired information back to the researcher. We
predict that there will be a change in the chassis used for
bacterial cell therapy applications. Where several currently developed
systems use  for proof of principle experiments,
a gradual shift will take place toward the use of commensal and probiotic
bacteria that can naturally colonize the target niches. Current Developments and Future Prospects
in Synthetic Bacterial Cell Therapy Quorum sensing-based chassis recruitment or pathogen detection Extending the repertoire
of detectable molecules by exploration
of the ligand landscape for bacterial receptors and hybrid engineering Detection of hypoxic tumor environments Identification of interactors with specific receptors expressed
on target human cell types Sensing of the
inflammatory marker nitric oxide Construction of logic circuits using genetic AND, OR, and NOT gates Further characterization
of orthogonal regulators as logic
gates to engineer increasingly complex circuits Recording of memory using irreversible genetic switches Integration of several feedback signals that evaluate a disease
state and the therapy effectiveness Heterologous production
of mostly proteinaceous compounds Regulatory and biochemical
studies of key biosynthetic gene
clusters will aid in their refactoring Refactoring of biosynthetic gene clusters allows for tight and predictable regulatory control Expansion of therapeutic arsenal with small molecules produced
by more complicated biosynthetic machinery Intensive study of bacterial secretion systems as
delivery
devices Chassis self-elimination by engineered programmed cell death Development of systems to
prevent horizontal gene transfer
of synthetic parts or entire systems Controlled
lysis for compound delivery Tests to measure the efficacy
of chassis containment in its
intended niche and to ensure it does not spread to the environment , ,  mostly for applications in the gut Focus on development of genetic systems for key members of
the human microbiota at various body sites Engineering
of therapeutic T cells rather than bacteria for
bloodborne applications.