Synthetic biology aims to engineer genetically modified biological systems that perform novel functions that do not exist in nature, with reusable, standard interchangeable biological parts. The use of these standard biological parts enables the exploitation of common engineering principles such as standardization, decoupling, and abstraction for synthetic biology (). With this engineering framework in place, synthetic biology has the potential to make the construction of novel biological systems a predictable, reliable, systematic process. While the development of most synthetic biological systems remains largely , recent efforts to implement an engineering framework in synthetic biology have provided long-awaited evidences that engineering principles can facilitate the construction of novel biological systems. Synthetic biology has so far demonstrated that its framework can be applied to a wide range of areas such as energy, environment, and health care. For example, novel biological systems have been constructed to produce drugs () and biofuels (), to degrade containments in water (), and to kill cancer cells (). Despite these encouraging advances, synthetic biology has not yet been exploited to develop new strategies for tackling infectious disease, a leading cause of death worldwide, especially in poor countries. Given the stalled development of new antibiotics and the increasing emergence of multidrug-resistant pathogens, using synthetic biology to design new treatment regimens for infectious disease could address an urgent need. Consequently, in this study, we have made progress toward developing a novel antimicrobial strategy, based on an engineered microbial system, using the synthetic biology framework. Toward this aim, we designed and constructed a genetic system, based on standardization, decoupling, and abstraction, that allows sensing and killing of , a human pathogen, in a non-pathogenic chassis, . The biological parts of our devices were designed and synthesized in compliance with the BioBrick assembly standards (). Each of the biological devices was characterized to understand its behavior, and the correlation between the input and output of one key biological device was studied in detail. colonizes the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract (), and causes life-threatening infections to the patients with immunodeficiency such as cystic fibrosis and cancer (; ). Despite a wide range of antibiotics available in the market,  is still among the leading causes of nosocomial infection primarily because it is intrinsically resistant to many antibiotics and antimicrobials, in part because of its effective efflux systems (). Contemporary treatments against  infection include antibiotic chemotherapy and bacteriophage therapy. In antibiotic chemotherapy, a combinatorial treatment involving multiple antimicrobial agents is usually preferred over monotherapy due to the rapid acquisition of drug tolerance in . This approach, however, promotes unspecific killing of bacteria and upsets a healthy human microbiome. Phage therapy involves strain-specific bacteriophages that invade and destroy the cellular integrity of pathogens (). The therapeutic potential of employing virus in bacterial infection, however, is limited, as a directed treatment cannot be re-employed after the infected host develops specific antibodies against the introduced virus (). Certainly, combating  infections now requires the development of novel, unconventional antimicrobial strategies that do not entirely rely on current antibiotics. To this end, we have exploited 's own strategy for survival in a competitive environment by means of bacteriocins, ribosomally synthesized antimicrobial peptides. Bacteriocins are specific and effective against closely related species, and thus have garnered attention as a new generation antibacterial agent (). Pyocins are narrow-spectrum bacteriocins produced by . Contrary to traditional antibiotics, the acquisition of pyocin resistance by lateral gene transfer between bacteria has not yet been encountered, supporting the use of pyocins in targeting  infection (). In general, pyocins are classified into three types: R, F, and S. An earlier study estimated that R and F type pyocins are synthesized by 90% of all  strains and S type by 70% (). S-type pyocins are soluble and comprise two protein molecules associated in complex, with parallel structural and functional features similar to DNase-based colicins. The larger protein has been identified as the functional protein for killing while the smaller protein is regarded as the immunity protein that confers the host cell with defense mechanism against its own pyocin (). Our group has recently reported that pyocin S5 exhibits strong bactericidal activity against  clinical isolates through membrane damage but is ineffective against  (). Together with its characteristics of being soluble and medium sized at 498 amino acids, pyocin S5 presents itself as an ideal candidate for a killing molecule in an  chassis. Further, to enable our engineered microbes to produce pyocin S5 only in response to the presence of , we exploited the quorum sensing mechanisms of . Quorum sensing is an organic chemical signaling cascade that regulates a myriad of physiological activities such as cell motility, virulence, biofilm formation, and growth (). This sensing mechanism is mediated by various diffusible, chemical signals known as autoinducers that are produced by the synthase genes of the bacteria. The extracellular concentration of signaling molecules increases as a function of cell density and is permeable to cell membrane. Upon attaining a threshold concentration of the chemical signals, the quorum sensing cascade is activated to elicit expressions or repressions of multiple genes, including those that are functional for production of autoinducers such as acyl homoserine lactones (AHLs; ). Although similar production mechanisms are present in some Gram-negative bacteria, each synthase homolog producing AHLs differs in either length or functional groups (e.g., hydroxyl and carbonyl groups) on the acyl side chain. Thus, with each bacterium possessing disparate synthase sequence, a high level of specificity can be achieved during intercellular quorum communication (; ). To enable an effective release of pyocin S5, we utilized E7 lysis protein to lyse the  chassis. The E7 lysis protein is a key component of the SOS response system in colicin-producing cells and functions to export bacteriocins into the extracellular space under stressful environmental conditions (). Recent studies have shown that the E7 lysis protein is effective in causing inner membrane damage and maybe associated with the activation of outer membrane phospholipase A for outer membrane modification (). In addition to being specific to , the E7 lysis protein is small at 47 amino acids and can be easily utilized as a modular part in the assembly of novel genetic circuits. Taken together, our final system was designed to (i) detect AHLs produced by ; (ii) produce pyocin S5 upon the detection; and (iii) lyse the  cells by E7 lysis protein so that the produced pyocin S5 is released from the cells, leading to the killing of . In this paper, we demonstrate that our engineered  effectively senses and kills , which provides a novel synthetic biology-based antimicrobial strategy that could be applied to eradicating other infectious pathogens. Design of the sensing and killing genetic system shows a schematic of our sensing and killing genetic system. The sensing device was designed based on the Type I quorum sensing mechanism of . The  promoter, which is constitutively on, produces a transcriptional factor, LasR, that binds to AHL 3OCHSL. The  promoter, to which LasR-3OCHSL activator complex reportedly binds, was adopted as the inducible promoter in our sensing device (). Next, the formation of the LasR-3OCHSL complex, which binds to the  promoter, activates the killing and lysing devices, leading to the production of pyocin S5 and lysis E7 proteins within the  chassis. Upon reaching a threshold concentration, the lysis E7 protein perforates membrane of the  host and releases the accumulated pyocin S5. Pyocin S5, which is a soluble protein, then diffuses toward the target pathogen and damages its cellular integrity, thereby killing it.  shows the plasmid map of the final system. Characterization of the sensing device To evaluate and characterize the sensing device, the gene encoding the green fluorescent protein (GFP) was fused to the sensing device (i.e., pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-GFP; the plasmid map is shown in ) and the GFP expression was monitored at a range of concentrations of 3OCHSL. From the measured GFP synthesis rates (), we observed a basal expression level of 0.216 RFU per OD per minute without induction, followed by a sharp increase in GFP production rate as the concentration of 3OCHSL was increased beyond 1.0E-7 M. This transition peaked at 1.0E-6 M of 3OCHSL and exhibited a sharp decline afterward. These results suggest that the optimal detection range of the sensing device was between 1.0E-7 and 1.0E-6 M 3OCHSL. Note that previous studies estimated extracellular concentration of 3OCHSL to be in the range of 1.0E-6 to 1.0E-4 M within proximity to the site of  infection (; ). Transfer function of the sensing device One important characteristic of the sensing device was the transfer function that describes the static relationship between the input (3OCHSL) and output (GFP production rate) of the sensing device. The transfer function was determined by fitting an empirical mathematical model (Hill equation) to the experimental data where the input 3OCHSL concentration is <1.0E-6 M. The resulting best fit model demonstrated that the static performance of the sensing device follows a Hill equation below the input concentration of 1.0E-6 M 3OCHSL (). The model showed that the sensing device saturated at a maximum output of 1.96 RFU per OD per minute at input concentration >3.3E-7 M but <1.0E-6 M 3OCHSL, and the switch point for the sensing device was 1.2E-7 M 3OCHSL, the input concentration at which output is at half-maximal. Since this switch point concentration is smaller than the concentration of 3OCHSL present (1.0E-6 to 1.0E-4 M) within proximity to the site of  infection as earlier reported in the literature (; ), the sensing device would be sensitive enough to detect the amount of 3OCHSL natively produced by . Detection of the native autoinducer produced by As stated above, the characterization of the sensing device indicated that it produced an optimal output at 1.0E-7 to 1.0E-6 M 3OCHSL. To verify that the sensing device would be able to sense the amount of 3OCHSL natively produced by , the sensing device coupled with a GFP reporter (i.e., pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-GFP) was induced using the filtered culture of  ln7, a clinical isolate that is sensitive to pyocin S5 (). Results show that GFP synthesis rate measured for the isolate ln7 was 1.375 RFU per OD per minute. This value was above the minimum synthesis rate and greater than the half-maximal of the sensing device. This result confirmed that the sensing device was able to detect the natively produced 3OCHSL. Further, we used the GFP synthesis rate measured and the model (, Materials and methods) derived in the earlier experiment to gain an insight into the amount of 3OCHSL natively produced by the isolate. The average concentration of 3OCHSL in the liquid culture of the  strain was estimated to be ∼1.0E-6 M 3OCHSL. This result was coherent with previous studies that had estimated that the extracellular concentration of 3OCHSL is between 1.0E-6 and 1.0E-4 M (; ). Characterization of the lysing device As stated above, our system was designed to release pyocin S5 through lysis upon detection of . To determine the lysis activity of the system, we characterized the behavior of the E7 lysis protein under the transcriptional control of the sensing device before integrating both the pyocin S5 and E7 genes into the system. The E7 lysis gene was ligated downstream to the sensing device (i.e., pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-E7; the plasmid map is shown in ) and its performance was evaluated in the  chassis over time by measuring absorbance at OD at a range of concentrations of 3OCHSL.  shows that at 0 and 1.0E-8 M 3OCHSL, the growth rates of  underwent no noticeable transition into a lysis state. However, at higher concentrations of 3OCHSL (i.e., 1.0E-6 and 1.0E-4 M), the cells exhibited a significant reduction in optical density, likely due to the lysis activity. Our results imply that 1.0E-6 M or higher concentrations of 3OCHSL cause observable cell lysis with a delay of ∼120 m. To verify the effect of the lysis, cell integrity was examined with and without 1.0E-6 M 3OCHSL using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM).  shows that  containing pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-E7 and induced with 3OCHSL appeared shriveled with corrugated surface morphology, in contrast to the distinct ‘rod-like' features of the cells that were not induced with 3OCHSL. To further confirm that the lysis activity can be sustained in the final system including pyocin S5, the morphology of  containing the final system (i.e., pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7; ) was monitored using FESEM.  shows that  cells having the final system and induced with 3OCHSL also appeared shriveled with corrugated surface morphology, whereas  cells having the final system but not induced with 3OCHSL remained ‘rod-like' in shape. These observations were similar to that obtained in our earlier experiment with  containing pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-E7. This result suggests that 3OCHSL induced the lysis of the  containing the final system. In line with the overall objective of the E7 lysis device in mediating the export of pyocin, we studied the efficiency of the lysis device in the final system by measuring the amount of the released protein. After induction with 1.0E-6 M 3OCHSL, histidine-tagged S5 protein was purified by immobilized metal affinity chromatography from the filtered supernatant and analyzed by SDS–PAGE and Bradford assay.  shows that distinct bands that corresponded to pyocin S5 were observed on the SDS–PAGE of the final system (i.e., pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7), while no bands were seen in lanes without the lysis device (i.e., pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5; the plasmid map is shown in ). We further validated the results by estimating the protein concentrations in the supernatant with Bradford assay and showed that the amount of pyocin released by our final system was eight times higher than the system without the lysis device (). The dynamic performance of the lysis device in the final system was characterized by an impulse release of protein 2 h after induction, followed by a steady-state response. Verification of the final system with the sensing, killing, and lysing devices We have so far demonstrated that our engineered microbes are able to sense natively produced AHL 3OCHSL, which subsequently triggers cell lysis. To further determine whether the sensing of 3OCHSL also leads to killing of  as designed, the growth of  was monitored in the presence of the engineered  containing the final system. First, to determine the concentration of 3OCHSL that causes a significant growth inhibition and confirm that the concentration falls within the range of concentrations of 3OCHSL naturally produced by , the engineered  was exposed to commercial 3OCHSL at 0, 1.0E-8, 1.0E-6, and 1.0E-4 M, and the filtered supernatants were added onto -grown agars. We observed that the growth of  was clearly inhibited by the filtered supernatants of the  cultures exposed to 1.0E-6 and 1.0E-4 M 3OCHSL, whereas very faint inhibition zones were observed at 0 and 1.0E-8 M, likely due to the basal expression of pyocin S5 and E7 (). Second, to further confirm the inhibition effects,  was examined upon exposure to the supernatant of the  cultures with 1.0E-6 M 3OCHSL using the LIVE/DEAD cell viability assay. As seen under microscope, many  cells exposed to the supernatant of the engineered  were stained with the PI dye, which stains a dead cell, whereas those that were incubated with the wild-type  were mostly stained with the SYTO 9 dye, which stains a live cell (). This result suggests that our engineered  carrying the final system can kill  in response to as low as 1.0E-6 M 3OCHSL. Since our earlier estimation indicated that the concentration of 3OCHSL natively produced by  was ∼1.0E-6 M, this outcome may imply that this killing activity would be sustained against  in response to its producing 3OCHSL. Therefore, subsequently, to confirm the killing activity by the native 3OCHSL produced by , the filtered supernatant of  cultures was mixed with the  cultures, whose supernatant was then added to -grown agars.  shows that  growth was significantly inhibited by the engineered  cultures exposed to the supernatant of  cultures, while neither with the wild-type  cells nor without the  supernatant led to growth inhibition. This result indicates that our final system produces pyocin S5 and E7 in response to the 3OCHSL natively produced by , which resulted in the killing of . To further visualize the inhibition effects on  by our engineered ,  cells were stained using the LIVE/DEAD cell viability assay.  shows that many  cells exposed to the supernatant of the engineered  induced with native 3OCHSL were stained with the PI dye, whereas the cells incubated with the wild-type  were mostly stained with the SYTO 9 dye (green). This result suggests that our engineered  carrying the final system can kill  in the presence of native 3OC12HSL produced by . To verify that our engineered  that contains the final system (i.e., pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7) exerts a killing activity against  in a mixed culture, we monitored the growth of  co-cultured with the engineered  in the ratio 1:4. To determine the growth inhibition of  in the mixed culture, we used  that constitutively expresses GFP and  that is without either the pyocin S5 or E7 lysis devices as negative controls.  shows that the GFP expression level of the  co-cultured with the  that carries the final system remained low and almost constant, whereas the GFP level underwent an exponentially increase when  was cultured with the negative control  systems. To verify the efficiency in growth inhibition, we also performed CFU count on mixed cultures using  that was transformed with chloramphenicol-resistant plasmid.  shows that our engineered  inhibited the growth of  by >99% while continuous growths were apparent in  co-cultured with incomplete  systems missing either the pyocin S5 or E7 lysis devices. The result also implies that our engineered system was activated only after the pathogen entered the late exponential and stationary phase when the autoinducers were released (). To examine the potential application of our engineered system against a  disease state of , a static biofilm inhibition assay was performed by culturing  carrying a chloramphenicol-resistance plasmid with the engineered .  shows that our engineered  inhibited the formation of  biofilm by close to 90%. This observation is in stark contrast to the pyocin-resistant control strain PAO1 and pyocin-sensitive clinical isolate ln7 subjected to treatment with  having the systems missing either the pyocin S5 or E7 lysis gene. To visualize the extent of biofilm inhibition, biofilm cells with green fluorescence were grown in the presence of engineered  on glass slide substrate and examined with confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM).  shows that the morphology of  biofilm treated with the engineered  appeared sparse while elaborated honey-combed structures were apparent in the control experiments. This observation implies that our engineered  has the capability to inhibit biofilm formation during the initial attachment phase and prevent subsequent progression into mature microcolonies. Collectively, our results suggest that our engineered  carrying the final system, which contains the sensing, killing, and lysing devices, can effectively inhibit the growth of  in both planktonic and sessile states. Nonetheless, we recognize the need for further extensive experimental studies in direct disease-relevant models. In particular, future studies should examine the  efficacy of the engineered  in controlling the growth of  in infected murine models. In summary, we engineered a novel biological system, which comprises sensing, killing, and lysing devices, that enables  to sense and eradicate pathogenic  strains by exploiting the synthetic biology framework. We designed and synthesized all the biological parts in compliance with the BioBrick assembly standards. The sensing, killing, and lysing devices were characterized to elucidate their functionalities, which subsequently aided in the construction of the final system and the verification of its designed behavior. Based on the characterization and modeling results, we verified that the sensing device had an optimal activity approximately in the range of 1.0E-7 to 1.0E-6 M 3OCHSL, which was in line with the concentration of 3OCHSL secreted by . We further confirmed the activity of the killing and lysing devices in response to this range of 3OCHSL concentration. Finally, we demonstrated that our engineered  with the complete system effectively kills  in both planktonic and biofilm states when those two microbes were grown together. As a proof of concept,  a natural inhabitant of the gastrointestinal tract, was chosen as the chassis in this study. The synthetic biology framework and genetic devices developed in this work could potentially be transferred into other microbial chassis such as probiotics and residential microbes of the upper respiratory tract (; ). Further, this study presents the possibility of engineering potentially beneficial microbiota into therapeutic bioagents to arrest  infection. Given the stalled development of new antibiotics and the increasing emergence of multidrug-resistant pathogens, this study provides the foundational basis for a novel synthetic biology-driven antimicrobial strategy that could be extended to include other pathogens such as era and . All cells involved in cloning and characterization experiments are  TOP10 (Invitrogen) unless otherwise stated. Commercial Luria-Bertani (LB) and Muller Hinton (MHB) were used as the medium for cloning and inhibition studies unless otherwise stated. Supplemented M9 (M9 salts, 1 mM thiamine hydrochloride, 0.4% glycerol, 0.2% casamino acids, 0.1 M MgSO, 0.5 M CaCl) was used as the medium for the characterization. Ampicillin (100 μg/ml) was added to the culture media for antibiotic selection where appropriate. Homoserine lactone (3OCHSL; Sigma-Aldrich) was used for characterization experiments. All restriction and ligation enzymes were purchased from New England Biolabs (NEB).  summarizes all plasmids, Biobrick parts, and devices used in this study. Genetic mapping of representative engineered constructs is illustrated in . The genetic constructs developed in this study were assembled using standard synthetic biology protocols (). Briefly, for front insertion of Biobrick parts, purified insert and vector plasmids were digested with RI/I and RI/I respectively. For back insertion to upstream vector, the insert and vector plasmids were digested with I/I and I/I in that order. Digested fragments were separated by DNA gel electrophoresis and ligated with NEB Quick Ligase in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Plasmids from chemically transformed cells were purified by affinity columns and verified by DNA sequencing. Characterization of pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-GFP with 3OCHSL Single colonies of pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-GFP (Top10) were each inoculated into 5 ml of prewarmed supplemented M9 ampicillin for overnight culture in a shaking incubator at 37°C. After overnight growth, the cultures were diluted to OD of 0.002 and allowed to incubate further to OD of 0.5 or 5.0E7 cfu/ml under the same condition. Cultures were then transferred into a transparent, flat-bottom 96-well plate in triplicate aliquots of 200 μl for induction with 3OCHSL at varying molar concentrations (0, 5.0E-10, 1.0E-9, 5.0E-9, 1.0E-8, 5.0E-8, 1.0E-7, 2.5E-7, 5.0E-7, 1.0E-6, 5.0E-6, 1.0E-6, 5.0E-5, and 1.0E-4 M). The plate was incubated at 37°C with rapid shaking in a microplate reader (Biotek) and assayed for green fluorescence. Time-series fluorescence and OD data were obtained at intervals of 10 m for a total run time of 3 h. The result was zeroed with supplemented M9 to remove background fluorescence and OD. A relative GFP production rate was derived as a ratio of background subtracted green fluorescence to OD value. A time-averaged GFP synthesis rate was obtained by averaging the relative GFP production rates between 20 and 80 m after induction with 3OCHSL. The experimental results were fitted using an empirical mathematical model (Hill equation), models GFP synthesis rate () as a function of input concentration of 3OCHSL (). The four parameters () were estimated to obtain the best fit curve by performing a non-linear curve fitting using the experimental results. This curve fitting was performed using MATLAB Curve Fitting Toolbox (The Mathworks, Natwick, MA, USA). Detection of the native autoinducer produced by GFP production rates induced by 3OCHSL natively produced from  were measured with pTetR-LasR-pLuxR quorum sensor as described above. Briefly, overnight cultures of pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-GFP (Top10) were diluted in Supplemented M9. Diluted  cultures were grown to a late logarithmic phase and filtered with a filter membrane (0.22 μm). Sterile filtrates containing 3OCHSL were mixed with pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-GFP culture to activate GFP production. The resultant mixtures were transferred into a transparent, flat-bottom 96-well plate in triplicate aliquots of 200 μl to be assayed for GFP production rates in a microplate reader (Biotek) at 37°C with rapid shaking. The rates obtained were then compared with the Hill function mathematical model derived earlier using 3OCHSL to estimate the native 3OCHSL concentration from  ln7. Characterization of lysis device with 3OCHSL Overnight cultures of pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-E7 (Top10) were diluted in supplemented M9 and harvested at an OD of 0.5. The resultant cultures were transferred into a transparent, flat-bottom 96-well plate in triplicate aliquots of 200 μl for induction with 3OCHSL at varying concentrations (i.e., 0, 1.0E-8, 1.0E-6, and 1.0E-4 M). The plate was incubated at 37°C with rapid shaking in a microplate reader (Biotek) and assayed for cell turbidity. Time-series absorbance at OD was obtained at intervals of 10 m for a total run time of 6 h. The result was zeroed with supplemented M9 to remove background absorbance. To examine the effect of E7 lysis protein on cell morphology, re-inoculated cultures of pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-E7 (Top10) and pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7 (Top10) were induced with 1.0E-6 M 3OCHSL at OD of 0.5 and cultured for 2 h. Cell pellets collected after centrifugation at 4000 r.p.m. for 15 m were washed with 0.1 M sodium cacodylate (pH 7.4) three times before fixation with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate for 2 h of incubation at 4°C. Cell pellets were further washed three times with sodium cacodylate after fixation and resuspended in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate (volume depends on cell amount). In all, 2 μl of sample was loaded onto PEI-coated silicon slide followed by incubation at 25°C for 30 m. The loaded silicon slide was fixed in 1% osmium tetraoxide in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate at 25°C for 90 m. Silicon slide was then dehydrated in serial concentrations of absolute ethanol (37, 67, 95% and three times of 100%) for 15 m each before drying in a vacuum evaporator overnight. Coating of silicon slide was performed with 20 nm of gold–palladium alloy (60:40) and examined using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (JSM-6700F FESEM) at 10 kV Characterization of lysis device by protein release in engineered To characterize the efficiency of the lysis device in mediating pyocin release, pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7 and pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5 plasmids were first labeled with hexa-histidine tags on the 3′ terminus of S5 gene with  polymerase (Promega) and transformed into  Top10. Overnight cultures of the His-tag version of pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7 and pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5 were then diluted in LB and harvested at an OD of 0.7. The collected cultures were induced with 1.0E-6 M 3OCHSL and incubated for 6 h in a shaking flask culture set at 37°C and 170 rpm. At regular intervals of 2 h, cell cultures were drawn and filter sterilized (0.22 μm). The filtered cultures were mixed with 1/10 volume of 100% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated on ice for an hour to allow protein precipitation, before being washed with an equal volume of acetone. Precipitated proteins were reconstituted in 1 ml of reconstitution solvent (1 × PBS, 30 mM imidazole and 4 M urea; pH 6.0) and purified by immobilized metal affinity chromatography using Vivapure miniprep MC (Sartorius Stedim Biotech GmbH) in accordance to the manufacturer's instruction. Finally, purified pyocin proteins were analyzed by SDS–PAGE (; ) and Bradford assay (). Overlay inhibition assay with 3OCHSL and the final system Overnight cultures of pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7 (Top10),  ln7 and PAO1 were diluted in LB and harvested at OD of 0.7 and 0.2 separately. Collected cultures of pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7 (Top10) were induced with varying molar concentrations of 3OCHSL (0, 1.0E-8, 1.0E-6, and 1.0E-4 M) and incubated for 2 h before being filtered with a filter membrane (0.22 μm). In all, 30 μl of sterile filtrate from each induced sample containing soluble S5 was spotted onto trypticase soy agar (TSA) plate in triplicates. Upon drying of spots, 0.1 ml of ln7 at OD of 0.2 in soft agar (1% peptone, 0.5% agar) prewarmed at 55°C was thinly filmed over the spotted TSA and allowed to dry completely. Resultant TSA plate was then incubated for 6 h at 37°C before image analysis with Bio-Rad ChemiDoc XRS. To evaluate the effectiveness of the engineered system coupled with the sensing function, overnight culture of  ln7 was also harvested at OD of 1.0 after redilution. The culture was filtered with a filter membrane (0.22 μm) and the sterile filtrate obtained, containing planktonic 3OCHSL was used to induce pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7 (Top10). These procedures were repeated to capture inhibitory images for the engineered system that was activated by 3OCHSL natively produced from . Co-culturing of the engineered  and GFP reporter plasmid pMRP9-1 and chloramphenicol-resistant plasmid pAWG1.1 were transformed into  ln7 and PAO1 using a method described before (). Overnight cultures of  (ln7/PAO1 with pMRP9-1), pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5 (Top10), pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-E7 (Top10), and pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7 (Top10) were diluted and harvested at an OD of 1.0. pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7 (Top10) was added to ln7 or PAO1 in the ratio 4:1 to obtain a mixed culture with an overall cell density of 1.0E8 cfu/ml in 25 ml of MHB. The resultant mixture was grown for 15 h in a shaking flask culture set at 37°C and 170 rpm. For fluorescence assays, the mixed culture was transferred into a transparent, flat-bottom 96-well plates in aliquots of 200 μl and assayed for background subtracted green fluorescence in a microplate reader (Biotek) at regular intervals of 3 h. The same procedures were repeated for pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5 (Top 10) and pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-E7 (Top 10) as negative controls. For cell viability assays, aliquots of  in the mixed culture were quantified by CFU count on chloromphenicol selective agar plates at regular intervals of 5 h. The same procedures were repeated for pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5 (Top 10) and pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-E7 (Top 10) as negative controls. Percentage survival of planktonic  was determined as follows: Live and dead fluorescent microscopy Overnight cultures of ln7 and pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7 (Top10) were diluted in LB and harvested at an OD of 0.5 and 1.0, respectively. 3OCHSL from ln 7 was obtained after passing ln7 culture through a filter membrane (0.22 μm) and the sterile filtrate was used to induce expression of engineered system by mixing it with pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7 (Top10) in 1:1 mixing ratio to a total volume of 2 ml. The resultant culture was grown for 3 h and filtered with a similar membrane to obtain sterile S5 filtrate. The filtrate was mixed with ln7 at OD of 1.0 in 1:1 mixing ratio to a total volume of 2 ml and incubated for 3 h. One microliter of the final culture was stained with bacterial viability kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instruction and analyzed with a fluorescent microscope (Zeiss Axio Scope A1). (ln7/PAO1 with pAWG1-1) conferred with chloramphenicol resistance was mixed with pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7 (Top10) in the ratio 1:4 to obtain a mixed culture with an overall cell density of 1.0E8 cfu/ml in 6 ml of MHB. The resultant mixture was transferred to the wells of a polystyrene microtiter plate (Iwaki) in aliquots of 1 ml each and grown at 37°C and 150 rpm. After 18 h of growth, biofilm on the microtiter plate was rinsed and recovered in fresh MHB by sonication and quantified by CFU count on chloramphenicol-selective plate (100 μg/ml). The same procedures were repeated for ln7 treated with pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5 (Top10) and pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-E7 (Top10), and PAO1 treated with pTetR-LasR-pLuxR-S5-pLuxR-E7 as negative controls. Percentage survival of  biofilm was determined as follows: Mixed bacteria cultures of  (ln7 with pMRP9-1) and engineered  systems were grown in MHB in 50 ml tubes containing sterile glass slide. Biofilm developed on the glass slides after 18 h of growth was rinsed in PBS, dried, and visualized by confocal laser scanning microscopy (Zeiss LSM 510). Collected Z-stack biofilm images were reconstructed using Zeiss 2.5D software. Supplementary Figures S1–2, Supplementary Table S1.