Chemical systems capable of performing biochemical reactions in the absence of live cells have been extensively used in research and industry to study and model biological processes, to produce small molecules, to engineer proteins, to characterize RNAs, as biosensors and molecular diagnostic tools, and to extend the sensing abilities of natural cells. Organisms from all three domains of life have been used to obtain transcription/translation (aka TX/TL) extracts for cell-free production of biochemical products from genetic codes. Encapsulating cell-free TX/TL extracts into liposomes creates bioreactors often referred to as synthetic minimal cells (SMCs or synells). Although synells have been used to make functional proteins using encapsulated systems reconstituted from recombinant cell-free translation factors, as well as cell-free extracts from bacterial and eukaryotic cells, work on liposomal synells has so far focused on expression of single genes, with the goal of synthesizing a single gene product, and within a homogenous population of liposomes. Here, we confront a key issue in synthetic biology: the modularity of multi-component genetic circuits and cascades. We show that by encapsulating genetic circuits and cascades within synells ( and ) and orchestrating the synells to either operate in parallel (), communicate with one another (), or fuse with one another in a controlled way (). We can create genetic cascades that take advantage of the modularity enabled by liposomal compartmentalization. Thus, our strategy enables genetic cascades to proceed in well-isolated environments while permitting the desired degree of control and communication. We present design strategies for constructing and utilizing such synell networks, thus expanding the utility of liposome technology and improving the modularity of synthetic biology. Synell networks may support complex chemical reactions that would benefit from both the high-fidelity isolation of multiple reactions from one another, as well as controlled communication and regulatory signal exchange between those reactions. We show, for example, the controlled fusion of two populations of synells that contain mammalian transcriptional and mammalian translational machinery, respectively, which are normally incompatible when combined in the same compartment. Confinement of genetic circuits in liposomes Before exploring the control of, and communication with, synells containing genetic cascades, we first characterized the basic structural and functional properties of individual synells. To characterize the size and functionality of our liposomes, we labeled liposome membranes with red dye (rhodamine functionalized with a lipid tail) and filled the liposomes with cell-free transcription/translation (TX/TL) extract derived from HeLa cells, as well as DNA encoding either GFP or split GFP. Structured illumination microscopy (SIM) images showed that GFP liposomes had a diameter between 100 nm and 1 μm (), a measurement that we confirmed with dynamic light scattering (). We used flow cytometry to quantify the functional expression of genes by synells; 68.4% of the GFP liposomes expressed fluorescence, along with 61.8% of those encapsulating split GFP ( – ; for control flow cytometry experiments, see ). We characterized the enzymatic activity of several reporters in our liposomes () and used a Western blot to provide an additional non-enzymatic characterization of luciferase expression (). We compared the performance of mammalian (HeLa) and bacterial () TX/TL systems in our liposomes, finding the mammalian system to be slower and have a lower protein yield (). Having established that the liposomes were of proper size and functionality, we next sought to verify that a well-known advantage of liposomal compartmentalization—facilitated reaction efficacy due to molecular confinement (since encapsulating reactants within a liposome facilitates their interaction due to the small volume)—can help support multi-component genetic circuits as well as chemical reactions of higher order. We compared cell-free transcription/translation (TX/TL) reactions that produce firefly luciferase (fLuc) from one, two, or three protein components, testing them in bulk solution vs. synells. In this experiment, we used HeLa cell extract constitutively expressing the Tet protein to mediate small-molecule induction of transcription of the one, two, or three fLuc components, as well as alpha-hemolysin (aHL), which serves as a pore to admit doxycycline (Dox) to trigger Tet function. The one-component luciferase was simply conventional monolithic fLuc (); the two-component system (i.e., to explore 2-order reactions) comprised the two halves of split firefly luciferase, each attached to a coiled coil and a split intein fragment to bring the halves together and covalently bridge them (); and the three-component system involved the halves of split firefly luciferase bearing coiled coils and split inteins, with the coiled coils targeting a third protein, a scaffold (). For all three orders of luciferase-producing reactions, the effect of dilution on fLuc expression was weaker for liposomes than for bulk solution ( – ; P < 0.0001 for interaction between factors of encapsulation and dilution factor; ANOVA with factors of encapsulation and dilution factor; see  for full statistics and  for corresponding experiments under the control of a constitutive P70 promoter). As expected, fLuc expression was proportional to the concentration of Dox added to the external solution, and depended on aHL ( –  show end-point expression after 3 h; see  for the corresponding expression at a 1 h end-point, and  for the same reactions in bulk solution). Liposomes produced lower amounts of fLuc than the same volume of TX/TL extract in bulk solution—likely due to the well-known property of stochastic loading of reagents into liposomes (P < 0.0001 for factor of encapsulation in ANOVA with factors of time, encapsulation, and order; see  for full statistics). For the third-order reaction, we found that liposome encapsulation resulted in efficacy nearly equal to that of bulk solution (P = 0.1324 for factor of encapsulation in ANOVA with factors of time and encapsulation; ; see  for full statistics), whereas for the first-order and second-order reactions the liposomes resulted in lower efficacy (P < 0.0001 for factor of encapsulation in ANOVAs for both analyses, each with factors of time and encapsulation;  and ; see  for full statistics). Molecular confinement in liposomes thus may help facilitate higher-order reactions that require multiple chemical building blocks to be brought together, since the restricted movement of reagents increases the probability of the requisite multi-way interactions. Insulation of genetic circuits operating in parallel liposome populations As a next step towards engineering sets of liposomes that can communicate with one another, we set out to determine whether liposomes could be used to insulate multiple and potentially incompatible genetic circuits from each other, so that they could operate in the same bulk environment. This insulation would enable modular design; each circuit could be optimized independently and deployed in the same environment as other circuits without interference. These circuits could reuse the same parts (proteins, DNA) for different purposes in different liposomes, thereby circumventing one limitation of genetic circuits designed to all operate within the same living cell (where one must assume that all circuit elements might encounter each other and must therefore be inherently orthogonal). Different liposome populations could also contain chemical micro-environments that are not mutually compatible (e.g., bacterial and mammalian extracts, or mammalian transcriptional and mammalian translational machinery)—there are numerous examples throughout chemistry of reactions being run under specialized, and thus often isolated, reaction conditions. We first assessed whether multiple liposomal circuits could operate in parallel without crosstalk. To do this, we created populations of liposomes that could respond differently to the same external activator. We built two populations of liposomes carrying mammalian TX/TL extract and the same amount of Dox-inducible luciferase DNA (either Renilla or firefly luciferase), but varied the amount of alpha-hemolysin DNA to result in high-aHL and low-aHL synell populations (). High-aHL and low-aHL synells responded to the non-membrane-permeable Dox in the external solution, doing so proportionally to their own aHL concentration (). We observed no evidence that doxycycline acting upon one liposome population affected expression of luciferase in the other population: specifically, there was no significant difference in fLuc expression in high-aHL fLuc liposomes when the rLuc liposomes were high-aHL vs. low-aHL, and the same held for the other combinations (; Sidak’s multiple comparisons test after ANOVA with factors of luciferase type and alpha-hemolysin combination; see  for full statistics, and  for rLuc and fLuc expression data at different aHL plasmid concentrations, for two different time points). That is, luciferase expression from each liposome population depended only on the amount of aHL DNA present in that population, and not on that of the other population ( – ). This experiment thus not only verifies the independent operation of multiple non-interacting liposomes, but also verifies that multiple liposome populations can be programmed in advance to have varying response levels to a given trigger, and subsequently in the same internal solution, triggered to function simultaneously. Communication between genetic circuits operating in multiple liposome populations Having established that genetic circuits in separate populations of liposomes could operate independently, we next sought to begin to create controlled communication pathways between populations of synells. In this way we could create a compartmentalized genetic circuit—which as noted above may need to be separated from others for reasons of control fidelity, toxicity, or reagent tunability—and connect it to other compartmentalized circuits. While previous works have emphasized the importance of modularity in genetic circuits, to our knowledge nobody has approached the problem by physically separating circuit elements into different liposomes. We built two-component circuits by mixing together two populations of liposomes, a “sensor” that senses an external small molecule cue and a “reporter” that receives a message from the sensor population and produces an output; we could vary the occupancy of each population to achieve a different overall ratio of the two components (; see  for additional characterization of the membrane-permeable small molecules used throughout this figure, and  for the associated statistics). Our first version was built with bacterial TX/TL extract (). The sensor liposomes contained IPTG (a small, non-membrane-permeable activator that induces the  promoter) and the arabinose-inducible gene for aHL (arabinose, which unlike IPTG, is membrane-permeable); these liposomes thus sensed arabinose and released IPTG by expressing aHL channels. We combined these with reporter liposomes containing constitutively-expressed aHL, in which fLuc was under the control of the  promoter—either directly (fLuc under  promoter) or indirectly (T7RNAP under the  promoter and fLuc under T7 promoter)—and found that multi-component compartmentalized genetic circuits thus constructed were able to operate as coherent wholes. We tested both systems with multiple dilutions of sensor and reporter liposomes, and found similar dose-response curves from titration of either species of liposome ( and ; bars in these panels represent final time points of 6 h; for the complete time series that includes the data in , see ; for the end-point expression of the circuit in  without arabinose triggering, see ; for the complete time series that includes the data in , see ; for the end-point expression of the circuit in  without arabinose triggering, see ). Using this modular architecture, we constructed a genetic circuit that combines both bacterial and mammalian components (). The sensor liposome in this case responded to theophylline (membrane-permeable) to release doxycycline (non-membrane-permeable). Dox, in turn, activated fLuc expression in reporter liposomes built with mammalian components. As before, we showed that the multi-compartment genetic cascade could function as designed, with fLuc expression dose-response curves similar upon titrating either sensor or reporter liposome concentration (; bars in this panel represent final time points of 6 h; for the complete time series that includes the data in , see ; for the end-point expression of the circuit in  without theophylline triggering, see ). Thus, even multi-component genetic circuits with different chemical micro-environments (e.g., made from bacterial vs. mammalian cell extracts) can be assembled into coherent networks comprising multiple modules. Fusion of complementary genetic circuits Finally, having established that it is possible to maintain liposomes in high-integrity states despite being mixed, we sought to engineer synells to fuse so that they could bring together two genetic cascades into the same environment in a programmable fashion. Two precursors might require synthesis in different milieus, but ultimately need to be reacted with one another. One prominent example is that of mammalian transcription and translation. Mixed mammalian transcription and translation cell-free extracts are not able to functionally result in transcription of DNA into RNA and then the translation of RNA into protein, perhaps because the micro-environments of the mammalian nucleus and cytoplasm are quite different, making their cell-free extracts incompatible (). Rather than mixing the two cell-free extracts into a single non-functioning mixture, it might be preferred to use synells to compartmentalize the reactions. Once nuclear-extract synells have completed transcription, it might be desirable to fuse them with cytoplasmic-extract synells for translation to take place. reported as de-quenching of a molecular beacon encapsulated in one population of liposomes by a complementary target encapsulated in the other population Thus, we sought to make liposomes capable of controlled fusion (). Fusing liposomes of opposite charge was previously demonstrated to activate gene expression in liposomes. Our system uses only one kind of membrane composition (POPC cholesterol membranes, known to be a good environment for membrane channels like aHL), so to achieve fusion between liposomes we used SNARE/coiled-coil hybrid proteins (here called SNAREs for short), which can be generated in complementary pairs that are specific in their fusion properties. We could thus fuse together complementary circuit elements by encapsulating them in separate populations of SNARE-fusable liposomes. We confirmed that SNAREs were mediating liposome fusion, through SIM imaging (), by observing Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) signals from lipid dyes added to the liposome membranes (FRET signals showed that the fusion process takes place within minutes; see ) and by observing mixing of liposome content,  (see ). We observed large liposomes and also liposome aggregates (presumably in the process of fusing) of sizes on the order of 5–10 μm, and measured a minimal amount of leakage from the liposomes during the process of fusion (). We tried several combinations of complementary circuit elements: the gene for T7RNAP and a T7-driven fLuc (); a non-membrane-permeable small molecule trigger (IPTG) and an IPTG-triggered (-promoter driven) fLuc (); genes for a membrane pore (aHL) and a -promoter driven fLuc (, in an IPTG-containing ambient); two different genes encoding for parts of split luciferase (, using the same fLucA and fLucB as in ). For one final test, liposomes carrying mammalian nuclear (transcription) extract and the gene for fLuc, incubated for 12 hours, were then mixed with liposomes containing cytoplasmic (translation) extract, and further incubated for 12 hours (). We were able to observe production of fLuc protein, even though a direct combination of transcriptional and translational machinery produced no fLuc above background levels (). Throughout all these cases, we observed production of the final output of the genetic cascade only when the two liposome populations were equipped with SNAREs, and only when they were a SNARE cognate pair (P < 0.0001 for factor of SNARE compatibility, ANOVA with factors of mechanism, occupancy, and SNARE compatibility; see  for full statistics; for systems in this figure, switching which liposome contained which SNARE had no effect on the results, as shown in ). Liposomes are key in chemistry and chemical biology for compartmentalizing chemical reactions that require different environments or act on different samples. In this work, we show how synthetic minimal cells (synells)—liposomes containing genes as well as transcriptional and/or translational machinery—enable a great level of modularity for genetic circuit design and execution. We showed that circuits could be designed to run in synell populations in the same container, independent of each other due to the insulation provided by the liposomal membrane. Genetic circuits could also be connected to communicate with one another through small molecule messengers. This communication was possible even across liposomes containing incompatible micro-environments, as we showed by constructing the first genetic circuit containing bacterial and mammalian cell-free extracts and genetic elements. Finally, we explored the use of SNARE mimics to fuse synells together, enabling the direct union of separately synthesized reaction components. Using this strategy, we were able to produce RNA encoding for firefly luciferase (fLuc) in one population of liposomes containing mammalian transcriptional extract, which upon fusion with liposomes containing mammalian translational extract resulted in protein production—an outcome which does not occur if the gene is simply added to a mixture of the two extracts. Synells thus enable a new level of modularity for synthetic biology. Modularity is key in engineering, since breaking a complex synthetic biology system into parts that can be independently controlled or regulated, without crosstalk, and that communicate only in well-defined ways, enables each part to be individually optimized while supporting their incorporation into an emergent whole. Our technologies will enable a large number of different synthetic biology problems to be made modular, even those that involve genetic cascades that might interfere with each other (or pose toxicity issues) if they were to all occur in one pot. Since our method of compartmentalization is liposomal, there is no need for specialized hardware to mediate the communication and control of multiple interacting reaction systems. Precise temporal control of synell networks could be even further enhanced by using light to trigger optogenetic signaling cascades, which in turn can trigger downstream effects. We also show that the molecular confinement of liposomes can facilitate multicomponent protein-protein interactions. Our synells, in addition to the power they offer to synthetic biology, may also enable the simulation of various complex behaviors that have been proposed as characteristics of early life forms. Controlled communication between cells, the fusion of genetic elements across cells, and the assembly of complex genetic cascades towards defined cellular behaviors, are all traits that arose in the course of early evolution. Synthetic minimal cells have been widely used as models for studying the origin and earliest evolution of life. For example, one of us has previously shown that liposomes encapsulating a simple catalyst can be used to model early Darwinian competition mechanisms. Interacting encapsulated genetic circuits will hopefully enable the study of the more complex characteristics that have been proposed for the last universal common ancestor (LUCA), perhaps helping reveal the dynamic and boundary conditions underlying the mechanisms of Darwinian evolution. Cloning of expression constructs The P70 (OR2-OR1-Pr) and  (Llac-0-1) promoter constructs were used in a modified pCI vector (Promega). The original promoter region of the vector was replaced by the appropriate promoter to make our constructs. For bacterial expression, the previously described transcription terminator T500 was added at the end of each ORF. The original UTR was also removed and replaced with the previously described UTR1. The mammalian Tet constructs were built into Tet-On 3G bi-directional vector (Clontech) by cloning the genes into MCS1. The araBAD constructs were built using a PBAD vector (Thermo). We used PBAD-hisB, removing the His-tag and the enterokinase recognition site prior to inserting the genes used in this study. Flow cytometry with GFP and split GFP Fluorescence signal from these GFP liposomes was measured after 12 h of incubation for the experiments in  – . Membranes (red fluorescence) were labeled with Lissamine Rhodamine B 1,2-Dihexadecanoyl-sn-Glycero-3-Phosphoethanolamine Triethylammonium Salt (rhodamine DHPE), used at 0.2 molar percentage of the POPC concentration. GFP was expressed from a plasmid with the T7 promoter. The halves of split GFP were fused to complementary coiled coils and expressed from two different plasmids (both with the T7 promoter). Flow cytometry analysis: events in two fluorescent channels were analyzed: GFP and red fluorescence. Each dataset consists of minimum 19,000 events.  shows an analysis of liposomes expressing GFP and  shows an analysis of liposomes expressing split GFP. The percentage of liposomes expressing protein was calculated as the percentage of events in the quadrant positive in both green and red channels (Q2 on both plots). The flow cytometer was not calibrated using size standards, therefore all information about the size of the particles in the experiment are approximate. For the detailed size measurements of the liposomes in this work see  data from the DLS experiments. The flow cytometry analysis was performed on FACSCanto II, and the data analysis was performed using FACSDiva 8.0. Firefly luciferase (fLuc) activity was assayed using the Steady-Glo Luciferase Assay System (Promega). The protein analysis was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The cell lysis protocol was replaced with a modified procedure for lysing liposome-encapsulated expression reactions. The 50 μL liposome reactions were quenched by 10 μL of Quench Mix containing 0.3% v/v Triton-X100 (to disrupt vesicles), TURBO DNAse (Thermo; final concentration ~2U/60 μL; 1 μL used), TURBO DNAse buffer (final concentration ~0.5×, 2.5 μL 10× stock used), RNase Cocktail Enzyme Mix (Thermo, mixture of RNAse A and RNAse T1, 3 μL per 60 μL reaction). The samples were incubated with the Quench Mix for 15 min at 37°C. The resulting sample was used directly with the Steady-Glo luciferase assay, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The result is given in RLU—relative light units with 10 s integration time. Renilla, NanoLuc luciferase, Beta-lactamase, Beta-galactosidase and Chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity were assayed using commercially available kits, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. See  for detailed procedures. Our  cell-free extract was prepared according to the Noireaux Lab protocol, from Rosetta 2 BL21 cells (Novagen). The entire extract preparation was performed in a cold room (4°C). The HeLa cell-free translation (TL) extract was prepared according to a previously published protocol. The entire extract preparation was performed in a cold room (4°C). For the mammalian in vitro transcription, we used the HeLa cell-free nuclear fraction transcription system HeLaScribe (Promega). The SNARE protein mimics were chemically synthesized by solid phase protein synthesis (Genscript). SNARE-A was a fusion of the E3 coiled-coil motif and the trans-membrane region of the VAMP2 protein (residues 85–116). SNARE-B was a fusion of the K3 coiled-coil motif with a trans-membrane region from syntaxin-1A protein (residues 258–288), as described before. The SNARE peptide-to-lipid molar ratio used in all experiments was 1:500. It’s worth noting that liposomes undergoing SNARE-mediated fusion will form large aggregates made from multiple starter liposomes; this does not affect the results in , but it would probably reduce the molecular confinement effects observed in ..