bosomally synthesized
and osttranslationally modified eptides (RiPPs)
offer several advantages in the synthetic biology of complex materials
and in drug discovery. RiPPs are universally synthesized
on short precursor peptides, which encode a core peptide that is converted
into a natural product. Enzymatic modifications to the core peptide,
and usually proteolytic cleavage of the core from the precursor peptide,
yield much smaller and highly chemically modified, bioactive compounds.
These transformations mainly take place ,
meaning that in order to modify the structure of the resulting compound,
it is sufficient to make mutations in the precursor peptide. Such
mutagenesis has been applied to modify or improve initial biological
activities of compounds, with the goal of increasing the activity
of the natural product against its natural target. In a few cases,
it has also been applied to create designer compounds to hit proteins
not targeted by the initial natural product. Ideally, combinatorial RiPP libraries could be applied to any target,
no matter what the initial activity of the compound might be. This
could be achieved by, for example, creating a randomized library of
core peptides. This method is analogous to that of phage display,
intein cyclic peptide libraries, and related strategies. The major difference is that in the RiPPs, diverse posttranslational
modifications impart further drug-like properties into the structures
of the compounds. A major challenge has
been in understanding the substrate selectivity of these modifying
enzymes. If the enzymes are relatively selective for specific substrates,
then the idea of using RiPPs for combinatorial biosynthesis would
fail. Three general strategies have been employed to address
RiPP selectivity.
The first involves making directed mutants, either via chemical or
genetic methods, and determining which lead to functional products. A related second method involves synthesizing
saturation libraries of single point mutants. Both of these methods are powerful, but they suffer from the fact
that they do not distinguish the context dependence of the mutation.
For example, an amino acid may be accepted in a certain position in
a peptide sequence, but if a second position is simultaneously changed,
that amino acid may no longer be accepted. This is because it is the
overall molecular properties of a peptide, not its linear sequence,
that determines whether or not it will be a substrate for enzymes.
A third method involves synthesizing randomized libraries and looking
for improved biological activity. This
method relatively rapidly assesses large numbers of compounds, but
it does not determine whether a compound can be made or not; instead,
only active compounds are discovered. These methods have been widely
and successfully used to create derivatives. However, in order to truly determine the sequence selectivity of
a RiPP pathway, multiple amino acids must be simultaneously mutagenized,
and the products must be chemically characterized. We sought
to determine the sequence selectivity of the cyanobactin
biosynthetic pathway, , independent of the surrounding sequence context and without dependence
on a functional activity of the products. This pathway was already
known in several studies to exhibit unusually relaxed sequence selectivity
both  and  (Figure ), but no methodical and unbiased studies have previously examined
the absolute substrate selectivity of the pathway. The  precursor peptide TruE is modified by at least four different enzymes,
meaning that  is a complex biosynthetic pathway.
The products of the pathway are small, N–C macrocycles of 6–8
amino acids, which are highly decorated with posttranslational modifications.
Thus,  affords an opportunity to evaluate the
use of RiPPs in combinatorial biosynthetic libraries, since the compounds
are relatively small in size but are highly complex chemically. The  pathway is also ideal because, although it originates
in cyanobacteria, it can be functionally expressed in , making it experimentally tractable. Here, we report
on our efforts to synthesize and characterize such libraries. Natural and
genetically engineered cyanobactins. (A) TruE precursor
peptides are processed by a series of enzymes to yield drug-like products
such as trunkamide and patellin 3. (B) Natural and synthetic diversity
of peptides previously known to be synthesized by  (blue),  (black), or both (green) pathways , emphasizing the large diversity synthesized by
identical enzymes in . The known  biosynthetic diversity is greater still. Numbering
of substrate amino acids begins at the carboxyl terminal cysteine
and proceeds backward to the amino terminus of the linear precursor. We designed a strategy focused on
cyclic heptapeptides. Heptapeptides offered a representative sequence
complexity in comparison to the hexa- and octa-peptide series, and
the natural product trunkamide is a heptapeptide that was considered
to be an anticancer lead at one time. Thus, we constructed
and analyzed a relatively complex library while simultaneously building
trunkamide variants for anticancer screening, the results of which
will be reported elsewhere. In synthesizing libraries, we desired
to encode the entire  operon on a single plasmid
vector as previously described, including
all modifying enzymes and the precursor peptide gene, . TruE consists of two core peptides that are modified enzymatically
to produce two distinct natural products (Figure ). We sought to keep intact the core peptide for the natural
product, patellin 3, which would serve as an internal
production control. The second core peptide sequence was modified
to create libraries. The internal patellin 3 control is essential
to our strategy. If patellin 3 is found, but the recombinant peptide
is not, then the absence of that recombinant peptide is meaningful.
However, if neither peptide is found, then there may be a technical
failure in the recombinant expression run. In all of the results reported
below, robust patellin 3 expression was observed from each reported
recombinant  strain. In the design of the core peptide mutagenesis strategy, we
selected
NNK libraries (N, any nucleotide; K, guanine or thymidine). For the
past two decades, this strategy has been the most common one used
in creating genetically encoded libraries (such as phage display libraries),
since it only encodes 32 codons with 1 stop sequence, rather than
the 64 codons with 3 stop sequences encoded in NNN libraries. Previous studies have shown that a heterocycle
(either proline
or thiazol(in)e/oxazol(in)e) is required in position 1 in order for
macrocyclase enzyme to be functional. Therefore, the thiazoline precursor Cys was fixed in position 1.
We chose to fix Pro in position 3 in these studies because we reasoned
that this position would be important in holding the resulting product
in the correct orientation for trunkamide activity. Previously, NMR
studies have shown that trunkamide adopts a specific shape, which
might be essential for the anticancer mechanism of the natural product. A library with full 5-fold degeneracy contains
20 (3.2 million) possible sequences, meaning that even
with Cys and Pro fixed, a large library would still be characterized,
but the analysis is more chemically feasible than assessing 20 (64 million) sequences. The challenge was to adequately
characterize this enormous number
of possible mutants, which requires expensive and time-consuming procedures.
Briefly, in order to synthesize the reported libraries, randomized
vectors were prepared in which the  pathway was
intact, but the second core peptide sequence of  was mutagenized with the NNK strategy. The resulting library was
transformed into , and individual colonies
were picked from plates. The mutant  gene was
sequenced in each colony, and the colonies were arrayed into deep
24-well plates. After 5 days of incubation, the colonies were pelleted,
extracted with organic solvent, and the resulting extracts were partially
enriched on a solid phase resin. Production of cyclic peptides was
analyzed by HPLC-mass spectrometry (Figure ). Potential product masses were determined using the Sanger sequences
of  genes: a spreadsheet was produced in which
the possible molecular weights of products in various states of posttranslational
modification were listed. For example, the spreadsheet contained
the expected mass of the
linear, unmodified product, and in addition, expected masses with
0–3 (or more if chemically possible) dehydration reactions
to yield macrocycle and thiazoline or oxazoline, as well as with the
addition of 0–3 isoprene units, which are added to the Ser
or Thr side chains. These expected molecular weights were then sought
in each HPLC-MS trace. If an expected peak was found, the presence
of this peak was also sought in adjacent HPLC-MS runs using extracts
of  clones that contained other TruE2 derivative
sequences, which thus served as negative controls. If a compound is
prenylated, isoprene is partly eliminated in the MS, so that both
the parent ion and deprenylated fragments are apparent in the MS. Each run was also assessed for the presence of the positive control,
patellin 3, and its less prenylated derivatives. Taken together, the
extensive positive and negative controls embedded in this library
design allowed us to assign the identity of new compounds with high
confidence. This general method was also validated previously on much
smaller library sets. Finally,
an additional complication of these libraries is that
the alpha protons adjacent to thiazoline are readily epimerized. Indeed, we have previously described that the
Phe adjacent to thiazoline in trunkamide is synthesized in the L-form
and gradually epimerizes to the D-form. The metastable form of the compound seems to be determined by the
preferred three-dimensional structure of the molecule, since only
a subset of heptapeptides exhibits this trait. The practical outcome
of epimerization is that there are often, but not always, two distinct
isobaric peaks for each product formed (Figure ). While simpler chemical
methods could perhaps be envisioned to analyze
the libraries, we have tried many of them and found this procedure
to be the most reproducible. In addition, the method provided very
robust controls. In essence, each run served as a negative control
for every other run. The presence of patellin 3 as a positive control,
and the sequence-mass relationship of new compounds, enabled us to
establish the presence or absence of each new compound with very high
confidence. Another advantage was that the presence of patellin 3
enabled us to roughly estimate the amount of each mutant compound
synthesized, which ranged from approximately 10–500 μg
per liter in this library, using a previously described method. If a compound was not detected despite the positive
controls working, we consider the sequence as not being a substrate
for the  pathway. However, there are many reasons
that a compound might not be detected beyond it being a poor substrate
(it might be lethal to , it may be secreted
into the broth, etc.). It may as well simply not be detectable under
the experimental conditions. A strategy to elucidate RiPP libraries
of 3.2 million members,
with the complex chemical analysis problem described above, has not
been previously reported and required careful design. In order to
determine the allowed sequences, in the absence of a function-based
assay, we chose to first simultaneously randomize two different amino
acid positions. Since only 20 (400) double mutants are
possible per pairwise sequence randomized, this strategy allowed us
to perform an initial assessment of the absolute sequence selectivity
at five different positions with a potential library size of 1200
sequences, rather than 3.2 million. In this design, we grouped positions
6 and 7 (XXIAPFC), 4 and 5 (TSXXPFC), and 2 and 4 (TSIXPXC). Subsequently,
we performed a tandem quadruple mutation (XSXXPXC), which has a potential
to accept a total of 20 (160 000) different sequences.
These changes covered positions 2, 4, 5, and 6. Thus, taken together,
positions 2, 4, 5, 6, and 7 were randomized in at least a subset of
libraries. Even these more limited libraries contained a greater
sequence
diversity than could be reasonably characterized. Therefore, we selected
a strategy that enabled saturation coverage at each of five positions.
Sanger sequencing of the resulting clones indicated that the positions
were saturated with each of the 20 proteinogenic amino acids (Table ). If each amino acid were represented once in each
of the mutated positions, a total of 100 possible substitutions would
be allowed, whereas we measured 763 individual amino acid substitutions.
The only exceptions were the amino acids Met and Trp, which were absent
from position 6, although overall they were encoded 19 and 25 times,
respectively, in the libraries. Amino acids were incorporated into
the library in their expected numbers based upon NNK codon frequency,
with no undue bias by amino acid type (Figure ). This showed that, overall, the libraries
were of high quality. Expression strategy for
trunkamide derivatives. (Top) The full
11 kbp operon was expressed in , including
a randomized  gene sequence in cassette 2. (Bottom)
Example of a randomly obtained clone and its production of a new cyanobactin
derivative in . HPLC-MS run extracted ion
chromatograms are shown. Supporting Information
Table S4 Example of peak doubling observed in libraries (top), compared
to a similar compound that does not exhibit peak doubling (bottom).
This phenomenon has previously been characterized with other derivatives
to be caused by epimerization. Here, the possible positions that may
be epimerized are shown with wavy lines. For each compound, the HPLC-MS
derived extracted ion chromatogram is shown, along with integrated / for that peak area. Full spectra are
shown in greater detail in . Observed (-axis) versus expected (-axis) occurrence of each amino acid in the libraries,
using the
data shown in Table . Orange, hydrophobic;
yellow, hydrophilic; light blue, aromatic; green, acidic; purple,
Gly/Met/Pro/Cys; black, basic. Number of Occurrences of Amino Acid
Coding Mutations in the Libraries Only full-length
TruE2 mutants
are considered in this analysis. Saturation was achieved for each
amino acid at each site, with the exceptions of Met and Trp in position
6. Expect indicates the total number of times that the amino acid
may be expected to occur in an NNK library with 763 mutants; observed
values meet expectations for a library of this complexity, indicating
no undue bias in the library preparation and analysis. The core
peptide sequence of
trunkamide, TSIAPFC, was mutated in NNK libraries encoding XXIAPFC,
TSIXPXC, and TSXXPFC. The first of these was aimed at determining
the importance of the posttranslational modification prenylation,
which requires the presence of Ser or Thr in positions 6 and 7. The
other libraries aimed to mutagenize the remaining three positions
in the library. Supporting Information
Table S1 Supporting Information Table S4 Supporting Information Table S2 Supporting Information Table S3 We screened a total of 460 random double mutant
clones, out of which 260 encoded full-length TruE derivatives and
the remainder contained stop codons or frame-shifts. Out of these
260, 150 mutant TruE products (142 unique) were detected as abundant
components of these extracts for a ∼58% success rate (Figure ). All three libraries exhibited an approximately
equal success rate. Since 1200 possible double mutants might be created
by this library, if the success rate could be extrapolated, then 675
compounds should be produced in these libraries. Details of which
amino acids are found in which positions are described in ensuing
sections below. However, a few examples of interesting sequences will
be described. While the native sequence is TSIAPFC, we found that
sequences such as PLIAPFC, HLIAPFC, GEIAPFC, TSIQPNC, TSISPTC, TSIFPWC,
TSAEPFC, TSHPPFC, TSKQPFC, and many other highly unnatural sequences
were competent for modification by the  pathway
and were found in whole cell extracts. These many promising and diverse
sequences are listed in , and their raw MS data is shown in . Further examples are also
shown in Figures  and . Many sequences also failed to be processed, as shown in .  summarizes observed
mutations per position and reveals that every amino acid was incorporated
into every position in the library, with the exception of Met and
Trp in position 6, which were not encoded in the library. The double mutant libraries also
clearly revealed the value and
necessity of determining context-independent amino acid selectivity.
As a concrete example in this library, the sequence TSRAPFC (versus
the wild-type sequence, TSIAPFC) was not accepted; in a saturation
library, it would appear that R is forbidden in position 5. However,
in reality, R was relatively favorable in position 5, when position
4 was no longer the wild-type Ala sequence, and the following peptides
were all successfully synthesized: TSRDPFC, TSRFPFC, TSRQPFC, TSRSPFC,
TSRTPFC, TSRVPFC, TSRYPFC. Treating peptide substrates as linear sequences
of letters is clearly inadequate to the task of determining the true
substrate selectivity of RiPP pathways. Supporting Information Table S4 Examples of
successfully produced double mutant derivatives. Larger
spectra, as well as spectra for all produced compounds are provided
in . Supporting Information
Tables S1–S4 We designed the sequence,
XSXXPXC, based upon the results above. We wished to preserve the Ser
in position 6 so that this position would always be available for
prenylation, allowing us to assess substrate selectivity of prenylation.
In this event, 96 clones were screened, leading to 65 full-length
TruE derivatives. Of these 65, nine led to full-length products, for
a 14% success rate. These derivatives were highly sequence variable
(Figure ), reinforcing the value of the library.
Results and data are provided in . Supporting Information Table S4 Examples of successfully produced quadruple
mutant derivatives.
Larger spectra, as well as spectra for all produced compounds are
provided in . We noticed that certain
amino acids could never be found in certain positions, even if they
were encoded in those positions in multiple independent events. This
enabled us to form sequence selectivity rules that were useful in
understanding library diversity. The formulation of rules is described
in “”, but briefly, we
tabulated the amount of times an amino acid was found in each position
in a mutant library, counting only mutated residues. If an amino acid
was encoded in a specific position at least five times, but never
led to a detectable product, that amino acid was considered to be
“forbidden”. In total, each of the 20 amino acids
was present an average of 38.15 times, with 134, 69, 181, 251, and
127 point mutations in positions 7, 6, 5, 4, and 2, respectively (Table ). This enabled the rules to be assigned with confidence.
In particular, Cys was never found outside of position 1. Arg and
Lys are unfavorable; they were never found in positions 2, 6, or 7,
and were disfavored in positions 4 and 5. Asp, Gly, Glu, and Pro were
never found in position 2, although Gly was only found in tandem with
other relatively disfavored amino acids in this library and therefore
was not considered as forbidden. The rules are not absolute,
and merely denote preferences that
are reflected in the complexity of the resulting libraries. As a very
concrete example, despite 23 codons encoding Cys in our libraries,
we never saw Cys outside of position 1. However, in previous work
Cys has been found in other positions in octapeptides produced by . Therefore, it is likely
that Cys is acceptable in some contexts that were not fully explored
by this library. Nonetheless, the sequence selectivity rules are useful
in analyzing the experimental results. For example, if only rule-following
sequences are considered, 80%, 84%, and 58% success rates are observed
for the XXIAPFC, TSIXPXC, and TSXXPFC libraries, respectively. (The
complication of the rules for the latter library, in which basic amino
acids are sometimes accepted but greatly decrease the chances of production,
explain the lower success rate. In fact, similar total numbers of
products are accessible from each library.) Similarly, the quadruple
library would have a 38% success rate following the rules. About the
same total number of compounds would be anticipated in either event,
but the background of unaccepted sequences is higher when the rules
are not followed. Supporting
Information Figure S4 Additional variables increase the number of
compounds produced
(Figure  and ). In particular, both - and - amino acids are observed adjacent to thiazoline, which causes
some peaks in the LC-MS traces to be doubled. Ser or Thr adjacent
to thiazoline is partially dehydrated, leading to compounds that are
18 Da lighter than predicted. This dehydration is most probably due
to the reverse Michael reaction, since it is observed to increase
in extracts over time, whereas enzymatic reaction products are stable.
Finally, mixtures of differentially prenylated products are observed,
with 0, 1, 2, or even 3 prenylation events observed as mixtures of
compounds in traces. It is easy to verify this as O-prenylation, since
68 Da (isoprene) is readily lost in these compounds, as previously
described. Once these compound variants
are taken into account, the 159 successfully produced sequences yielded
>300 unique, new compounds. Of note, prenylation was the
most fastidious feature of the pathway.
While all detected products were N–C macrocyclic and contained
thiazoline, not all products were prenylated, even if prenylatable
groups were present. We only observed prenylation when position 5
was comprised of Arg, Val, Leu, Ile, Met, Ser, or Thr. Beyond the
Rules: Relative Sequence Preferences Supporting Information Table
S3 In
nature, the  and related  pathways
produce compounds that contain Ala, Cys (position 1 only in ), Ile, Leu, Phe, Ser, Thr, and Val, or eight out of
the 20 proteinogenic amino acids. There are
no known  or  natural products
containing Asp, Glu, Gly, His, Met, Asn, Gln, Trp, or Tyr. Nonetheless,
from this library methodology, these amino acids are clearly highly
favored in most positions, so that in this work we more than double
the number of amino acids (to 17) that are known to be favored in  and  core sequences. In addition,
Arg and Lys are never found in natural sequences. They are disfavored
in most positions, but they can in fact be found with relatively high
preference under some circumstances. Beyond these rules, there were
minor variations in preference at individual amino acid positions,
which are shown in . Supporting Information Tables S3B and S3C Supporting Information Table S3 The overall preference for each amino acid can be
readily discerned from the available data (Figure  and Table ). Models were created
both with and without considering the codon bias of NNK libraries,
yielding essentially identical results. Therefore, for simplicity,
we chose to analyze the data as straight percentage of occurrence
in compounds versus total appearances in the library. In so doing,
it is apparent that amino acids behave relatively similarly as groups
(). Preferred amino acids include the four hydrophobic amino acids,
four hydrophilic amino acids, four aromatic amino acids, and Gly/Met,
which were grouped. The two acidic amino acids and Pro are relatively
favored except in specific positions. The two basic amino acids are
highly disfavored. Although behavior is similar within groups, there
are minor variations in incorporation efficiency between amino acids
within groups; complete details are provided in . Interestingly, if
one considers the eight amino acids naturally
found in  and  products in
the wild, there is only a slightly greater chance that these amino
acids would be found in our library than the other 9 favored amino
acids. Excluding Cys, the remaining 7 natural amino acids are successfully
incorporated in degenerate positions 74%/55% of the time in double/double
+ quadruple mutant libraries. (These amino acids are encoded 307 times
in the libraries.) In comparison, the 9 relatively preferred amino
acids that are not found in nature are successfully incorporated 67%/47%
of the time. (These amino acids are encoded 293 times in the libraries.)
We hypothesize that the naturally observed amino acids are important
for the phenotype of the compounds in their native environments. The  and  pathways are found so far only
in symbiotic cyanobacteria that live in marine animals, and the resulting
compounds are abundant components of the animals. It will thus be
of interest to elucidate the natural roles of these compounds. Graphical representation
of results shown in Table . The vertical axis
is the % chance that an amino acid will
be found in a specified position in otherwise rule-following sequences
(forbidden amino acids indicated by a black box). The horizontal axes
represent the amino acids considered and the position in the peptide,
with similar amino acids grouped and considered together. The circles
indicate total accepted mutations at each position found in this study. Substitution Preference
and Forbidden
Positions in Heptapeptide Libraries Given
are the total number of
appearances of amino acids in each position for the combined double
and quadruple mutant libraries, then % success rate for rule-following
sequences. Highlighted are positions of “forbidden”
amino acid substitution. In the shaded series, the percentage value
indicates that this amino acid is never observed in libraries, since
they are never rule-followers. The wild type sequence is shown in
row 2. The double mutant libraries
allowed us to achieve confidence intervals of 11, 8, and 11 for the
three libraries at the 95% confidence level. Overall, this indicates
that together these 3 double mutant libraries would yield between
600 and 750 unique compounds. Similarly, although the quadruple mutant
library is obviously undersampled (although it is still the largest
of its kind reported to date), one could estimate that between 16 000
and 48 000 compounds could be produced using this methodology. Here, we define the unbiased
sequence selectivity of the  pathway with the
heptapeptide series. We show that virtually every amino acid is accepted
at five separate positions within the heptapeptide series. By using
tandem mutations, we were able to determine sequence selectivity regardless
of the context of the amino acid. As the example of Arg in position
5 shows, context dependence is a critical but underappreciated aspect
of substrate selectivity in RiPP libraries. Because every position
was oversampled with the minor exceptions mentioned above, the results
are obtained with high confidence. In studies of RiPP selectivity , these context-independent results are generally
not obtained, or else they are usually constrained only to compounds
that exhibited the sought biological activity. From this study, it
seems likely that the breadth of products that could be synthesized
by RiPP pathways has been underestimated. These libraries have
been used to screen for more active variants of the anticancer compound,
trunkamide, which will be described in due course. This is not the
ideal application of such libraries, since it is highly labor-intensive
and leads to a relatively small compound diversity. We have created
libraries containing >10 unique sequences; if even
1%
of these are synthesized, the libraries should afford >10 unique compounds. In these types of libraries,  screening and selection methods provide the most appropriate applications,
since they require a minimum of manipulations and are much less expensive
to conduct. These methods would be analogous to those used in phage
display or intein circularization libraries. The results of
this study reveal several important points in the
design and synthesis of randomized RiPP libraries. First, as found
in other library-generating methods, we experienced a relatively high
attrition rate of sequences even with standard methods such as NNK
libraries employed. Therefore, in large RiPP libraries one has to
consider that at minimum 30% of clones are nonfunctional because of
stops, frameshifts, etc. Second, it appears that basic amino acids
are relatively disfavored in  (while they
are seemingly not as unfavorable ) in comparison to other amino acids. Other strategies, such as  libraries, may serve to circumvent this problem,
but they have disadvantages in some screening applications. Third,
in RiPP libraries that are truly randomized, even with an enormous
number of successfully produced new compounds, it is likely that most
sequences will not be functionally produced. This requires a design
of the screening strategy that minimizes the manipulation of individual
colonies and that does not rely on chemical extraction methods. Finally,
the majority of the limitations discussed above can be circumvented
by producing libraries in which each position is randomized to contain
only favored amino acids. This could be achieved by preparing libraries
using trimer phosphoramidites, where each amino acid is encoded by
a unique codon (Glen Research, Sterling, VA). Each randomized position
could be produced using a trimer phosphoramidite mixture containing
only the amino acids favored at each site. If these limitations are
considered during the design of a screening campaign, RiPP libraries
offer access to an unprecedented chemical diversity through simple
mutagenesis. In the case of the  pathway,
at least four
individual enzymatic steps take place in the processing of the precursor
peptide. Prior to the action of enzymes,
a precursor peptide, TruE, is synthesized on the ribosome. This precursor
peptide contains three distinct recognition sequences (RS) that attract
modifying enzymes, as well as the amino acid sequence that encodes
the natural (or unnatural) product. The
first three enzymatic steps involve enzymes that target recognition
elements in the core peptide. The first of these is heterocyclization
of Cys residues by TruD, which binds to RSI in the leader peptide. Previous studies  show that TruD and the
related PatD are extremely broad-specificity enzymes, and thus it is likely that TruD is not a
limiting enzyme in the synthesis of derivatives. In our study, we
explicitly searched for derivatives lacking heterocyclization in Cys,
but we did not find any such examples. Cys failed to be incorporated
at any other position in the precursor peptide. Since it is known
from  studies that TruD cyclizes Cys in many
different positions, it is likely that Cys in all positions is heterocyclized
but that such products containing multiple heterocycles are not substrates
for macrocyclization. The next enzyme in the pathway is TruA,
which cleaves the precursor
peptide at RSII, releasing a free N-terminus that is the nucleophile
for macrocyclization. Relatively less is known about the substrate
selectivity of TruA (which is sequence identical to PatA), and our
study was not designed to detect possible products in the case of
TruA failure. Subsequently, TruG cleaves RSIII from the core peptide
in tandem with macrocyclization. TruG and its close
relative PatG have been extensively studied  and exhibit very relaxed substrate selectivity. For example,  substrates containing Arg or Lys are highly favorable, rather than being unfavorable as found in this
study . Rarely, PatG macrocyclization leads
to linear, rather than cyclic products .
Our study was designed to detect short linear peptides resulting from
core peptides, but these were not observed in any case. In our
study, when we observed products, they were universally
macrocyclic and heterocyclic at Cys, indicating that the three enzymes
TruD, TruA, and TruG were able to process all of the substrates and
intermediates. In the last enzymatic step, one, two, or three units
of isoprene are added by TruF. This enzyme was not always functional, and many products were observed
in which prenylation was lacking, as discussed above. This is of significance
because the cyanobactin prenyltransferases modify the cyclic peptide
itself. No RS is present when TruF acts, and the precursor peptide
has already been cleaved. Thus, this step would be expected to exhibit
the most stringent substrate requirements. Even so, TruF can recognize
a large number of different sequences and is quite substrate relaxed.
It remains a mystery how an enzyme can recognize such a large variety
of cyclic peptides, which to the best of our knowledge has not previously
been observed for any other enzyme family. Complicating the
above discussion, nothing is known about the relative
rates of the enzymes , or of the possible
degradation or stability of proteins or intermediates . This means that, for example, a mutant may actually be a reasonable
substrate for all of the enzymes, but the degradation rate of a short
peptide intermediate may be faster than the relatively slow cyclization
step. For reasons of  kinetics, therefore,
it is very difficult to firmly establish the reason for failure of
individual intermediates. Perhaps conditions could be found that might
affect these relative rates, broadening the potential substrates in . How many total compounds might be made using
the  pathway? Our study was not aimed to answer
this question, but an
approximate estimate might be made. The lower-end estimate for the
quadruple mutant library is that ∼20 000 compounds might
be accessible. Position 6, not sampled in the quadruple mutant library,
was very permissive in double mutant library, such that perhaps 100 000–200 000
compounds might be accessible in a pentuple mutant library based upon
a linear extrapolation. If these numbers scale at all with larger
libraries, and since multiple ring sizes are possible, a large number
of derivatives might be anticipated from the  pathway.
It should be kept in mind that with the appropriate techniques, unnatural
and nonproteinogenic motifs can also be incorporated by , increasing the biosynthetic potential of the pathway. While the estimates are merely suggestive, they receive some support
in the very elaborate derivatives that have been synthesized to date  and  by the  pathway, as well as by the fact that our hextuple mutant library
afforded a ∼1% success rate in preliminary studies. In
summary, we show here specifically with the  pathway
example that RiPP libraries are promising sources of chemical
diversity. These methods and libraries may find application in drug
discovery, as well as in other problems in synthetic biology and biotechnology. The plasmid pSD-2 was
synthesized containing the tru pathway genes: , , , , , , and . In place of native , a  variant was constructed in which patellin 3 was present in the first
core peptide cassette and a randomized NNK library was present in
the second cassette. In this study, 4 libraries were synthesized based
upon the heptameric trunkamide sequence: XXIAPFC, TSXXPFC, TSIXPXC,
and XSXXPXC. An oligonucleotide duplex was prepared for each library,
as follows. Each library template oligo was annealed separately with
the Library Primer oligo and the duplexes were filled in using Taq
DNA polymerase (NEB, Ipswich, MA) as per the manufacturer’s
instructions. Each duplex was digested with MluI (NEB, Ipswich, MA),
as per the manufacturer’s directions. The resulting MluI/BanII
terminated oligo duplexes were ligated into BanII/MluI digested plasmid
pSD-2. Each ligation mix was transformed by electroporation, using
a BTX ECM600, into NEB10-β. Multiple transformations were performed
to produce libraries of sufficient complexity. Plasmid purifications
were performed using Qiagen mini-prep spin columns. The following
oligonucleotides were used: library primer 5′-pCGCTCGGAGATTAGTCGTCATAGGA-3′
(p for 5′ phosphate); library template XXIAPFC 5′-CGTTGACGCGTCTNNKNNKATTGCGCCGTTCTGCTCCTATGACGACTAATCTCCGAGCGAGCC-3′;
library template TSXXPFC 5′-CGTTGACGCGTCTACCAGCNNKNNKCCGTTCTGCTCCTATGACGACTAATCTCCGAGCGAGCC-3;
library template TSIXPXC 5′-CGTTGACGCGTCTACCAGCATTNNKCCGNNKTGCTCCTATGACGACTAATCTCCGAGCGAGCC-3′;
library template XSXXPXC 5′-CGTTGACGCGTCTNNKAGCNNKNNKCCGNNKTGCTCCTATGACGACTAATCTCCGAGCGAGCC-3′. Library quality was verified by randomly picking and sequencing
the  mutants from individual  clones and Sanger sequencing the  gene. Titers
of mutant libraries were verified by dilution transformation into , showing that >10 individual sequences
were present in the 6-fold randomized library and that the other libraries
contained enough diversity to fully sample the sequence space. The
pathways containing mutant  sequences were expressed
in  using 6 mL culture volumes in 24-well
plates, using methods that were previously described. For each randomly picked expression clone, the  mutant gene was sequenced, and the resulting sequence
was used to predict potential molecular weights of the resulting cyanobactin
products, as described in . Supporting Information Table S4 After the growth period, cells were
harvested by centrifugation, the supernatant was removed, and the
pellet was extracted with acetone (3 × 1 mL, followed by centrifugation
to pellet cells). The acetone was removed under vacuum, the extracts
were passed through HP20 resin to eliminate salts and hydrophobic
components, and the resulting methanol eluent was concentrated under
vacuum. Samples were analyzed by HPLC-MS using a Thermo Finnigan TS
Quantum mass spectrometer coupled to a Waters 2694 HPLC separations
module, 2996 photodiode array detector, and 600 controller, using
a Phenomenex C column (10 cm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm).
Samples were analyzed for the presence or absence of the standard
patellin 3 as a control for expression quality in each construct.
This patellin 3 standard also verified that the total expression operon
present in pSD-2 was functional and full-length. Compounds representing
all masses calculated as described above were sought manually. Putative
product peaks were verified by comparing their weights to control
runs from other expression experiments in which that precise sequence
was not present. When compounds are isoprenylated, the fragment isoprene
loss can also be readily identified, further supporting the structure
assignment. Thus, for each compound found, a large number of negative
controls and significant MS data exist in support of the proposed
identified compound. This method has been described in greater detail
in previous publications in which cyanobactin derivatives were identified
or synthesized from complex extracts. Raw data for each experiment
is provided in . Determination of Selectivity Rules Supporting Information Tables S1–S3 TruE mutant sequences
that yielded products and those that failed to yield products were
tabulated (). Mutants containing stop codons, frameshifts, or other errors within
the cassette were not considered in this analysis, and only sequences
expressing full-length TruE analogs were used. First, we analyzed
which amino acids could possibly exist in each position. If a mutant
residue was found at least 5 times in a specific position, and yet,
the resulting predicted compound was never found, this amino acid
was considered to be “forbidden” by the rules. For example,
Arg/Lys was never found in positions 2, 6, or 7, despite occurring
a total of 35 times in available sequences. In addition, Pro, Asp,
and Glu were not allowed in position 2. Despite occurring 23 times
in the library, Cys was never found in any variable position. Supporting Information
Figure S3 If an amino acid never appeared in a given position X, despite being
present in the mutant library, it was given a score of −1.
Sequences containing those forbidden amino acids (88 total sequences)
were not considered in the remaining substrate selectivity analysis,
since it was presumed that the effect of the forbidden amino acid
dominated the nonproduction of compound from that sequence. The remaining
174 sequences were analyzed as follows. The percent of the time that
an amino acid in an individual position led to successful production
of compound was calculated (). This value was taken to provide a measure of the
relative favorability of that amino acid in a given position. Finally,
the values and sequence selectivity rules were reevaluated with the
complete set of data to ensure consistency. These analyses were
first performed using formulas that normalized
to the expectation value given the NNK codon bias. However, since
the observed sequences were truly random and representative, essentially
identical results were obtained whether or not this bias was considered..