Over the past century, the observation
that bacteria accumulate preferentially in tumors has prompted the
investigation of the use of a number of strains for cancer therapy,
including , , , , and . Attenuated strains of  have generated particular interest as they can innately home to
and colonize tumors of a variety of sizes and have exhibited safety
and tolerance in human clinical trials. were initially shown to mediate antitumor effects through recruitment
of the host immune system and by competition with cancer cells for
nutrients. Subsequently, engineered production of therapeutic cargo
was added through simple genetic modifications. While these studies
represent important advances in the use of bacteria for tumor therapies,
the majority of existing efforts have relied on constitutive, “always
on” cargo production that typically results in the
delivery of high dosages, off-target effects, and development of host
resistance. As a next step, synthetic biology seeks to add controlled
and dynamic
production of cargo by utilizing computationally designed “circuits”
that have sophisticated sensing and delivery capabilities. These
circuits can be designed to act as delivery systems that sense tumor-specific
stimuli and self-regulate cargo production as necessary. Since plasmids
are the common framework for synthetic circuits, we begin by characterizing
the dynamics of plasmid-based gene expression in an  mouse model by utilizing real-time luminescence imaging, quantitative
biodistribution measurement, and computational modeling. Together,
these approaches provide a framework for exploiting the inherent instability
of plasmid-based networks, which will facilitate the generation of
specific temporal release profiles directly within the tumor environment. We began by transforming two different attenuated strains of  with a constitutively expressed luciferase
plasmid (luxCDABE genes on a pBR322/colE1 high-copy without partitioning
machinery) to allow for real-time monitoring of luminescence with
an  imaging system (IVIS). Strain A (:SL1344 phoPQ-) is attenuated
for the PhoPQ regulon, which is known to activate a number of genes
related to virulence, while Strain B (:SL1344
phoPQ- aroA-) contains an additional aromatic amino acid synthesis
mutation that effectively allows it to grow only in nutrient-rich
environments. Importantly, while these strains are derived from the
same parent (SL1344), their growth rates and therefore plasmid-loss
dynamics differ significantly. To investigate the  gene expression dynamics of these strains, we generated model xenograft
tumors in mice by subcutaneous injection of a human ovarian cancer
cell line (OVCAR-8). After measurable tumors were established, bacterial
strains were injected intravenously via tail vein (Figure a) with dosages varying from 10 to 5
× 10 bacteria. Once injected, bacteria specifically
colonized tumors at a rate proportional to the dosage administered,
as measured by IVIS signal at 24 h post-injection (Figure b). We then monitored the tumor site for Strain A-derived
signal over
the course of 60 h using time-lapse IVIS imaging (Figure c,d). These trajectories followed the specific pattern of
an initial steep increase followed by a gradual decrease back to baseline
(Figure d). We hypothesized that the shape
of this waveform was the result of the initial exponential growth
of plasmid-containing bacteria followed by increasing rates of plasmid
loss in the absence of antibiotic selection. Eventually, the rate
of luciferase production by the remaining plasmid-containing bacteria
is overtaken by luciferase decay, and the total signal begins to decline. To test this hypothesis, we counted the number of plasmid-containing
and non-plasmid-containing bacteria in tumors over time by observing
bacterial growth on selective media (Strain A, 10 bacteria
injected). Each measurement was compared to counts taken in the spleen,
a control tissue where there a stable subpopulation is present, as
the bacteria initially accumulate but do not grow or die in this site.
At each time point, organs were excised from the mouse and then homogenized
and plated with or without antibiotic selection (Figure a,  = 3–5 tumors). Colony counting
on these plates yielded an accurate measure of the plasmid state of
the bacterial population over time (Figure b). After 2 h, roughly 3 × 10 plasmid-containing
bacteria reside in the tumor, or about 0.3% of the injected dose.
After 12 h, plasmid-containing bacteria grow to a level of 10, and the number of non-plasmid-containing bacteria reaches
a similar level. This accumulation corresponds to a doubling time
of approximately 75 min. Growth rate declined further over time, presumably
due to nutrient limitation, ultimately resulting in a 300 min doubling
time for non-plasmid-containing bacteria (Figure b). While the total population of bacteria grew throughout
the course
of the experiment (60 h), the number of plasmid-containing bacteria
reaches a maximum at 24 h (Figure b). By taking
the ratio of these populations, we can calculate the percentage of
plasmid-containing bacteria over time (Figure c). After 12 h, roughly 50% of the population retains the plasmid,
a fraction that drops to 10% after 24 h (Figure c). The slope of this line remains constant throughout the 60-h experiment
and represents the rate of plasmid loss in the tumor environment. The tumor-spleen ratio is commonly reported as a characteristic
measure of specificity and tumor-homing ability for a given strain.
Bacteria accumulate in the spleen from the initial dosing yet do not
subsequently grow and divide. Given that we observed essentially no
increase in the bacterial count in the spleen throughout the duration
of our experiments, the tumor-spleen ratio increased over time (Figure d). Since this ratio is typically reported as a
fixed number in the literature, its time-dependence may help to explain
the wide range of reported values. To explore
how bacterial growth rate affects the dynamics of plasmid
instability over time, we injected two groups of mice with Strain
A and B (at a dosage of 10) and monitored their signal
over the course of 60 h. The two strains displayed markedly different
profiles, with Strain A peaking and decaying sharply and the slower
growing Strain B peaking broadly over a longer period of time before
decaying (Figure a,b). We plot the average
trajectories for Strains A and B on an absolute luminescence scale
in Figure c for comparison. To quantify these
differences, we measured the width at half-maximum and total area
under each curve for the average trajectories (Figure d). These measurements illustrate that Strain A produces more
luminescence quickly while Strain B produces less luminescence over
a longer period of time (Figure d). Additionally,
to confirm that signal intensity is a representative measure of the
population of plasmid-containing bacteria, we compared counts of antibiotic
resistant bacteria with absolute IVIS values at the 72-h time point
and found them to be highly correlated ( = 0.832, ). Developing a fully tunable dynamic expression platform
will require
a more complete understanding of the underlying processes. Plasmid-loss
dynamics have been well described in a variety of  and  contexts; however, modeling of population or gene-expression
dynamics has not yet been studied for  tumor
environments. Specifically, we hope to learn how expression dynamics
are dictated by the rates of growth and plasmid-loss for a given strain.
To accomplish this, we developed an ordinary differential equation
(ODE) model describing internal plasmid and non-plasmid-containing
bacteria and their respective expression of luciferase signal (Figure a). Initially, N bacteria are injected.
These plasmid-containing bacteria replicate and lose their plasmids
at rate τ, resulting in populations of plasmid (N) and non-plasmid (N) containing bacteria that
continue to grow at rates μ+ and μ–, respectively
(Figure a). Both populations grow exponentially
for 24 h until available nutrients become limiting, a process modeled
by including a finite quantity of tumor substrate that is consumed
according to Michaelis–Menten kinetics (). The tumor environment is also spatially restrictive of
bacterial growth, with bacteria in the center consuming nutrients
more slowly than bacteria on the rapidly growing periphery. Thus,
despite a nearly constant population of plasmid-containing bacteria,
IVIS signal fails to increase after 24 h since most of these bacteria
reside in the non-growing center of the colony. We accounted for this
behavior by limiting the amount of bacteria that can consume the tumor
substrate, which effectively limits plasmid-containing bacterial growth
and allows luciferase decay to dominate. Our ODE model produced dynamics that were consistent
with our experimental
observations, where IVIS signal is taken to be proportional to the
plasmid-containing population (Figure b).
We define the full-width at half-maximum, ω, and area under
the curve as important parameters that characterize the duration and
magnitude of dosage, respectively (Figure c). To understand how to tune  expression
profiles according to these parameters, we varied growth rate and
dosage level and modeled the effects on IVIS signal in each case (Figure d,e). Lower growth rates yield IVIS curves that
are shifted toward later times with broader widths and lower areas
(Figure d). In contrast, larger initial dosages
result in a linear increase of IVIS signal that increases area but
does not alter the width (Figure e). The latter
linear increase in area as a function of dosage is reflective of doses
much lower than the carrying capacity of the system. Finally, decreasing
the plasmid-loss rate resulted in an increase in area under the curve
as well as a slight shift in the width and time to peak of the gene
expression profile (). These effects correlate with experimental observations that
can
be explained based on differences in strain growth rate. Since plasmids
are lost during cell division, the faster a cell replicates, the more
frequently it loses plasmid. Thus, the faster growing Strain A accumulates
luciferase quickly but loses a comparatively larger fraction of plasmids
per day, resulting in higher IVIS values that peak at earlier time
points than Strain B (Figure a,b). In contrast,
Strain B grows more slowly, producing less luciferase but maintaining
its plasmids much longer, yielding a broader expression profile compared
to Strain A (Figure a,b). In the context
of drug delivery, a critical parameter is the rate
at which a device releases drug into the surrounding environment.
For instance, materials have been investigated that generate “burst”,
“delayed”, or “sustained” release characteristics. The transient plasmid-based system we have developed
here can generate a similar variety of expression dynamics. For instance,
Strain A produces an expression profile analogous to burst release
due to its fast growth rate and high rate of plasmid loss. In contrast,
Strain B yields a sustained release profile owing to its slow growth
rate and moderate rate of plasmid loss. Bacteria are unique in the
context of drug-delivery vehicles in that they produce their own cargo,
in contrast to other devices that are preloaded and depleted. This
difference allows them to deliver a time-varying concentration of
cargo in a designed profile directly on site. In the future, this
work will enable a variety of drug-release profiles from engineered
bacteria for therapeutic applications. Developing both experimental
and computational techniques in concert
will be critical to engineering  genetic circuits. Computational modeling can rapidly probe system
parameters to explore potential outputs but must remain closely tied
to experimental results to remain relevant. On the other hand,  experiments present the most direct application
of engineered circuits, but involve long time scales and the results
are often difficult to interpret. Here, we have utilized plasmid instability
to generate transient expression profiles in tumor environments. In
our computational model, we can predict how dosage, strain growth
rate, and plasmid loss rate combine to yield differing expression
dynamics. Subsequently, these designs can be implemented experimentally
by varying plasmid type, copy number, and maintenance system or by modifying the strain growth rate. Building
on this platform, future applications will include engineered gene
circuits that further extend the range of expression dynamics, sensing
tumor-specific stimuli and self-regulating cargo production. Tumor homing bacteria and dosage variation. (a)  are injected via tail vein into nude mice
and localize to subcutaneous
tumors where they replicate. (b) Dosages between 10 and
5 × 10 bacteria (Strain A) were injected into mice,
and IVIS images were taken after 24 h. Higher initial dosages show
an increasing signal and a minimum value of 5 × 10 bacteria required to visualize tumor colonization at 24 h. (c) Sequence
of IVIS images for strain Strain A at 10 dosage over the
course of 60 h. (d) Total flux of left (light blue) and right (dark
blue) tumors as a function of time normalized to the maximum value
across the trajectory. The IVIS signal rises due to rapid bacterial
growth and then decays due to plasmid loss and luciferase instability. Population dynamics of bacteria inside tumor environments. (a)
Schematic showing tumor extraction, homogenization, and plating to
count internal populations of bacteria. Plating on antibiotics reveals
the number of plasmid-containing bacteria, while plating without antibiotics
gives the total number of bacteria. (b) Measured number of plasmid-containing
and non-plasmid-containing bacteria per organ calculated for plasmid-containing
bacteria (green) and non-plasmid-containing bacteria (blue). Bacteria
with the plasmid reach a steady state around 24 h, while the non-plasmid
bacteria continue to grow. (c) Percentage of cells containing the
plasmid as a function of time showing a constant loss rate over the
course of 72 h. (d) Ratio for total number of bacteria in the tumor
versus the spleen. This number is typically reported as a measure
of specificity of the tumor-targeting strain. Strain A at a dosage
of 10 cells was used for all panels. Lines indicate a
piecewise linear fit of the data. Characterization of Strain
A and Strain B IVIS profiles. (a, b)
Time-course trajectories for Strain A (a) and Strain B (b) over the
course of 60 h normalized to their maximum value across the trajectory.
Colored lines indicate individual trajectories, and the solid black
line indicates the average trajectories. (c) Time-course trajectories
for Strain A and Strain B on an absolute scale. Average trajectories
from (a) and (b) were scaled by the average absolute value of the
individual trajectories. (d) (left) Full-width at half-maximum and
the area (right) under the curve for the average trajectory of both
strains. These parameters characterize the dosage and duration of
transient gene-expression. Modeling bacterial dynamics
inside of tumor environments. (a) Schematic
of mathematical model. Bacteria containing plasmids are injected at
a dosage . Plasmids are lost from cells
at a rate τ, and growth of resulting plasmid-containing and
non-containing cells continues at μ+ and μ–, respectively.
(b) Modeling results (solid lines) for the number of plasmid-containing
(blue) and non-plasmid-containing (green) bacterial population data
from Figure b. Open circles indicate experimental
points. (c) Typical time course of an IVIS trajectory indicating parameters
ω and area for characterizing transient gene expression. The
relative IVIS trajectory is typically measured experimentally due
to mouse-to-mouse variability, while the absolute IVIS trajectories
are used to calculate ω and area. (d) The effect of growth rate
on transient gene expression. Decreasing growth rate shifts the absolute
IVIS signals to a lower value and longer peak times, therefore increasing ω
and decreasing the area under the curve. (e) The effect of initial
dosage on transient gene expression. Increasing the dosage shifts
the absolute IVIS signals to a higher level, increasing the area under
the curve, but does not change the relative IVIS trajectory shape
or ω value. strains Strain
A (SL1344 PhoPQ-)
and Strain B (SL1344 PhoPQ- aroA-) were provided by Elizabeth Hohmann
(MGH). The constitutive plasmid bearing
luxCDABE genes was received as a gift from the Weiss lab. On the day of injection, bacteria containing
plasmids were diluted 1/1000 into fresh LB media (Difco, 0.22 μm
filtered) with antibiotics (Ampicillin 100 μg/mL) and grown
up to OD = 0.4–0.6. Cells were then prepared
by washing 4 times with PBS (0.22 μm filtered) and measured
for OD. Colony counts were performed on the preparation
as a calibration and cells were prepared at various concentrations
for 100 μL injections. Subcutaneous human xenograft tumors
were generated by injecting
5 × 10 OVCAR-8 cells (NCI DCTD Tumor Repository,
Frederick, MD) bilaterally into the hind flanks of 4-week-old female
Ncr/Nu mice. Cells were grown to 80–100% confluency in RPMI
1640 media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and antibiotics
(100 μg/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin) before
injection. Cells were pelleted and resuspended in phenol red-free
DMEM with 15% reduced growth factor Matrigel (BD Biosciences). Tumors
were allowed to grow for 10–20 days until tumor masses of 200–500
mg were reached. Colony counts were measured by dissecting tumors
and organs from
mice, homogenizing using a Tissue-Tearor (BioSpec), and plating serial
dilutions on LB and LB Ampicillin plates. Prior to imaging, mice were
anesthetized with 2–3% isoflurane. IVIS signals were measured
using the IVIS Spectrum imaging system (Caliper Life Sciences) with
1–60 s exposure times, and Living Image software (Caliper Life
Sciences) was used for analysis. Data where the tumor had ulcerated
or had low signal (maximum of trajectory did not reach above 10 radiance, or approximately <5× initial background)
were not included. Error bars drawn are standard error..