sensing and quantification of cellular metabolites,
ions and other biological small molecules are important to understand
cellular signaling pathways and other physiological processes in cell
biology. The detection of metabolites
or small molecules in cells has also been employed within diverse
industries such as biomedicine, food processing, environmental pollutant
tracing, and forensics. Moreover, synthetic
biology applications such as metabolite engineering, disease diagnostics,
and theranostics, rely on tracking dynamic changes of target molecules
in living cells in order to evaluate the function of the engineered
biological system. Therefore, developing  biosensors that enable monitoring of cellular target
molecules in real time is highly beneficial to cell biology, biotechnology,
and synthetic biology research. Genetically encodable riboswitches
that undergo conformational
changes upon recognizing a target molecule have been considered as
attractive tools for analyte sensing. Riboswitch
reporters, where the riboswitch is inserted upstream of a reporter
gene, and aptazymes, where a riboswitch is fused to a ribozyme, have
been very useful for  validation of riboswitches
as well as development of small molecule-responsive gene circuits. These riboswitch-based tools mainly rely on expressions of various
reporter genes such as beta-galactosidase for colorimetric measurements, GFP for fluorescence, and luciferases for luminescence. A critical aspect of the  application
of
biosensing systems is their activation rate to monitor sensitive and
dynamic changes on a cellular time scale. For instance, if a biological
process takes place on the order of minutes, but a sensor fully activates
within several hours, it cannot accurately capture the dynamics of
that process. Considerable progress has been made in developing new
biosensors for interesting and relevant ligands, but their activation
rate is often not optimized. Reporter systems that rely on gene expression
often require a longer time to produce a detectable signal. For example,
riboswitch reporters have been observed to respond in the time range
of 3–24 h. A time-dependent study of a riboswitch-based dual-color sensor that
changes color upon ligand binding revealed that the minimum time required
for response is 4 h. Engineered aptazymes
show fast cleavage kinetics  in the presence
of the target ligands, but similarly long incubation
times (20–72 h) have been reported to see changes in aptazyme-controlled
GFP and luciferase reporters in bacterial or mammalian cells. Recently, genetically encodable
RNA-based fluorescent (RBF) biosensors
composed of a ligand-binding riboswitch aptamer fused to an  selected fluorogenic aptamer have emerged as a
promising alternative tool. Ligand binding induces aptamer folding, which further facilitates
a specific dye to bind the fluorogenic aptamer and exhibit fluorescence
turn-on. For example, fluorogenic aptamers such as Spinach or Spinach2,
which fluoresce after binding to profluorescent dyes such as 3,5-difluoro-4-hydroxybenzylidene
imidazolinone (DFHBI) or its derivatives have been fused to ligand-recognizing
aptamers in detecting various target ligands including metabolites, signaling molecules, and neurotransmitter precursors. As
the signal turn-on of RBF biosensors does not depend on reporter gene
expression, they are expected to respond faster than riboswitch or
aptazyme reporters. In prior studies of RBF biosensors, it was
not possible to accurately
assess  turn-on kinetics because enzyme activity
was required to produce the specific target molecule in the cell,
yielding an additional step to biosensor activation. For example,
the -adenosylmethionine (SAM) biosensor was observed
to respond in  with a detectable signal in
15 min and maximal signal in 3 h upon the addition of methionine,
the SAM precursor. In another study,
the thiamine pyrophosphate biosensor showed a detectable fluorescence
microscopy signal after 1 h and a maximal signal after 3 h of thiamine
addition. In an earlier report from our
group, the cyclic di-GMP biosensor detected dynamic changes of cyclic
di-GMP levels in cells within 15–30 min of zinc depletion,
which activates a diguanylate cyclase to produce cyclic di-GMP. In contrast, when the target molecule
can be introduced into cells
directly, the signal turn-on time is observed to be shorter. A 5-hydroxytryptophan
(5HTP) biosensor composed of a modified guanine riboswitch and Broccoli
fluorogenic RNA aptamer provided a distinguishable signal in  within 15 min of 5HTP addition. More recently, an RNA integrator constructed by fusing
a target binding aptamer, hammerhead ribozyme, and Broccoli provided
an observable signal change in  after 10 min
of target molecule addition. These
studies show that RBF biosensors generally work within minutes
to hours in cells, while riboswitch and aptazyme reporters generally
require several hours to a day. However, to our knowledge there has
been no systematic study that has compared cellular turn-on kinetics
for a riboswitch-based biosensor against a reporter for the same ligand.
This comparison would ameliorate differences between cell permeability,
transport, and enzymatic processing of different compounds used as
ligands in these studies. To investigate the real-time kinetics
of RNA-based biosensor activation , we developed
a new biosensor for the compound guanidine,
which has been shown to be cell permeable. The  type riboswitch is observed to bind guanidine and regulates the
gene expression of proteins involved in detoxification of this compound. The prior study also showed for the first time
that guanidine can be produced in bacteria under normal growth conditions.
However, the pathways toward guanidine accumulation and utilization
in bacteria are still largely unknown. Beyond its biological importance,
guanidine and its close derivatives are found as environmental pollutants
or evidence of explosives. As a contaminant, guanidine
has been detected through spectroscopic methods such as UV and HPLC
but these only work for  samples. Therefore, the development of a guanidine biosensor that can work
both in the cell-free and cellular context will be significant for
both environmental and biological applications. Here we describe
the development of guanidine-responsive RBF biosensors
by screening and optimizing two different topological designs connecting
the guanidine-I riboswitch with the fluorogenic Spinach2 aptamer.
The resulting biosensors selectively turn on fluorescence in the presence
of guanidine both  and in live cells. These
biosensors enabled  kinetic studies to compare
the response times of riboswitch-based biosensors and reporters to
the same small molecule ligand. RBF biosensors exhibited a fast response,
with a detectable signal within 4 min of analyte addition and a maximal
signal within 15–35 min depending on the biosensor variant.
The reporter, on the other hand, required nearly an hour before response
was detectable. To our knowledge, this is the first report of functional
biosensors for guanidine and the first systematic study directly comparing  activation of a riboswitch-based biosensor against
a corresponding reporter. Together, these results show that riboswitches
can be adapted to provide faster warning via fluorescent biosensors,
then trigger gene expression to provide an ameliorating response. Design of Guanidine Biosensors with Two New
Topologies Four different riboswitch classes with unique
folds so far have been
discovered to bind the ligand guanidine. Of these riboswitches, the guanidine-I class appeared to have structural
advantages for biosensor development, as it uses only one out of three
helical stem loops to form a ligand binding pocket. In comparison,
the guanidine-II riboswitch utilizes both pairing stems loops to bind
guanidine, and the guanidine-III riboswitch
possesses a complex pseudoknot involving its terminal ends and stem
loop that is involved in RNA triplex formation to bind the ligand. The guanidine-IV riboswitch was reported very
recently. In-line probing assays revealed that the
guanidine-I class has higher selectivity and more sequence representatives
with stronger affinity toward guanidine than the other three classes. Thus, we selected the guanidine-I class riboswitch as the best candidate
for biosensor development. Analysis of the  guanidine-I riboswitch X-ray crystal structure (PDB 5T83) revealed two key
challenges for biosensor design. First,
the 5′ and 3′ ends of this riboswitch are quite distant,
spanning almost 26 Å from one another and not engaged in a terminal
pairing stem (a). This presents an issue because RBF biosensors typically are constructed
by fusing the riboswitch aptamer through the terminal pairing stem
to the fluorogenic aptamer. Second, key tertiary interactions need
to be maintained between the P1 and P3 helices as they were shown
to be crucial for riboswitch folding and guanidine recognition. However,
we noticed that the P1 stem-loop is not directly involved in this
interaction and devised an approach based on this finding. One strategy that our group developed to overcome a terminal pseudoknot
riboswitch topology was to create a circular permutation of the fluorogenic
aptamer (cpSpinach2) and insert it within a nonterminal riboswitch
stem. However, applying this strategy
to the guanidine-I riboswitch would leave the terminal ends loose
and susceptible to both unfolding and cleavage. Instead, two new biosensor
topologies termed “Junction (J)” and “Linker
(L)” were designed that enable fusion to the Spinach2 aptamer
for  testing and cloning into a tRNA scaffold for  testing (b). The linker
design utilizes an approach we previously reported that connects the 5′ and 3′ termini
to generate a circularly permuted riboswitch that can be fused to
Spinach2. We hypothesized that this approach would maintain the tertiary
interactions between P1 and P3 helices necessary for guanidine binding
and would result in fluorescence activation of this biosensor topology.
While prior cpRiboswitch designs involved closing a terminal pairing
stem with a stem loop, in this case a flexible linker was employed
as the terminal ends of guanidine-I are much farther apart. A variable
poly-Adenosine (poly-A) linker was used (a), which was inspired by an approach used
to span a 30–40 Å gap and tether functional ribosomal
subunits together. Alternatively, the junction design involves adding
an artificial
transducer stem to create an architecture reminiscent of a three-
or four-way junction. Three-way junctions are commonly observed in
natural riboswitches such as the cyclic-di-GMP or guanine classes. We hypothesized that transducer stems from other RBF biosensors
our lab has developed would retain their native switching properties
and form the basis of an artificial P0 stem that communicates with
the fluorogenic aptamer Spinach2. Variable adenosine spacers were
added before the P0 stem to span the gap. Design of guanidine
biosensors with two different topologies. (a)
X-ray crystal structure of the guanidine-bound  guanidine-I riboswitch aptamer (PDB 5T83) showing the distance between the 5′
and 3′ ends. (b) Design of two different biosensor topologies
utilizing a circularly permuted riboswitch with a linker (L) or an
artificial 4-way junction (J). Secondary structure model
and initial screen of linker and junction
biosensors. (a) Design of initial junction and linker biosensor library.
(b) The representative secondary structure of a junction biosensor
Kpn J 2,2-A. The name denotes the length of the adenosine spacers
and the identity of the P0 stem. Residues in red circles undergo direct
contact with the ligand, guanidine. M4 mutant with the single nucleotide
mutation shown is denoted as Kpn J 2,2-M. (c)  fluorescence response of 18 junction and 4 linker biosensors to
the ligand, guanidine. Biosensors with greater than 1.2x fluorescence
enhancement at 1 mM guanidine are indicated in red. Data shown are
average with standard error of the mean for two replicates. Screening of Functional
Elements in Junction and Linker Designs The first biosensor
designs were developed using an experimentally
validated guanidine-I riboswitch sequence from  (Kpn). A total of
18 junction biosensors were designed that incorporate nine different
adenosine spacers and two P0 stems taken from previously designed
cyclic di-GMP biosensors. In addition,
four linker biosensors were designed with four different poly-A tethers.
For the linker designs, the circularly permuted (cp) P1 stem was truncated
by nine base pairs and nine single bases to fuse with Spinach2. These
biosensors were synthesized from assembled DNA templates by  transcription and then screened for fluorescence
activation in response to guanidine (). The initial screen was performed
at 28 °C with 10 mM Mg, which matches in-line probing
conditions used to analyze riboswitch aptamers and, in our experience, tends to be more permissive for
biosensor constructs to fold and bind a target ligand with higher
affinities than physiological conditions. We chose a high, saturating
concentration (1 mM) and a low concentration (10 μM) to attempt
to distinguish biosensor candidates with tighter ligand affinity.
Although no response was observed at lower guanidine concentration
(10 μM), five junction biosensors did exhibit >1.2-fold fluorescence
activation at 1 mM guanidine. The linker biosensors notably displayed
constitutively higher fluorescence signal than parent aptamer Spinach2
and did not respond to guanidine. This result suggested that the P1(cp)
stem for the linker design was stably forming even in the absence
of guanidine. On the basis of these results, a second round
of biosensor design
was carried out. For junction biosensors, three more P0 stems were tested in combination with four spacer lengths that showed
function in the previous screen (a). Three out of the 12 junction biosensors
exhibited greater than 1.4-fold fluorescence activation (b). For linker biosensors,
seven truncated P1(cp) stems were designed and tested with A and A linkers (L-4 and L-5). The truncations involved
deleting nucleotides and base-pairs in the Spinach2 aptamer rather
than P1(cp), which makes tertiary interactions necessary for guanidine
binding (c).
Five out of 14 truncated linker biosensors exhibited >1.2-fold
activation
and stems Tr-2, -4, and -5 gave ligand responses (d). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf The functionality of the two biosensor topologies was compared
by measuring the binding affinities of two representative constructs,
Kpn J 2,2-A and L-5 Tr-4, to guanidine. A much lower dissociation
constant () was measured for J 2,2-A
(∼60 μM) compared to L-5 Tr-4 (∼7 mM), indicating
that biosensor topology has a considerable effect on binding affinity
to guanidine (). The  value determined for guanidine binding to
Kpn J 2,2-A is close to the  value of
the natural riboswitch aptamer (∼20 μM) determined by
in-line probing experiments, which are performed at high magnesium
concentrations. These results point
out that the linker design, in contrast to
the junction design, either failed to allosterically regulate dye
binding to the Spinach2 domain, hampered guanidine binding to the
riboswitch domain, or both. The transducer stem truncation was designed
to destabilize the stem but may have compromised ligand affinity.
Other aspects of the linker design that could contribute to affinity
loss include use of the unstructured poly-A tether or the circular
permutation of the riboswitch aptamer. However, we previously showed
for another four-way junction riboswitch that circular permutations
and connections of terminal ends with a stem loop improved ligand
affinity, so the circular permutation
strategy is not always detrimental to biosensor function. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf A
point mutation in the riboswitch aptamer called M4 was previously
shown to disrupt function of the guanidine-I riboswitch. To show that fluorescence activation required
the functional riboswitch, we generated the same G-to-C mutation in
the junction biosensor Kpn J 2,2-M (b). The mutant biosensor displayed no fluorescence
activation in the presence of 10 mM guanidine (). Second round designs
of junction and truncated linker guanidine
biosensors. (a) Screening of 12 junction biosensors with three additional
artificial stem sequences and four variable adenosine spacer lengths.
(b)  fluorescence response of biosensors
to guanidine. Biosensors with a greater than 1.4× fluorescence
increase at 1 mM guanidine are indicated in red. Nomenclature of the
biosensors denotes the number of adenosines in the sequence and the
identity of the P0 stem. (c) Screening of linker biosensors with seven
transducer stem truncations and two variable linker lengths. (d)  fluorescence response of optimized linker biosensors
to guanidine. The nomenclature for linker (L) biosensors denotes the
number of adenosines in the linker region and the identity of the
stem truncation. Biosensors with greater than 1.2× fluorescence
increase at 1 mM guanidine are indicated in red. Data shown are average
with standard error of the mean for two replicates. Phylogenetic Screen and Characterization
of Guanidine Biosensors We previously showed that representative
riboswitches from diverse
phylogeny are useful to generate efficient, highly fluorescent, and
well-folded RNA biosensors. A phylogenetic
library was developed based on functional elements from the two design
rounds combined with five guanidine-I riboswitches from  (Bcl),  (Dru),  (Bsu),  (Pae), and  (Pfl). The phylogenetic
junction library consists of the combination of five riboswitch sequences,
three functional transducer stems (A, C, D), and four spacer lengths,
which generate a total of 60 constructs. The phylogenetic linker library
consists of the combination of five riboswitch sequences, two stem
truncations (Tr-4 and Tr-5), and two poly-A linker lengths (L-4 and
L-5), which provide 20 additional constructs. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf All 80 phylogenetic
biosensor candidates were synthesized and screened  for response to guanidine at 37 °C with 3 mM Mg to model physiological conditions (). The majority of junction biosensor constructs showed some fluorescence
activation in response to 1 mM guanidine () and 13 met our criteria of fold-activation greater than
1.4 (a), which
corresponds to a 21.6% hit rate. Interestingly, the most active constructs
were generated from just two of the five phylogenetic sequences. Transducer
stems A or D and spacer length 2, 3 were commonly found in these functional
designs. In contrast, the majority of truncated linker biosensor constructs
showed no fluorescence activation and only one linker biosensor construct
met the fold-activation criteria in response to 25 mM guanidine (). The poor response of the linker designs
again could be due to stem truncation or lack of structural changes
in P1 upon guanidine binding, which highlights the utility of exploring
different sensor topologies. Previous in-line probing and structural analysis of the guanidine-I
riboswitch indicates that ligand binding stabilizes the P3 stem, whereas
P1 and P2 stems are mostly preformed. However, the P3 stem and loop regions are involved in tertiary contacts
that preclude their use as the transducer stem. Instead, we introduced
a P0 stem to form an artificial 4-way junction, which acts as a biosensor
as P3 helix formation upon guanidine binding apparently stabilizes
P0 and the DFHBI binding pocket in Spinach2 (b). Interestingly, P0 stems
A through D, which are derived from c-di-GMP riboswitches that form
3-way junctions, worked robustly in biosensor constructs, but not
P0 stem E, which is derived from a SAM-I riboswitch that forms a 4-way
junction. These results together demonstrate that the artificial junction
design strategy developed based on the  riboswitch structure is transferrable to riboswitches from other
bacteria and can generate additional functional biosensors. The ligand affinity and selectivity of three junction biosensors,
Kpn J 2,2-A, Dru J 2,2-A, and Dru J 2,2-D, were compared at near physiological
conditions (37 °C and 3 mM MgCl) in preparation for  studies. Under these more stringent conditions,
the Kpn biosensor exhibited a 2.3-fold reduction in binding affinity
( ∼ 139 μM). The two Dru
biosensors had similar binding affinities toward guanidine (a) and both showed
higher fold-activation (5- and 4-fold for A and D, respectively) than
the Kpn biosensor (2-fold). In addition, all three biosensors showed
good selectivity for guanidine over related analogues (b). These results indicate
that the three junction biosensors should selectively respond to guanidine . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf Given their similar binding affinities, use of the same dye-binding
aptamer, Spinach2, and use of the same P0 stem, the observed difference
in fold-activation and maximal fluorescence for Kpn and Dru biosensors
is not due to changes in binding equilibria (). Rather, we expect that the riboswitch aptamer sequence
is affecting overall folding efficiency of biosensor constructs. Thus,
the maximal fluorescence for a given biosensor will be proportional
to the percent that folds into a binding-competent state (). We have found for both RNA-based
and protein-based biosensors that “bioprospecting” through
phylogenetic libraries is an efficient way to identify well-folding
variants. In some cases, the riboswitch sequence even
improved folding efficiency such that our biosensors had higher maximal
fluorescence than Spinach2 itself. Phylogenetic junction biosensor hits and their
proposed activation
mechanism. (a) Phylogenetic junction biosensor hits with over 1.4×
fold activation at concentrations of 1 mM guanidine. Data shown are
the average with standard error of the mean for three replicates.
(b) Proposed mechanism of junction biosensors which utilizes an artificial
transducer stem (orange) which can assemble in the presence of ligand
and induce DFHBI (yellow) fluorescence turn-on. Sensitivity and selectivity of select guanidine biosensors.
(a)
Apparent dissociation constant () of
guanidine for biosensors Kpn J 2,2-A, Dru J 2,2-A and Dru J 2,2-D.
(b)  fluorescence of Dru J 2,2-A, Dru J 2,2-D
and Kpn J 2,2-A with no ligand (NL), guanidine (G), and other structural
analogues at 1 mM concentrations. Data shown are the average with
standard deviation of two replicates. Turn-on Kinetics of Guanidine Biosensors in Live Cells http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf Riboswitch
reporters for guanidine were reported to show a distinguishable
change in reporter gene expression after overnight treatment with
1–3 mM of guanidine. In contrast,
our biosensors display significant turn-on with 500 μM of guanidine
within a much shorter time. For  testing,
the three biosensors and related controls were cloned into a tRNA
scaffold, which previously has been shown to favor homogeneous expression
of the biosensor and improve stability of RNA constructs against RNases
in the cells (). After biosensor overexpression in BL21(DE3)
Star  cells grown in autoinduction media,
the cells were diluted and incubated with 50 μM of DFHBI-1T
in PBS buffer for 10 min to enable the fluorescent dye to passively
enter the cells. Guanidine (500 μM) or water (no ligand control)
then was added and mean cellular fluorescence was measured after 15
min at room temperature using flow cytometry (a). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf Even with this short exposure to guanidine, cells expressing the
biosensors exhibited robust fluorescence activation responses (1.7
to 2.2-fold) (b,c). In contrast, cells expressing Spinach2 and mutant Kpn J 2,2-M
displayed no significant change in fluorescence in response to 500
μM of guanidine, although a nonspecific response was observed
when 10 mM guanidine was used (). The cells expressing the biosensors also exhibited minimal change
in response to guanidine analogues at 500 μM concentration (). Furthermore, we analyzed the stability
of the biosensor activity by storing cells expressing the biosensor
in noninducing (NI) media at 4 °C and repeating the fluorescence
measurements over the course of multiple days. Excitingly, after its
expression in , the guanidine biosensor maintains
robust sensing activity for up to 11 days or 1.6 weeks (). The  turn-on kinetics of the biosensors
were determined using flow cytometry by analyzing time points before
and after guanidine addition. Interestingly, without guanidine being
added, we can observe the uptake, export, and subsequent equilibration
of the fluorescent dye DFHBI-1T in these experiments for both the
biosensor and Spinach2 control (a,b). Equilibration occurs within 25 min of dye addition
for the biosensor. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf The representative graphs show that guanidine addition leads to
clear fluorescence turn-on for Dru J 2,2-D, whereas no change is observed
for the control Spinach2 (a,b, and  for other
biosensors). To account for the difference in background fluorescence
over time, we determined and plotted the ΔMFI/MFI values for
all three biosensors and control Spinach2 (c). This analysis revealed that the Kpn biosensor
displays a much more modest fold-activation in fluorescence than the
two Dru biosensors but is faster to reach a maximal fluorescence response  (∼15 min versus ∼30 min). Since the
timing of the experiment shown in  is 15 min after guanidine addition, this
result explains why the Dru biosensors did not exhibit as high a fold
turn-on in that experiment as seen  (b) and now seen at
30 min after guanidine addition  (3-fold,
see  and ). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf The difference in biosensor
kinetics  does
not appear to be due to different expression levels, as all three
biosensors were at similar levels as analyzed by RT-qPCR (). This result also prompted us to examine
the  kinetics of the tRNA-scaffolded biosensors
(). Maximal fluorescence response  was observed in 12 and 18 min after guanidine addition,
respectively, for Kpn and Dru biosensors (). This means that all three biosensors are slower  than . Common differences
between the cellular and  experiments include
the cell membrane and molecular crowding slowing diffusion of guanidine
and dye, as well as the biosensor concentrations being different when
expressed in the cell compared to . Although the maximal fluorescence response ranged from 15 to 30
min, significant signal over background can be observed within 4–5
min of guanidine addition for all three biosensors (c). This is due to compensating
effects, as the Dru biosensors have slower activation kinetics that
are balanced by their higher fold turn-on relative to Kpn. Taken together,
these results reveal that riboswitch-based fluorescent biosensors
are capable of responding quickly  and , with significant fluorescent signal over background
within as little as 4 min of ligand addition. analysis of guanidine
biosensors. (a)
Schematic representation of the  assay for
RBF biosensors using flow cytometry. Cells transformed with plasmids
encoding biosensors were inoculated 24 h in NI (noninducing) media
followed by 18 h in AI media at 37 °C to express the RNA biosensors.
Cells were diluted in 1X PBS containing DFHBI-1T and incubated for
10 min to allow the dye to diffuse into cells. Mean fluorescence intensity
(MFI) values were determined by analyzing 30 000 cells per
sample after 15 min incubation with guanidine (500 μM). (b)
Representative flow cytometry histograms of biosensor Dru J 2,2-D
and Spinach2 in the presence or absence of guanidine. (c) MFI values
of the RBF biosensors and Spinach2 in the presence and absence of
guanidine. Data shown are the average with standard deviation of four
biological replicates. -Values from Student’s  test for biosensors, Kpn J 2,2-A, Dru J 2,2-A and Dru
J 2,2-D are <0.004 and the -values for Spinach2
and Kpn J 2,2-M are >0.05. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf response kinetics of guanidine
biosensors.
Plot of average MFI values over time for cells expressing (a) Dru
J 2, 2-D biosensor or (b) Spinach2. Other biosensor plots are shown
in . Water or guanidine was added
at time 0 (indicated by red arrow). (c) Plot of ΔMFI/MFI values
over time for cells expressing guanidine biosensors or Spinach2. The
enlarged portion of the plot displays the turn-on response at earlier
time points. Data shown are the average with a standard deviation
of 2–3 biological replicates. Turn-on Kinetics of Guanidine
Reporter A major motivation
of our study was to compare cellular turn-on kinetics for a riboswitch-based
biosensor versus reporter for the same ligand, which to our knowledge
has not been done. To construct the Kpn guanidine reporters, the synthetic
promoter BBa_J23100 and the 5′ untranslated region of the  tauA gene containing the guanidine riboswitch (with or without M4 mutation) (b) were fused upstream of the
lacZ reporter gene (a). Notably, the reporter uses the same riboswitch aptamer
sequence as the Kpn biosensor. The reporter gene chosen, lacZ, is
most commonly used in riboswitch assays and encodes the highly active
β-galactosidase enzyme that increases sensitivity of the assay
due to lower background than fluorescent protein reporters. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf The Kpn-WT and Kpn-M4 mutant reporter
plasmids were transformed
into BW25113  cells and riboswitch-regulated
gene expression with different guanidine concentrations was quantified
using a standard Miller assay. Increasing
activation of the Kpn-WT reporter expression was observed after 5
h of incubation with 25 mM and higher concentrations of guanidine,
whereas the Kpn-M4 reporter was insensitive to guanidine, as expected
(b). At this
time point, no detectable change in reporter expression was observed
with 10 mM or lower concentrations of guanidine (data not shown).
In fact, the  of the Kpn-WT reporter
was found to be between 50 and 70 mM (), whereas 100 mM of guanidine inhibited cell growth. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf To analyze
the  turn-on kinetics of the
reporter in a similar way as the biosensors, the ΔMU/MU values
were measured and plotted for time points after the addition of 50
mM guanidine. With this reporter, a maximal signal was observed in
2.5 h, and a significant signal over background can be observed within
1 h of guanidine addition (c, ). Thus, this
direct comparison between a biosensor and reporter based on the same
riboswitch reveals that the biosensor provides 15 times faster response
(4 versus 60 min) even when exposed to 1/100 the concentration of
the target analyte (0.5 versus 50 mM). Analysis of
guanidine sensing by a riboswitch lacZ reporter. (a)
Schematic representation of the assay for the riboswitch lacZ reporter
using the standard Miller assay, which detects expression of β-galactosidase
using the colorimetric substrate ortho-nitrophenyl-β-galactoside
(ONPG). (b) β-Galactosidase reporter gene expression in Miller
Units (MU) as controlled by Kpn-WT and Kpn-M4 riboswitches with different
concentrations of guanidine. (c) Plot of guanidine reporter response
(ΔMU/MU) over time after addition of 50 mM guanidine at time
0. Data shown are the average with a standard deviation of three biological
replicates. This
study demonstrates the first biosensor developed for guanidine,
a commonly used chaotropic agent that is also an explosives precursor,
fertilizer component, and recently identified metabolite in bacteria.
Unlike most riboswitch ligands that have been targeted for biosensing,
guanidine is freely diffusible into cells and does not require further
enzymatic processing to yield the target ligand. These properties
enabled us to directly compare the  turn-on
kinetics of a biosensor and reporter derived from the same riboswitch
aptamer sequence in response to the same ligand. These head-to-head
clocking experiments demonstrate that the Kpn biosensor is at least
15 times faster than the Kpn reporter and obtains a maximal signal
in 15 min, which is considerably before the reporter gives any significant
signal over the background. The slower but higher turn-on Dru biosensors
are at least 12 times faster and obtain maximal signal in 30 min,
which is still before the reporter gives a reliable signal. We state
“at least”, because the reporter showed no change in
signal after 5 h incubation with 500 μM guanidine, which is
the concentration detected by the biosensors. Changes in reporter
expression were observed previously upon overnight treatment with
1–3 mM guanidine. This reporter
used the  promoter, but otherwise was the same
as the one used in our study. Assuming that overnight treatment is
12–16 h and gives maximal reporter signal, the biosensor maximal
response may be actually 48–64 times faster than the reporter. The observed difference in response times is expected because the
reporter must go through additional steps after guanidine binding
induces structural changes to the riboswitch, namely transcription
and translation of the  gene, which is 3057 base
pairs long. These processes are both time-consuming and resource-intensive
for the cell. In contrast, the biosensor is approximately the size
of the riboswitch and directly binds fluorogenic dye after guanidine-induced
structural changes. A recently published study with the fluoride ion-sensing
riboswitch analyzed the turn-on of two types of fluorescent reporters
in cell-free reactions. A GFP reporter detected 3.5 mM sodium fluoride
in 30 min with maximal signal in 8 h, whereas a fluorogenic aptamer
reporter (the riboswitch controls expression of the RNA aptamer) provided
a detectable signal in 12 min with maximal signal in 35 min. This study further enforces that translation
may be rate-limiting, although it should be noted that the reporter
genes are different lengths, and GFP requires an extra chromophore
maturation step. One benefit of cell-free reactions is that conditions
such as magnesium concentrations can be optimized to improve performance;
the cell-free reporter kinetics were obtained with 12 mM Mg, which is above normal physiological concentrations. Since our results
show that the fluorescent biosensors exhibit similar binding kinetics  (at 3 mM Mg) and , we expect that they also would function well in cell-free reactions. One notable aspect of the biosensor kinetics is that these results
were achieved with an artificial junction. The guanidine-I riboswitch
topology and the large distance between terminal ends posed special
challenges to biosensor design that were met by rigorous testing of
two distinct topological designs and optimization of several parameters,
including transducer stem sequence, adenosine spacer length, and riboswitch
aptamer sequence. We found that the first two parameters introduced
additional variables that increased library size and limited the number
of phylogenetic variants that were assessed. For c-di-GMP biosensors,
which only required optimization of the riboswitch aptamer sequence,
a larger sampling of phylogenetic diversity identified several biosensor
sequences with half-maximal activation () in 1–1.5 min. On the basis
of our current study, we expect that these biosensors would exhibit
similar binding kinetics , and so likely are
limited only by the activation kinetics of signaling enzymes that
produce or degrade c-di-GMP. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf Finally, one underappreciated advantage
of RBF biosensors is that
their activation mechanism is the same  and . Thus, after expression in cells, these biosensors
possess both reasonably fast response kinetics (minutes, ) and functional
longevity (weeks, ). In addition,
we show that construct improvements obtained from  screening efforts can be directly translated . For example, higher signal and fold-activation for Dru biosensors
were recapitulated . Ongoing work focuses
on establishing  screening methods to make
faster RBF biosensors that break the speed limits set by natural riboswitch
sequences and further enable real-time sensing for cell biology, biotechnology,
and synthetic biology applications. DNA oligonucleotides
used for biosensor constructs and cloning were purchased either from
Integrated DNA Technologies (Chicago, IL) or from the University of
Utah HSC Core facility. Guanidine hydrochloride and all guanidine
analogues were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO). DFHBI
and DFHBI-1T was synthesized following previously described protocols and was stored as a 10 mM stock in DMSO at −20 °C. Chemically
competent BL21 (DE3) Star cells were purchased from Life Technologies
(Carlsbad, CA). BW25113 competent cells were prepared using standard
protocols. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf Junction biosensors
() were constructed by obtaining
each phylogenetic riboswitch sequence as an ultramer (IDT) and then
performing two sequential PCRs to produce the full-length biosensor
sequence. The first PCR utilizes a primer pair that anneals to the
5′ and 3′ ends of the riboswitch sequence with overhangs
containing the desired P0 stem, adenosine spacer length, and part
of the Spinach2 aptamer. The second PCR utilizes a primer pair that
recognizes the partial Spinach2 sequence and possesses overhangs for
the remainder of the Spinach2 aptamer. The PCR products after each
step were purified either by a 96-well format ZR-96 DNA clean-up kit
(Zymo Research) for screening or by QIAquick PCR purification kit
(Qiagen) for characterization. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf Linker biosensors () were constructed
by ordering a truncated riboswitch biosensor sequence with the desired
poly-A linker length and part of the Spinach2 aptamer as an ultramer
(IDT). PCR was performed with primers that recognize the partial Spinach2
sequence on the 5′ and 3′ ends and possess overhang
remainders of the Spinach2 aptamer. PCR products were purified either
by a 96-well format ZR-96 DNA clean-up kit (Zymo Research) for screening
or by QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen) for characterization. DNA templates
for  transcription were prepared by PCR amplification
using Phusion DNA polymerase (NEB) from ultramer oligonucleotides
for screening or sequence-confirmed plasmids for analytical experiments.
The forward primer introduced an extended T7 promoter sequence at
the 5′ end. PCR products were purified either by a 96-well
format ZR-96 DNA clean-up kit (Zymo Research) for screening or by
QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen) for analytical experiments.
RNA was transcribed from DNA templates using T7 RNA polymerase in
40 mM Tris- HCl, pH 8.0, 6 mM MgCl, 2 mM spermidine, and
10 mM DTT. RNAs were either purified by a 96-well format ZR-96 Clean
& Concentrator (Zymo Research) for screening or by denaturing
(7.5 M urea) 6% PAGE for analytical experiments. RNAs purified by
PAGE were visualized by UV shadowing and extracted from gel pieces
using Crush Soak buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl and 1
mM EDTA, pH 8.0). Purified RNAs were precipitated with ethanol, dried,
and then resuspended in water. Accurate RNA concentrations were determined
by measuring the absorbance at 260 nm after performing a hydrolysis
assay to eliminate the hypochromic effect due to an RNA secondary
structure. General Procedure for  Fluorescence
Assays fluorescence assays were
carried out with 100 nM RNA in binding buffer containing 10 μM
DFHBI, 40 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 125 mM KCl, 0 or 200 mM NaCl, and 3 or
10 mM MgCl as indicated in the figures. Other conditions,
including temperature (28 or 37 °C) and concentration of ligands,
were varied as indicated in the figures. The biosensor RNA (1 μM)
was renatured by heating at 72 °C for 3 min in binding buffer
then cooling to an ambient temperature for 10 min prior to addition
into the reaction solution. DFHBI was added to the solution containing
buffer and RNA, and then the ligand (or water for no ligand control)
was added before fluorescence measurement. Binding reactions were
performed in 50 μL volumes and fluorescence emission was recorded
at the indicated temperature in a Greiner Bio-One 384-well black plate
using a SpectraMax i3x plate reader (Molecular Devices) for 60 min.
The fluorescence emission was calculated as an average of the values
measured between 30 to 60 min with the following instrument parameters:
448 nm excitation, 506 nm emission. Fluorescence turn-on was calculated
by dividing the fluorescence in the presence of guanidine by fluorescence
in the absence of the guanidine. Binding Affinity Analysis
of Guanidine Biosensors The
binding affinities of guanidine biosensors were measured with 100
nM RNA in binding buffer containing 10 μM DFHBI, 40 mM HEPES
(pH 7.5), 125 mM KCl, 0 or 200 mM NaCl, and 3 or 10 mM MgCl. The guanidine concentration was varied from 10 nM to 10 mM. The
fluorescence of the sample with DFHBI but no RNA was subtracted as
background to determine relative fluorescence units. The dissociation
constant () for each binding event was
calculated from the concentration-dependent fluorescence curves by
fitting the normalized fluorescence intensity () versus log of guanidine concentration plot to a nonlinear
regression (log (agonist) vs response (three parameter)) using Prism
8 software.  was calculated as ( – )/( – ), where  is fluorescence intensity at each ligand concentration,  is fluorescence intensity without ligand,
and  is fluorescence intensity at the
saturation point. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf The biosensor RNA in tRNA scaffold () (100 nM) was renatured in binding buffer
(40 mM HEPES (pH 7.5),
125 mM KCl, 200 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl) as previously mentioned,
then pre-equilibrated with 10 μM DFHBI (final concentration)
for 15 min at 37 °C. Guanidine (500 μM final concentration)
was added using the automated injector module of the SpectraMax i3x
plate reader (Molecular Devices) at the 30 s mark of the 20 min measurement
period. Kinetic experiments were performed in 100 μL reaction
volumes in CORNING Costar 96-well black with clear flat bottom plates
due to the use of bottom reads in this mode. Fluorescence measurements
were taken every 0.5 s for 20 min total. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf http://parts.igem.org/Promoters/Catalog/Constitutive http://parts.igem.org/Promoters/Catalog/Constitutive For  assays, biosensor sequences
were appended with a tRNA scaffold () through overhang addition by PCR, and
the resulting products were subcloned into the pET31b plasmid using
a double restriction digest and ligation with II and XhoI restriction sites. The Kpn
riboswitch reporter includes a synthetic promoter BBa_J23100, obtained
from the iGEM Registry of Standard Biological Parts (), the 5′ untranslated region of the  tauA gene containing the guanidine riboswitch (with or without M4
mutation), and the coding region of the  reporter
gene. The reporter was constructed by cloning the 5′ untranslated
region into a modified pRS414 vector containing the BBa_J23100 promoter
and  reporter using Gibson Assembly, for which both linear backbone and insert fragments
were amplified by PCR with Phusion. The 5′ untranslated region
harboring the Kpn riboswitch was amplified from the original  reporter construct received from Prof. Ronald
Breaker at Yale University. Fluorescence Assay Using Flow Cytometry BL21 (DE3) Star cells were transformed
with 10 ng of plasmid containing biosensor-tRNA construct and cells
were plated on LB/carbenicillin plates (Carb: 50 μg/mL). Four
single colonies for each construct were inoculated in 0.5 mL noninducing
media (NI) containing carbenicillin (50 μg/mL) in a 96 deep-well
plate (2.2 mL/well) and grown at 37 °C in an incubator with shaking
for 24 h until an OD of 3–4 was reached. The
NI culture was diluted 50× into ZYP-5052 autoinduction media
(AI) containing carbenicillin (50 μg/mL) in a 14 mL polystyrene
culture tube and grown for 18 h at 37 °C in an incubator with
shaking to express the biosensors. For end point flow cytometry
assays, 2 μL of the AI culture was diluted into 96 μL
of PBS buffer containing DFHBI-1T (50 μM) in a 96 well plate
(330 μL/well) and incubated for 10 min to allow DFHBI-1T to
diffuse into cells. To achieve a final guanidine concentration of
500 μM, 2 μL of 50 mM guanidine was added to the samples
and incubated at room temperature for 15 min. Single-cell fluorescence
was measured using an Attune NxT flow cytometer (Life Technologies)
using the following settings: excitation laser, 488 nm; emission channel,
GFP; cell counts for each measurement, 30 000. The data were
analyzed using FlowJo software. For checking the stability of
biosensor activity, 3 mL of the AI
culture was centrifuged at 4500 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C, the AI
media was decanted, and the cell pellet was resuspended in 3 mL of
NI media containing carbenicillin (50 μg/mL) and stored at 4
°C. The sensing activity of the biosensor was measured using
flow cytometry as described above for up to 11 days. After 11 days,
the experiment was concluded as a significant population of nonfluorescent
cells was observed. For kinetic flow cytometry assays, 2 μL
of the AI culture
was diluted in 96 μL of PBS containing 50 μM DFHBI-1T
in a 96 well plate (330 μL/well) and single-cell fluorescence
was measured at 0.5, 5, and 10 min to monitor DFHBI-1T diffusion into
cells. To achieve a final guanidine concentration of 500 μM,
2 μL of 50 mM guanidine was added and single-cell fluorescence
was measured in 1 min time points over 6 min followed by 5 min time
points over 60 min using the flow cytometer. For each time point,
ΔMFI/MFI was calculated as MFIguanidine – MFIwater/MFI, and -values were calculated using
Student’s  test to determine the minimum
time required for significant turn-on. -Values <
0.05 were considered as significant turn-on. Total RNA samples were
isolated by using QIAGEN RNeasy kit (catalog no. 74104) from BL21(DE3)
Star  cells transformed with the respective
biosensor plasmid and grown in NI media (24 h) followed by grown in
AI media (18 h) supplemented with 50 μg/mL carbenicillin. The
integrity of the total RNA was analyzed by 1% agarose gel electrophoresis
and by using the Agilent 4200 TapeStation system. One step quantitative
RT-PCR was performed using NEB Luna Universal One-Step RT-qPCR Kit
(catalog no. E3005S) with total RNA samples and appropriate primers.
One set of primers was specific to a portion of the tRNA and Spinach2
sequence and was common for all three biosensors. Another set of primers
was designed for the endogenous 5S rRNA. For both sets of primers,
the amplicon length was 68 nt. The reactions were performed on a 96-well
reaction plate using a BioRad CFX96 real time system monitoring by
SYBR fluorescence. The thermal cycling conditions used were 10 s at
95 °C, then 30 s at 59 °C.  (cycle threshold) values were determined using CFX Manager Software
with automatic baseline and threshold determination. All reactions
were performed in triplicate. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00583/suppl_file/sb0c00583_si_001.pdf Expression levels of the biosensors
were quantified using the relative standard curve method described
in the Applied Biosystems guide, “Guide to Performing Relative
Quantitation of Gene Expression Using Real-Time Quantitative PCR”.
Real-time PCR standard curves were generated by performing RT-PCR
with serial dilutions of the total RNA samples (1:1000 to 1:32000)
(). PCR efficiency for each set
of primers was calculated using the equation  =
(10 – 1) × 100. RT-qPCR was
performed with the 1:8000 dilution of total RNA samples using both
sets of primers (biosensor-specific and 5s rRNA-specific primers).
The relative expression level of each biosensor was quantified by
dividing the average  value for each
biosensor RNA with the respective  value
for the control, 5S rRNA. Chemically competent  BW25113 cells were transformed with 10 ng of the
reporter plasmid
and plated on LB/carbenicillin (Carb) plates (Carb: 50 μg/mL).
Three single colonies were inoculated separately in minimal media
containing 1× M9 salts (22 mM KHPO, 8.55
mM NaCl, 50 mM NaHPO, and 18.7 mM NHCl) supplemented with MgSO (2 mM), CaCl (100
μM), and glucose (0.4%), with the addition of carb (50 μg/mL),
and grown at 37 °C in an incubator with shaking overnight. The
overnight culture was diluted 200× in minimal media with carb
(50 μg/mL) and grown either in the presence (5–90 mM)
or absence of guanidine for ∼5 h until the OD reached 0.6.
The cell suspension was then analyzed using the colorimetric Miller
assay with the β-galactosidase substrate ONPG, and Miller Units
were calculated following the previous report. For kinetic assays, the overnight cultures were diluted
200× into 3 mL of minimal media with carb (50 μg/mL) and
grown until the OD reached 0.6 (∼5 h). Guanidine (50 mM final
concentration) was added to the cultures and 500 μL aliquots
were taken every 30 min over 5 h to perform the Miller assay. For
each time point, ΔMU/MU was calculated as (MU – MU)/MU..