Automation accelerates our ability
to engineer living systems. As a result, synthetic biology has adopted
design software and standardization to improve forward engineering. Experimental automation increases throughput, enables expanded assembly
of genetic circuits and interrogation of genetics on a scale not attainable
by manual efforts. CRISPR-based technologies are
highly amenable to design automation and are functional in a broad
range of organisms. This has made CRISPR-systems
indispensable for the fields of synthetic biology and genome engineering. Canonical CRISPR technologies target DNA  inducing double stranded DNA breaks (DSBs) and are often
subsequently repaired  nonhomologous end joining
(NHEJ), or by homology directed repair (HDR) with exogenous DNA templates.
However, DSBs can induce off-target mutations, apoptosis, and a destabilized
karyotype. To address these shortcomings, new technologies have
fused the programmability of CRISPR associated (Cas) proteins to enzymes
capable of mediating DNA manipulations without DSBs including Cas9-fused
recombinases, transposases, and deaminases. Deaminase fused-Cas9 base editing
(BE) technologies have enabled single base pair chromosomal editing
without the introduction of deleterious DSBs. Base editing consists
of cytosine base editors (CBE), which mediate the change of C-to-T
(or G-to-A), and adenine base editors (ABE), which facilitate the
conversion of A-to-G (or T-to-C). To date, BEs
have been used to interrogate genotype-to-phenotype relationships,
engineer animal model of disease, and develop cell therapies. However, base editors can only facilitate the
four transition mutations, are restricted to single nucleotide modifications
within the editing window, and cannot facilitate insertion or removal
of nucleotides. CRISPR-Cas9 systems have been used with reverse
transcriptases
to facilitate highly efficient user programmed editing. For instance,
CRISPey (Retron precISe Parallel Editing  homology)
enables highly efficient editing in yeast. Alternatively, prime editors (PE) are a recently developed gene
editing technology that is capable of introducing all 12 possible
single nucleotide changes as well as small insertions and deletions
without the need for DSBs or donor DNA templates. PEs are a fusion protein composed of a nicking Cas9 mutant
fused to reverse transcriptase domain (Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus
Reverse Transcriptase; MMLV-RT; a). The PE protein is targeted to the editing site
by a prime editing guide (pegRNA) which encodes three components:
(i) a guide sequence, (ii) a primer binding sequence (PBS), and (iii)
a reverse transcription template (RTT), which encodes the intended
edit. The pegRNA directs the PE to the target locus, where Cas9 mediates
a single-stranded DNA break (SSB) on the PAM-strand. The PBS of the
pegRNA then hybridizes with the 3′ end of the nicked DNA strand
resulting in a double-stranded DNA-RNA heteroduplex, with the edit
on one strand and the wildtype (WT) sequence on the opposite strand.
The nick on the 3′ end of the target DNA serves as the initiation
point of polymerization by MMLV-RT, with the RTT sequence used as
the template (a). Endogenous DNA mismatch repair is
then capable of incorporating the edit into the opposing strand resulting
in the final editing product. Various PE-based strategies have
been developed, including PE1,
PE2, PE3, and PE3b (b). Compared to PE1, PE2 utilizes
an engineered MMLV-RT that significantly increases editing efficiency.
PE3-based strategies utilize a pegRNA in combination with an accessory
sgRNA targeting a SSB 40–90 base pairs (bp) upstream or downstream
of the edit locus. Although PE3 results in higher targeting efficiencies
it has been shown to result in increased indel formation. Finally,
PE3b utilizes an accessory sgRNA that induces a nick on the complementary
(WT) strand in the edit/WT heteroduplex. This favors mismatch repair
to incorporate the edit into both strands of the target locus, which
avoids transient DSBs and significantly reduces indel formation. https://github.com/xiaowanglab/PINE-CONE https://github.com/xiaowanglab/PINE-CONE Although PE addresses many of the limitations of other CRISPR-based
methods, the critical determinant in PE is the facile design of pegRNAs.
Compared to the straightforward design of sgRNAs, pegRNA design requires
proper placement of guide, PBS, RTT, and edit sequences. As such,
the multifactorial design of pegRNAs results in higher complexity
and limits manual design. To that end, we developed a freely accessible
software tool, called Prime Induced Nucleotide Engineering Creator
of New Edits (PINE-CONE) (), that allows for the high-throughput design of pegRNAs. Overall,
this tool will enable scientists from diverse fields to easily navigate
their PE-based experiments by automating design of pegRNAs. PINE-CONE automated design of Prime Editing
Guide RNAs (pegRNAs).
(a) Prime Editor (PE) utilizes a nicking Cas9 (Cas9) fused to a Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus Reverse Transcriptase
(MMLV-RT). The PE fusion is targeted to a specific locus  a prime editing Guide RNA (blue line), where the locus is subsequently
nicked (blue triangle), exposing a 3′ OH. The MMLV-RT initiates
reverse transcription from the free 3′ OH group using the pegRNA
as the template for the edit (red circle). The flap intermediate and
Edit/WT DNA heteroduplex is resolved  endogenous
DNA repair. This results in the intended editing product incorporated
into both DNA strands. (b) Prime editing strategies include PE2, PE3,
and PE3B. PE2 utilizes a single pegRNA. PE3 utilizes a pegRNA matching
the target locus and a separate sgRNA that targets upstream or downstream
of the edit site. PE3b employs a sgRNA that is designed to nick the
complement (WT) strand of the Edit/WT heteroduplex. (c) PINE-CONE
takes edit information including chromosome, nucleotide position and
intended editing product as input. pegRNAs are designed using DNA
sequence data and include a guide directing Cas9 (blue), a Cas9-Hairpin
(Cas9-HP, gray), reverse transcription template (RTT, orange), edit
sequence (red circle), and primer binding sequence (PBS). The output
file include PE3 or PE3B guides, oligonucleotides for cloning, intended
edit DNA sequences, and PCR primers. (d) PINE-CONE is capable of designing
multiple types of edits including single point mutations (, SNPs), deletions, and insertions. Mutations are encoded
in the input file in the format shown in the “input notation”
panel. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00445/suppl_file/sb0c00445_si_001.pdf PINE-CONE is a software capable of turning
basic edit information
into pegRNA designs and accessory primers for PE workflows. The interface
allows users to select from various organisms, such as human (hg38)
and yeast (S288C) (). PINE-CONE uses the organism selection to retrieve DNA sequence
data from online reference genome’s web-based API (Supplementary a). Because many
laboratory strains and cell lines differ from their canonical reference
genomes, PINE-CONE is also capable of running on locally stored sequence
information ( the “Manual.txt” selection).
Consequently, information obtained in the lab, such as by DNA sequencing,
can be used to inform pegRNA design. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00445/suppl_file/sb0c00445_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00445/suppl_file/sb0c00445_si_001.pdf Edit input information
is provided by a simple comma separated
variable (.CSV) file (). The Input file includes edit chromosome, coordinates, sequence
and optional basic pegRNA parameters (RTT and PBS length). The input
information is used by PINE-CONE to design pegRNAs encoding the intended
edit along with PE3/B, cloning oligos intended edit sequences, and
PCR primers (c). PINE-CONE retrieves the wildtype (WT) target DNA sequences. In
turn, edit information is used to design the intended editing products.
Broadly speaking, PINE-CONE designs guides based off proximity to
edit or by specificity. Specifically, to account for potential off-target
effects, specificity scoring has been integrated into PINE-CONE’s
pegRNA design. When designing pegRNAs against a reference genome,
PINE-CONE retrieves “MIT Specificity scores”. In turn,
PINE-CONE ranks these scores and uses the highest specificity guides
available for pegRNA design. RTT sequence lengths are (i) defined
by the user  the input file (“RT (Bp)”, ), or (ii) if the RTT
input is blank, determined by PINE-CONE with a viable size (10–33
Bp). Similarly, PBS design are (i) defined by the user using a preferred
PBS length, or (ii) if the PBS section is left blank, optimized by
PINE-CONE using GC-content as the deterministic criteria as previous
studies have shown that high-GC contents favor short PBSs while low
GC-content favors longer PBSs. Because
pegRNAs often require design of multiple guides, RTT and PBS lengths
for experimental optimization, for most
target loci PINE-CONE designs at least 2 pegRNAs. In addition, the
user can enter multiple rows with systematic changes to RTT and/or
PBS lengths to the same edit generating multiple pegRNA variants.
Critically, PINE-CONE is capable of designing pegRNAs for a range
of edits from single nucleotide edits, such as single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs/replacements), or deletions (Del, D) and insertions (Ins, i)
(d). Finally,
PINE-CONE can design pegRNAs and accessory sgRNAs for various PE-based
strategies including PE2, PE3, and PE3B (b). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00445/suppl_file/sb0c00445_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00445/suppl_file/sb0c00445_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00445/suppl_file/sb0c00445_si_001.pdf PINE-CONE’s outputs design results in a “.CSV”
format and encodes edit information, pegRNA PE3 or 3B sgRNAs, cloning
oligonucleotides and PCR primers. Edit information is encoded in “WT-to-Edit”
format along with WT and Edit DNA sequences. PE3 or 3B sgRNA protospacer
and target cleavage distance(s) are provided. The output file also
includes oligonucleotides necessary for pegRNA and sgRNA cloning workflows
(, ). Cloning of peg and sgRNAs uses straightforward
restriction enzyme cloning and is compatible with an available CRISPR
RNA expression vector. Since PCR and sequencing are often necessary
in genome editing workflows, PINE-CONE also designs PCR and sequencing
primers flanking the edit locus. Importantly, PINE-CONE designs primers
with annealing temperatures that correlate with a commercially available
TM calculator ().
PINE-CONE is capable of plotting valid pegRNA loci in the form of
a Circos plot for Human (hg38) and yeast (S288C) reference genomes. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00445/suppl_file/sb0c00445_si_001.pdf For our initial validation of PINE-CONE’s functionality,
we used PINE-CONE to design pegRNAs for targets in which pegRNAs had
been previously experimentally validated by Anzalone , Kim , and Schene (−) These targets included a broad spectrum of single nucleotide substitutions
as well as small deletions. Overall, this analysis revealed that PINE-CONE
generated pegRNA sequences with matching guides, PBS, and RTT sequences
to previously published designs (). Next, we employed PINE-CONE for the design
of  pegRNA constructs that would be useful
for disease modeling applications
(a). To test
PINE-CONE’s ability to improve design automation, we assessed
its ability to generate pegRNAs to target 24 diverse single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that have been previously been identified to
be associated with increased risk of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD)
(b). Initially, we systematically assessed the effect of RTT length on
pegRNA targeting by analyzing a cumulative 625 pegRNA designs at these
24 loci. We found longer RTT lengths expanded the editing window of
PEs with 30 bp RTT sequences targeting up to 87% of loci (21/24).
Concurrently, we analyzed the prevalence of valid PE3 and PE3B accessory
sgRNA targets. PINE-CONE successfully designed PE3 sgRNAs for 79%
of loci (19/24) and PE3B sgRNAs for 58% of loci (14/24) (c). Circos style
plots generated by PINE-CONE indicate valid pegRNA loci across numerous
chromosomal contexts (d). Finally, we analyzed the
type of base conversions within our  experiment
and found pegRNAs target a series of transition mutations accomplishable
by BEs and PEs (38%). However, the majority (62%) of mutations consist
of base transversions accomplishable solely through use of PEs (e). This highlights
the expanded editing scope of PEs and the ability of PINE-CONE to
allow for pegRNA design automation. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00445/suppl_file/sb0c00445_si_001.pdf Finally, to validate design of pegRNAs in an alternative organism  we tested PINE-CONE on  S288C, an important host for biotechnology and
synthetic biology. We utilized PINE-CONE to rapidly design pegRNAs
for a series of loci including a series of auxotrophic marker genes.
PINE-CONE was able to design pegRNAs that would induce a range of
genetic modifications including introducing premature stop codons,
short deletions resulting in frameshift knockouts, and insertions
of LoxP site flanking target loci (). Collectively, this demonstrates PINE-CONE is capable
of automating pegRNAs design in multiple organism contexts for a variety
of applications. Tools for rapid design and implementation of
genome engineering
techniques are important for their broad adoption. As such, multiple
pegRNA design tools have recently become available. For instance,
pegFinder designs pegRNAs  alignment of WT and intended edit products. Multicrispr is a R package for a wide range of CRISPR-based strategies
including pegRNA designs. PrimeDesign
is capable of designing pegRNAs for genome-wide and saturation mutagenesis. These tools are effective and each offers unique
functionality; however, they require prior generation of the intended
editing product with flanking DNA sequences. Consequently, this may
reduce throughput and increase the likelihood of user imparted errors.
We sought to develop a tool that enables direct integration of nucleotide
coordinates and straightforward editing nomenclature. To that end,
PINE-CONE automates pegRNA design for multiple species, offers flexible
RTT and PBS specification, and requires only numerical DNA positional
information and simple editing notation. In summary, PINE-CONE
is capable of designing a range of edits
and systematically analyzing pegRNA designs. Specifically, we demonstrated
design of a series of pegRNA libraries in multiple contexts for both
disease study and synthetic biology. Altogether, PINE-CONE increases
ease of pegRNA design and significantly accelerates PE-based workflows. PINE-CONE design of pegRNAs of Alzheimer’s
disease (AD)-related
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). (a) Prime Editing mediated
introduction of SNPs. A pegRNA targeting a disease locus encodes an
edit, which is then incorporated into the target locus without the
need for double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs) or introduction of linearized
donor DNA. (b) PINE-CONE rapidly analyzed and designed a library of
pegRNAs and PE3 or PE3B sgRNAs for 24 AD-related loci. (c) The percent
of loci targeted by pegRNAs was systematically analyzed for various
RTT lengths. Inset schematic indicates valid edits that fall with
the reverse transcription range. Longer RTT lengths expand the Prime
Editing window and thus increase the number of targets up to 87% of
loci with RTTs of 30 Bp (21/24). In parallel, PINE-CONE generated
designs of PE3 sgRNAs for 79% of loci (19/24) and PE3B sgRNAs for
58% of loci (14/24). (d) PINE-CONE generated Circos mapping of pegRNAs
to target loci indicates PINE-CONE successfully designs pegRNAs across
numerous chromosome contexts. (e) A pie chart of PINE-CONE designed
edits at the 24 AD-relevant loci. Transition mutations are accomplishable
by cytosine base editors (CBEs), adenosine base editors (ABEs) and
Prime Editors (PEs) (38%, orange). The majority of mutations consist
of base transversion mutations (62%, blue). https://github.com/xiaowanglab/PINE-CONE https://github.com/xiaowanglab/PINE-CONE PINE-CONE was written in Python with the user interface (UI) constructed
using Tkinter. PINE-CONE source code, executables, and example files
are provided for download at the Xiao Lab GitHub (). A callable python script version for integration into genome-wide
design pipelines is also available. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00445/suppl_file/sb0c00445_si_001.pdf DNA sequences of each reference
genome are accessed  API hosted by UCSC genome
browser (). For API based retrieval of genomic DNA sequence,
PINE-CONE limits searches to 1 search per 0.5 s to avoid high frequency
requests. After DNA retrieval, PINE-CONE conducts a bidirectional
PAM search based off of user preferred RTT length. If RTT length is
undefined, PINE-CONE will identify a viable RTT length given the availability
of PAMs. Guide sequences are defined from available PAM motifs and
will retrieve MIT specificity scores from UCSC browser web api if
selected ( the “high specificity”
preference). PINE-CONE utilizes the highest specificity guides available.
The PBS is either (i) of a user defined length or (ii) PINE-CONE will
design the PBS based off of GC-content. Guide, Cas9 hairpin, RTT,
and PBS are combined to create pegRNA sequences. PINE-CONE attempts
to design at least 2 guides per target locus. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00445/suppl_file/sb0c00445_si_001.pdf PINE-CONE’s
ability to design pegRNAs was first tested by
comparing sequence output of loci tested in Anzalone , Kim , and Schene (−) Coordinates edited were determined by Basic Local Alignment Tool
(BLAT) analysis of edit locations. The subsequent coordinates and
edit nucleotides were provided to PINE-CONE in an input .csv matching
the format (). Output
pegRNA sequences were aligned back to experimentally validated pegRNAs
assuming use of the same scaffold sequence. This input file is available
for download at the Xiao Lab GitHub. For design of pegRNAs to
target AD-related loci, PINE-CONE curated
list of alleles identified by genome wide association study (ref ()) and  physiological importance (ref ()). For systematic analysis of RTT length. Loci
were downloaded from UCSC Genome Browser hg38 and were analyzed locally
by PINE-CONE. The list of valid RTT lengths was then used to query
pegRNA designs against the human genome (hg38). To test  pegRNA design on  (S288C), the coordinates for marker loci were
downloaded from SGD and used to either introduce stop codons at points
in the ORF, deletions 4–5 Bp in length or  insertion loxP sites by 2 pegRNAs flanking the coding sequence..