Clustered regularly interspaced
short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) together with CRISPR-associated
(Cas) proteins constitute an immune system in bacteria and archaea
that cut foreign DNA entering the cell. DNA degradation is achieved by DNA cleavage at specific positions  the Cas-encoded nuclease activity, which is guided to
the target site by a short CRISPR-RNA (crRNA) complementary to one
of the strands of the target DNA. The simplicity and programmability
of the CRISPR/Cas system, established for a broad range of different
organisms, has enabled its straightforward application to specifically
target any genomic location. Its applicability for engineering bacteria
was first demonstrated in the context of recombineering in  where 65% of recombinant cells could be
recovered by specifically killing of nonmutated cells. Since then, this approach has been successfully used for
manipulating numerous bacterial species, including ,,, and , and more recently
also . While Cas9 is currently the best-characterized and most widely
used endonuclease among available CRISPR editing methods, Cas12a (previously
named Cpf1) has recently emerged as an alternative for Cas9. This
can be reasoned by the cytotoxicity of Cas9 for a number of bacteria; possible reasons could be the generation of blunt
ends by Cas9 and the lack of or reduced activity of nonhomologous
end-joining (NHEJ) in bacteria. In contrast,
Cas12a generates staggered cut DNA with 5′-overhangs, which
can be easier repaired by prokaryotes. Recently, Cas12a found additional
applications in CRISPR genome editing methods for bacteria, such as ,,,, and . The first developed CRISPR/Cas
method for bacteria taking advantage
of Cas12a was developed for , directly
combined with single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) recombineering to relieve
allosteric feedback inhibition of the γ-glutamyl kinase by -proline., generally recognized as safe (GRAS), has been used for decades
in industry for the million ton-scale production of monosodium -glutamate. Despite intensive efforts to
understand -glutamate synthesis in this organism in detail,
it was only recently possible to solve the mystery of -glutamate
export by identifying the responsible mechanosensitive channel MscCG. In addition,  has also been engineered for the production of organic acids, alcohols, polyphenols, and specialty chemicals. Methodical
milestones for the engineering of  include the availability of DNA transfer methods, a two-step homologous recombination method (the “sacB-system”), and, more recently, the introduction of RecT-mediated
recombineering. The sacB-system, based
on the conditionally lethal levansucrase-activity (SacB), is currently
the method of choice for the site-specific introduction of genomic
mutations. In principle, RecT-mediated recombineering with oligonucleotides
(ssDNA) represents a true and less laborious alternative to the sacB-system,
but applicability of this method requires a selection step since the
frequency of obtaining recombinants in  is about 10. Here,
biosensors, enabling direct screening for mutated cells with increased
metabolite formation  fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS), were successfully used to isolate recombineered variants. However, depending on the application in question, development of
a biosensor-based screen is not an option. In such cases, CRISPR/Cas12a
mediated killing of nonrecombineered  cells is another option for quickly identifying variants with the
desired genotype by selection, which holds the potential to decrease
the experimental effort even further. In this manuscript, we
characterized the CRISPR/Cas12a system with
regard to the introduction of point mutations into the genome of  and developed a simplified CRISPR/Cas12a
protocol. Furthermore, we used this system to identify new gain-of-function
mutations in the mechanosensitive channel MscCG leading to -glutamate efflux. In the used CRISPR/Cas12a system, vector pJYS2_crtYf is applied for crRNA delivery.
Using this vector as a template, plasmid pJYScr was constructed comprising
a HI/I cloning site which
facilitates the insertion of protospacer sequences into the delivery
vector. Removal of the original crtYf protospacer sequence was performed
by DNA restriction using HI and I. The respective restriction sites for these enzymes are located
at position 3196 and 3244. Since the available vector pJYS2_crtYf
contains three additional I sites, the selected I restriction
site was not suitable for cloning. However, to make this site available
for cloning, the restriction site was replaced by a I site using a synthesized 313 bp I-II fragment (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), comprising
the parental sequence but replacing two nucleotides in the I site to create a I restriction
site. For plasmid construction, the delivery vector pJYS2_crtYf was
cut with I/II. Subsequently,
the resulting plasmid backbone fragment was purified and combined
with the synthesized fragment. Since the vector backbone contains
an additional BI restriction site, site-directed
mutagenesis was performed to introduce a C1165T mutation thereby eliminating
this restriction site. The QuikChange II XL Site-Directed Mutagenesis
Kit (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was used for this purpose. However,
we experienced that even after gel purification of vector DNA treated
with HI/BI still intact vector
was obtained after ligation with oligonucleotides. Therefore, the
49 bp HI/BI fragment was replaced
by a 931 bp dummy fragment (nt 379847–383111 of BA000036) yielding
vector pJYScr. This vector makes it easy to separate individual DNA
fragments after HI/BI restriction
for further processing. The DNA sequence of pJYScr and the vector
itself are deposited at Addgene (#132719). As control experiment,
pJYScr:crtYf bearing the same crRNA as pJYS2_crtYf was constructed
to evaluate, whether the replacement of restriction sites has an effect
on the editing efficiency in comparison to pJYS2_crtYf. In these experiments,
21 ± 7 cfu were obtained with the pJYScr:crtYf delivery vector
and with the original vector pJYS2_crtYf 34 ± 10 cfu as escaper
cells could be counted. This indicated that the vector backbone modifications
did not affect the formation of an active Cas12a/crRNA complex in  cells. For construction of the
individual crRNA delivery vectors, annealed oligonucleotides encoding
loop region and spacer were used. For annealing, 10 μL of both
oligonucleotides (200 nmol/mL HO) were mixed, incubated
for 10 min at 98 °C, at room temperature for 1 h, and subsequently
stored on ice. The annealed oligonucleotides were then ligated with
the 4332 bp HI/BI vector fragment
of pJYScr prepared  gel purification. Then  DH5α was transformed with the ligation
mix. Spectinomycin resistant clones indicating a successful transformation
event were identified on LB plates containing the antibiotic at a
concentration of 100 mg/L. Oligonucleotides pJYS2_fw2 and pJYS2_rv2
to amplify a 995 bp PCR fragment and DNA sequencing were used to verify
the presence the crRNA coding region in the vector. If desired, recombinant
strains were cured from the pJYScr plasmids by cultivation at 34 °C
without supplementation of antibiotics as described earlier. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf ATCC13032 was used throughout this study. Integration of the  gene under control of the synthetic PH36 promoter was
achieved by isolating a 3190 bp I-fragment from
the plasmid pMK-RQ_PH36_LacZ synthesized by Invitrogen (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). This fragment was inserted into the
pK18mobsacB vector carrying the two flanking regions of the chromosomal
noncoding region at nucleotide 1.404.651 (acc. no. NC_006958) as previously
described. Using two homologous recombination
events strain  WT:: was obtained. DNA sequencing confirmed a correct chromosomal integration.  WT:: colonies plated
onto BHIS-X-gal (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β--galactopyranoside)
turned blue after 3 days, whereas the  wild type cells remained yellowish. The two constructed  mutants devoid of the carboxyterminal end were constructed
by homologous recombination using pK19mobsacB-420stopΔ and pK19mobsacB-424stopΔ
(), each carrying two
flanking fragments of ∼500 bp. Transformation and Recombination Preparation of electrocompetent  pJYScr cells providing inherent expression
of RecT and Cas12a was performed as described previously with only
minor modifications. In short, a single
colony from a BHI agar plate was used to inoculate a preculture of
4 mL BHISG-Kan and incubated overnight at 30 °C and 220 rpm.
Subsequently, 500 μL of the preculture was transferred into
50 mL of BHISG-Kan supplemented with 1 mL/L Tween 80 and 4 g/L glycine.
The culture was harvested when the optical density at 600 nm (OD) reached approximately 1. Cells were chilled on ice for
20 min and centrifuged at 2,600 g and 4 °C for 10 min. Subsequently,
two washing steps in 50 mL of 10% glycerol were performed. Competent
cells were resuspended in 500 μL 10% glycerol, and aliquots
of 90 μL were stored at −80 °C. For transformation,
an aliquot was thawed on ice, mixed with 0.5 μg of the pJYScr
derivative and 10 μg of PAGE purified oligonucleotide (Eurofins
MWG Operon (Ebersberg, Germany), and transferred into 4 °C precooled
electroporation cuvettes (width 2 mm). The oligonucleotides used were
59 bp in size and encoded a mutated PAM site, spacer region, and,
if applicable, the mutation to be introduced. After electroporation,
cells were immediately transferred to 900 μL of prewarmed BHISG
medium and heat-shocked for 6 min at 46 °C. The cells were incubated
to recover for 2 h at 30 °C with shaking at 170 rpm. Cells were
plated on BHISG containing kanamycin and spectinomycin (BHISG-Kan-Spc-Xgal),
and incubated for 3–4 days to determine the number of colony
forming units and their respective color. was grown on LB and  on BHI (Difco
Laboratories, Detroit, USA). BHIS contained in addition 90 g/L sorbitol,
BHISG moreover 10 g/L glucose, BHISG-Kan 15 mg/L kanamycin, BHISG-Kan-Spec
100 mg/L spectinomycin, and BHISG-Kan-Spc-Xgal 50 mg/L. For glutamate
formation, precultures were grown overnight in 20 mL BHI. Cells were
harvested by centrifugation, washed with 20 mL 0.9% NaCl and inoculated
to an OD of 1 in defined CGXII medium (Eggeling and
Bott 2005) containing 50 μg/L biotin. -Glutamate in
supernatants was determined as its -phthaldialdehyde
derivative  HPLC and fluorescence detection as
previously described. Simple Construction of crRNA Delivery Vectors Using Oligonucleotides According to the protocol currently used, amplification of the
entire pJYS2_crtYf vector is necessary for inserting the desired crRNA-encoding
spacers. Despite different PCR conditions
and the use of megaprimers, this procedure resulted in a low yield
and often a doubling of the oligonucleotides. With the original protocol
we were able to construct only 1 of 5 desired vectors, which motivated
us to develop an improved crRNA delivery vector expediting necessary
constructions. The starting vector pJYS2_crtYf encodes the loop region
of the crRNA in combination with the specific crtYf-targeting sequence
on a 49 bp HI-I-fragment.
The single HI site is located between the strong
promoter pJ23119 and the specific spacer, whereas one of the four I sites of the vector is located between the spacer and
the T1rrnB terminator. Using a synthesized fragment and applying site-directed
mutagenesis, we replaced the I site by a BI site and removed an existing BI
site in the vector backbone. The resulting vector in principle allows
replacing the crtYf-specific crRNA-encoding sequence on the 49 bp HI-BI fragment by any other sequence. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf However, we substituted the crtYf-fragment by a larger fragment
of 931 bp resulting in the vector pJYScr of 5.252 kb, which enables
easy preparation of the 4.321 kb HI-BI vector fragment for the insertion of oligonucleotides encoding
the desired crRNA (). This new
vector for genome editing has been made available through Addgene
(#132719). To validate the functionality of pJYScr in a CRISPR/Cas12a
selection
experiment, a crRNA targeting  of  was cloned into the vector. The  gene encodes
the essential UDP--acetylmuramoylalanyl--glutamate 2,6-diaminopimelate ligase. The corresponding oligonucleotides comprising the PAM site 5′-GTTG-3′
(nt 255–258) within , were annealed and
ligated with the 4.321 kb HI-BI fragment of pJYScr, resulting in pJYScr:murE. After transformation
of  pJYS1-petFU (providing constitutive
Cas12a-activity) with 1 μg of the pJYScr:murE plasmid, only
81 ± 26 cfu as escaper cells were obtained demonstrating the
formation of an active Cas12a/crRNA complex in the cells. A control
experiment, in which  wild type
cells without pJYS1-petFU were transformed with the same vector yielded
3.2 × 10 cfu. Efficiency of CRISPR/Cas12a-Assisted ssDNA-Recombineering in http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf With the aim to explore the
capabilities of combining ssDNA-recombineering with CRISPR/Cas12a-mediated
elimination of nonrecombinant cells, we first constructed a  test strain carrying a chromosomal integration
of the  gene encoding for the β-galactosidase
from  ( WT::lacZ). In this particular strain, -expression
is under control of the synthetic promoter pH36, enabling easy identification of generated  mutants on agar plates supplemented with 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β--galactopyranoside (X-Gal) by blue-white screening. Subsequently,
this strain was transformed with pJYS1-petFU providing constitutive
Cas12a- as well as RecT-activity to this strain for the following
recombineering-CRISPR/Cas12a experiments. When transformed with the empty pJYScr-vector with or without the
recombineering oligonucleotide o-1574a, high transformation rates
comparable to that with the standard pEKEx3 vector as a control were
obtained ().
A high transformation rate is essential to obtain recombinants in
the combined recombineering-CRISPR/Cas12a-killing approach. Noteworthy,
the transformation rates obtained also confirmed the nontoxicity of
Cas12a opposed to Cas9 as it has been already described for various
organisms including . As crRNA delivery vector targeting
the chromosomal  gene, we have built pJYScr-lacZ-1574
using the intragenic PAM site 5′-(T)TT(C)-3′ with a
guide sequence of 21 nts. When  WT::lacZ pJYS1-petFU was transformed with this vector, only 51 ±
21 cells survived underlining the efficiency of Cas12a targeting in  (). To assay for DNA-editing plus targeting of unmutated
cells,  WT::lacZ pJYS1-petFU was
transformed with pJYScr-lacZ-1574 in combination with the editing
oligonucleotide o-1574a (all recombinogenic oligos are listed in ). This oligonucleotide was
designed to replace the PAM site and the adjacent codon TCG (5′-TTTCG-3′)
by 5′-TATAG-3′, which results in an inactivated PAM
site and the introduction of a stop codon within the open reading
frame of . This experiment yielded 1500 ±
172 colonies of which more than 97% were white (). Comparable numbers could be obtained when
targeting a second PAM-site (5′-(T)TT(A)-3′) within  using the oligonucleotide o-1654a and the simultaneous
introduction of a stop codon by substituting a single nucleotide (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf These results raised the question at which frequency
a reliable
introduction of mutations at different positions relative to the PAM
site is possible with this system. To answer this, nine different
oligonucleotides with a length of 59 nt were designed for introducing
a stop codon over a stretch of 18 nt along with a mutation inactivating
the PAM site. Oligonucleotides used for recombineering and introduction
of the desired mutations in the  gene and the
PAM site are given in . Experiments
conducted with these oligonucleotides yielded no white colonies when
oligonucleotide o-1574b was used, which would introduce two nucleotides
substitutions upstream of the PAM-site (). In this case, sequencing of eight randomly
picked blue clones revealed indeed that only the PAM site was mutated.
When performing recombineering-CRISPR/Cas12a with the editing oligonucleotides
o-1574c, -d, -a, e, and -f, more than 96% of the surviving  variants were white in all cases indicating
a successful introduction of the stop codon into the  gene. This observation was supported by DNA sequencing of randomly
selected clones, which confirmed correct incorporation of both mutations
in all clones analyzed. However, when using the recombinogenic oligonucleotides
o-1574g, o-1574h, or o-1574i designed for introducing a stop codon
further downstream of the PAM site, introduction of the desired mutations
was still possible, but only at a reduced frequency ranging from 75%
to 90% (blue bar), depending on the number of substitutions necessary
to generate a stop codon. Interestingly, DNA-sequencing revealed that
in a few cases only the stop codon was successfully introduced whereas
the PAM site was still intact (given in  as “stop only”). We obtained
a similar result of such partially successful editing events in experiments
targeting a second PAM site in  (). In these cases, possibly only a short
sequence of the genomic DNA was exchanged for the respective oligonucleotide
during recombineering. These clones escape Cas12a cleavage when only
mismatches in the PAM-distal region of the DNA target are present. Collectively, these data suggest that site-directed mutagenesis
using the combined recombineering/Cas12a selection strategy is possible
over a stretch of four nucleotides upstream and ten nucleotides downstream
of the PAM sequence. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf Inspired by these results, the mutagenic oligonucleotide
o-1574fe-random
was designed, which carries a continuous stretch of 18 random nucleotides
spanning the previously targeted PAM sequence plus five nucleotides
upstream and ten nucleotides downstream of that PAM site (). After performing the recombineering-CRISPR/Cas12a
selection, only eight white colonies were obtained. DNA sequencing
of the  gene of all clones revealed a mutated
and thus nonfunctional PAM sequence in all cases with four clones
carrying additional mutation(s) downstream of the targeted position
(nucleotides +11 to +16, ). Apparently, when considering the low number of obtained colonies
one can assume, that with the given oligonucleotide bearing such a
long random sequence, recombineering does not work. Hence, this method
cannot be used to exchange a longer stretch of DNA and is limited
to the introduction of three consecutive nucleotide substitutions
into the genome of . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf This
conclusion is supported by the results of two additionally
performed experiments using oligonucleotides o-1574e-mix and o-1574g-mix,
which were both designed for the saturation mutagenesis of a selected
codon (). Twenty-four
white colonies obtained by recombineering-CRISPR/Cas12a selection
using o-1574e-mix were randomly picked and sequenced. All variants
were characterized by a mutated PAM site and 16 of them carried additional
mutation(s) in the desired codon leading to 12 amino acid substitutions
on the protein level without a discernible preference for specific
substitutions (). Similarly,
targeted DNA sequencing of 24 white clones resulting from the genome
editing experiment using oligonucleotide o-1574g-mix yielded 13 variants
bearing mutations in the desired codon, leading to eight different
amino acids at this particular position (). Efficiency of genome
targeting and editing in . The
transformation assays to transform  WT::lacZ pJYS1-petFU contained 500 ng plasmid and 10 μg oligonucleotide
where indicated. The transformants were plated on X-Gal plates for
blue-white screening. The results are averages from at least two independent
experiments, and error bars depict standard deviations. In control
experiments,  was either transformed
with the cloning vector pEKEx3 (column 1), the empty vector pJYScr
(column 2) inscribed as pcr, or empty vector plus oligo o-1574a targeting
a PAM site in the chromosomal  gene (column 3).
When the crRNA was provided by vector pJYScr-lacZ-1574 (pcr-1574,
column 4) or vector pJYScr_lacZ-1654 (pcr-1654, column 6), only few
cells survived, whereas addition of the corresponding oligonucleotides
(o-1574a, column 5 or o-1654a, column 7) for PAM site-inactivation
and introduction of a stop codon resulted in a drastic increase of
surviving colonies with >96% of having the desired mutation. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf Genome editing efficiency relative to the PAM site in  using the combined recombineering-CRISPR/Cas12a
selection method.
Shown is a portion of the chromosome-integrated  gene with the PAM sequence highlighted in blue and the protospacer
highlighted in yellow. The Cas12a-cleavage site yielding staggered
ends is indicated by red triangles. The relevant DNA sequence of the
oligonucleotides for site-directed mutagenesis is shown at the bottom
with all mutations highlighted in red. The fraction of white colonies
obtained is given as percentage share. From each assay, the  gene of randomly selected white clones was sequenced
( = 4–16). Either the PAM site was mutated
and the stop codon was introduced (blue bars), only the PAM site was
mutated (red bars), or only the stop codon was introduced (green bars).
The respective numbers for each type of mutation (PAM+stop/stop only/PAM
only) assessed  DNA sequencing are also given
as numbers below the colored bars. Detailed DNA sequencing results
are given in . Site-Directed Mutagenesis Targeting  in An efficient -glutamate
export is an important prerequisite for achieving high -glutamate
titers with . In case of this bacterium,
the mechanosensitive channel MscCG (533 aa) is mainly responsible
for -glutamate efflux. However, -glutamate efflux only occurs in response to changes in the
structure of this channel, induced either by growth under biotin limitation
or addition of penicillin, ethambutol, or fatty acid ester surfactants
to the medium. In addition, an altered
lipid composition may cause efflux. According
to the current model, these cultivation/production conditions mentioned
increase membrane tension and thus activate the MscCG channel. Interestingly, several gain-of-function (GOF)
variants of MscCG are known causing constitutive -glutamate
efflux. These mutational hot spots are located in
the pore-lining helix of the N-terminal domain (1–286 aa),
which has been also shown to be responsible for -glutamate
excretion in response to the above-mentioned treatments. Furthermore,  two additional GOF mutants,
characterized by mutations in the C-terminal extracytoplasmic domain
are known. In one case, insertion of an IS-element at position 419
was described, resulting in the introduction of a stop codon at position
424. The other GOF mutant bears an P424L-substitution. Finally, a third mutant devoid of the entire
cytoplasmic domain (amino acids 420–533) has been described. We were interested in studying consequences
of mutations in this particular region at positions 422 and 423 of
MscCG and used the recombineering-CRISPR/Cas12a method to assay additional
amino acid substitutions at these particular positions. Both targeted
amino acid positions of MscCG are predicted to be located at the transition
of the fourth transmembrane helix to the periplasmic space. Presumably, this site determines the overall
structure of MscCG and is crucial for the interaction of the channel
protein with other components of the cell wall. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf pJYS1petFU was transformed with pJYScr_mscCG1269c providing the
crRNA and with 10 μg of the mutagenic oligo o-mscCG1269-V422nnn
for site saturation mutagenesis (). The assay yielded 43 clones of which 16 were randomly chosen and
sequenced. In these clones, altogether seven different amino acid
substitutions at amino acid position V422 of MscCG could be identified.
Similarly, position E423 was also targeted, eventually yielding 27
clones surviving CRISPR/Cas12a selection after recombineering. In
19 clones, DNA sequencing revealed introduction of eight different
amino acids and one stop codon. In addition, one variant with an undesired
deletion of two nucleotides in the PAM sequence was found. This frameshift
mutation inevitably resulted in a stop codon (E423AQstop). Recombinant
strains were cured from the respective plasmids and subsequently assayed
for -glutamate accumulation in the culture supernatant. As previous studies have shown, -glutamate formation,
even in described MscCG mutants, is very much dependent on biotin
concentration, medium composition and sugar concentration. For instance, the known MscCG
mutant devoid of the extracytoplasmic domain excretes -glutamate only at low biotin concentrations,
whereas the mutant carrying the IS-element insertion at position 419
accumulates -glutamate even in the presence of excess biotin. For assaying the -glutamate accumulation
capabilities of the newly constructed MscCG-variants obtained by recombineering-CRISPR/Cas12a
selection, we chose stringent conditions in defined medium with biotin
excess (50 μg/L) in combination with a low glucose concentration
(40 g/L). Under these conditions, the  wild type does not excrete -glutamate (a). The MscCG variants V422A,
V422C, V422T, V422L, and V422S did not accumulate -glutamate.
In contrast, in the supernatant of the MscCG-variants V422 K and V422D,
in which the valine residue was substituted by charged amino acids,
a substantial -glutamate accumulation of up to 13 mM could
be detected (a). However, variants E423 K and E423D did not show -glutamate
accumulation, as did mutants E423N, E423T, E423A, and E423H (b). In contrast,
mutant E423P, E423S as well as the strain with the MscCG variant E423stop
promoted -glutamate export. Noteworthy, -glutamate
concentrations decreased with time due to reuptake and utilization
of this amino acid as known from previous studies. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00361/suppl_file/sb9b00361_si_001.pdf Interestingly, the MscCG variant E423AQstop did
not cause -glutamate accumulation as expected (data not
shown). We also used
the conventional sacB-system to delete two different portions of the
extracytoplasmic domain of MscCG. In mutant M420stopΔ methionine
in position 420 was replaced by a stop codon and the carboxyterminal
end of 113 amino acids deleted. Similarly, the  strain carrying the shortened MscCG variant P424stopΔ missing
the carboxyterminal 109 amino acids was constructed. With variant
M420stopΔ, -glutamate concentrations of up to 27 mM
could be detected, and with mutant P424stopΔ concentrations
of up to 130 mM could be determined in the supernatant (). These observations are
in line with previous data also implying that presence of the carboxyterminal
domain has a negative impact on -glutamate channeling activity. -Glutamate accumulation in the supernatant of  variants with different mutations in
the mechanosensitive channel MscCG gene at position V422 (top) and
E423 (bottom). In addition, MscCG variants with stop codons at positions
M420 (M420stopΔ) and E423 (E423stop), respectively, were also
characterized with regard to the accumulation of -glutamate. -Glutamate concentrations for each variant were determined
after 14, 18, 20, and 22 h. CRISPR/Cas selection is a powerful technology
to perform genome
editing in living cells. On the basis of this system, methods for
inhibiting transcription (CRISPRi), activation of gene expression,
or modification of nucleobases have been developed. In bacteria, for the most part, methods introducing double-strand
breaks using the crRNA/Cas-complex to eliminate unaltered strain variants
find an application. The main challenge
during combined recombineering-selection experiments using RecT-recombineering
and CRISPR/Cas represents balancing activities of all individual components
including the recombinase, the crRNA and the endonuclease involved.
The need to ensure the availability of the respective components in
appropriate quantities at the right time initially led to the development
of CRISPR/Cas methods for , which require
up to three vectors or three independent induction systems. However, these established Cas9-based systems were not suitable
for applications in , for the most
part due to the cytotoxicity of the Cas9 endonuclease. However,
a CRISPR/Cas genome editing system based on the Cas12a
endonuclease originating from  was introduced for . This genome editing method is more suitable
for this bacterium as (i) Cas12a is not toxic for ; (ii) induction of gene expression (to establish endonuclease or
recombinase activity and crRNA formation) is not necessary due to
a fortunate choice of constitutive promoters; and (iii) the crRNA, 43 nt in length, is about half the size of
a typical Cas9 crDNA. However, the construction
of the crRNA delivery vector for a distinct protospacer sequence remained
laborious and time-consuming, lowering the overall applicability of
this method. The reconstructed vector pJYScr presented here, overcomes
this bottleneck as it allows for fast and simple vector assembly to
enable crRNA delivery. With CRISPathBrick, a similar strategy was
developed by the Koffas group, which allows for the modular assembly
of CRISPR-bricks to be used for CRISPR-Cas9 applications in . In this study,
CRISPR/Cas12a-assisted recombineering with ssDNA oligonucleotides
using this new vector was assessed by performing experiments to introduce
point mutations up- and downstream of PAM-sites in a chromosomally
integrated  gene. Interestingly, the results
are consistent with previous experiments in , showing that any targeting distal from the PAM
site results in a drastically decreased recombineering efficiency. Nonetheless, the results obtained in this study
confirm the potential of CRISPR/Cas12a-assisted recombineering using
ssDNA oligonucleotides for the efficient and precise introduction
of nucleotide substitutions into the genome of . This was demonstrated when performing site-directed mutagenesis
of the gene encoding the MscCG channel of . We focused on positions 422 and 423 of the MscCG protein located
at the transition of the fourth transmembrane helix to the periplasmic
space. It is striking that only substitution
by charged amino acids residues resulted in an open-channel conformation
at position 422. Given that the hydrophobic head groups of cardiolipin
and phosphatidylglycerol are present in  in this region, the direct local membrane
environment may be altered, which in turn creates the necessary conditions
for the amino-terminal part of MscCG to mediate the -glutamate
efflux. In contrast, amino acid substitutions
E423P and E423S, presumably causing drastic structural alterations,
support -glutamate efflux at position 422. Against the background
that complete deletion of the periplasmic domain also fosters -glutamate efflux, there are two
obvious possible explanations. Again, the immediate channel environment
could be affected, which could result in a deformed channel. Alternatively,
the extracytoplasmic domain could be forced away from the channel
opening, thus enabling the efflux of -glutamate. Such models
where a periplasmic domain functions as an efflux-controlling lid
and where this lid further interacts with the extracellular matrix
have been described for eukaryotes. Taken together, the crRNA delivery vector pJYScr introduced here
simplifies plasmid constructions and expands the number of CRISPR/Cas12a
applications in . In particular
in combination with recombineering, CRISPR/Cas12a is a powerful tool
when performing site-directed mutagenesis in the genome of  by selectively eliminating unedited cells
as presented in this study..