Significant genomic engineering
of cellular hosts is often required for efficient production of complex
or novel molecules Genome-scale screens can now rapidly
identify genes and associated pathways that enhance the production
of desired chemicals, fuels, or biologics. While modern
gene editing tools such as CRISPR/Cas9 enable precise genomic editing, deciding where to integrate new genes and pathways
remains challenging, especially in nonmodel organisms. Currently,
integration sites for heterologous cassettes are chosen
semirandomly or by gene replacement, and promising sites are reused
in future applications or hosts where similar sites exist. Integration
mediated by retroviruses is performed routinely in mammalian cells. The resultant integration is semirandom, however,
and creates heterogeneity among transformants, requiring significant
post-transformational screening. Targeted integration is preferred,
but identifying “safe harbor” sites that promote stable
transgene expression without harmful off-target effects remains challenging.
Current sites employed for targeted integration of recombinant cassettes
are often uncovered through empiricism, and a limited number of validated
sites are recycled in subsequent uses for a given organism. In yeast, integration into, and disruption of, native genes
such
as auxotrophic markers can achieve stable expression and native gene
knockout in a single step. Strategies using gene
replacement were essential prior to the development of whole-genome
sequencing, which enabled mapping of nontranscribed regions. Knockout
screens could potentially identify nonessential genes for integration
sites. This approach, however, is complex:
essentiality is often specific to the tested condition(s), and harmful
disruptions to multigene interactions may be initially overlooked.
In higher order eukaryotes such as humans, finding genomic safe harbors
has been especially elusive, and requires extensive screening to validate
a particular site for use. The number of trusted
integration sites is often insufficient, especially in nonmodel organisms,
for complex cellular engineering, which may require introduction of
several heterologous pathways that may comprise several genes each. Methods have been developed to engineer an organism in cases where
few genomic safe harbors are known. Integration of large constructs
containing multiple genes reduces the number of integration sites
needed, but this approach is often limited by the transformation and
recombination efficiency of the organism. An
artificial chromosome can obviate the need for genomic safe harbors,
but often is challenging to synthesize and stably integrate; these
constructs are also not yet available for many organisms. Screens to identify and validate positional
effects of various integration sites have thus far required intensive
upfront screening and have not resulted in an organized framework
for use by synthetic biologists. A simple, genome-wide assay to inform optimal sites for integration
of heterologous constructs would facilitate construction of cellular
factories, even in nonmodel organisms. ATAC-seq measures genome-wide
chromatin accessibility by using
a hyperactive Tn5 transposase to add sequencing adaptors to accessible
regions of the genome. ATAC-seq is simple and highly
scalable, enabling genome-wide evaluation of several strains, conditions,
or time points for accessibility and nucleosome positioning in a single
assay. Identifying sites for gene integration
using ATAC-seq is especially appealing because it only requires knowledge
of the genome sequence and annotated coding sequences; detailed functional
annotations, transcription factor binding sites, or promoter annotations
are useful but not necessary. Recently, ATAC-seq has been used to
investigate varied performance of limited integration sites, but the properties of a desirable integration
site are still poorly understood. To enable construction of complex
cell factories, a framework is needed that can predict optimal sites
for integration of heterologous genes in almost any host using a simple,
scalable, assay such as ATAC-seq. Here, we collected paired
ATAC-seq and RNA-seq data to characterize
the properties that might inform the suitability of a particular intergenic
region (IGR) for integration of heterologous genes. We performed this
characterization in the nonmodel, biotechnological yeast,  (),
for which only a few sites for integration are routinely used and
functional annotations are not well developed. Heterologous constructs
expressing a single copy of a fluorescent reporter were integrated
into 38 diverse intergenic regions (IGRs) using CRISPR/Cas9 to test
the effects of IGR size, expression and orientation of adjacent genes,
and intensity of ATAC-seq peaks, among other factors. We further evaluated
these effects for expression of secreted recombinant proteins from
tandem, multicopy integrations. From this analysis, we present a framework
for leveraging ATAC-seq to inform integration sites that should facilitate
genomic engineering of many other eukaryotic cell factories. Analysis of Transcriptomic and Epigenetic
Features in We first characterized
genomic,
epigenetic, and transcriptomic features that might influence the suitability
of a given locus for heterologous gene integration. We focused our
methods for characterization on simple, genome-wide assays RNA-seq
and ATAC-seq, which require only a genome sequence with annotated
coding sequences (CDSs). To this end, we cultivated wild-type  under relevant conditions for this host:
biomass accumulation in a glycerol-containing medium followed by simulated
induction of transgene expression in a methanol-containing medium.
We collected samples after each stage of the cultivation for RNA-seq
and ATAC-seq, which enables mapping of epigenetically accessible regions
and nucleosomes (). We sought to identify integration sites that would permit strong
expression across both of these typical growth conditions. (The same
methodology, however, should also allow identification of sites that
otherwise use epigenetic change across conditions to modulate the
expression of a gene.) http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf Starting with an annotated genome, we
reduced the design space of potential integration sites to intergenic
regions (IGRs) located away from chromosome ends and centromeres.
Chromosomal ends are not ideal regions for integration of heterologous
constructs due to the presence of telomeres, repetitive sequences,
and susceptibility to accumulation of polymorphisms. For these reasons, we avoided regions of 5–10 kb
at the distal ends of chromosomes where there were no annotated CDSs
with high-quality mRNA transcript. We excluded centromeres, which
we confirmed to be generally inaccessible as expected (). Finally,
we excluded regions in the extrachromosomal plasmids maintained in
variants of , since the function and stability of these plasmids are not well
characterized. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf As with most nonmodel organisms, functional annotation
of genes
in  is incomplete, so we did not consider
intragenic sites to prevent unwanted deleterious effects. Nearly all
the genes in  were expressed under
both conditions, further supporting the choice of IGRs as potential
integration sites (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf We
first investigated the impact of global dynamics of chromatin
on IGRs by searching for large regions in any chromosome in which
gene expression or chromatin accessibility was universally high or
low. We hypothesized accessible, strongly transcribed regions may
contain the most suitable IGRs, while closed chromatin areas are undesirable.
We divided each chromosome into equal intervals about 7.5 kb in length,
and visualized the average gene expression and accessibility for each
interval across the genome ().
Both accessibility and gene expression varied considerably from one
interval to the next, suggesting that gene-specific regulation, and
not global changes in chromatin, strongly influenced accessibility
and expression. We similarly compared gene expression and accessibility
under growth on methanol relative to glycerol. These environmental
conditions altered expression of many genes (C, ). There were no large hotspots of enhanced expression
or closed chromatin on the global scale (>20 kb) across these conditions.
Given these findings, we considered each IGR in the genome independently,
and next hypothesized which features might affect the suitability
of a particular IGR for use as an integration locus. Genome-wide analysis of gene expression (RNA-seq) and
chromatin
accessibility (ATAC-seq). (A) Workflow for cultivation and sampling
for RNA-seq and ATAC-seq after 24 h growth on glycerol and an additional
24 h growth on methanol. (B) Relative frequency of mapped fragment
sizes recovered in ATAC-seq libraries. (C) Log(fold-change)
in gene expression and accessibility score relative to genome-wide
averages for 7.5 kbp intervals across each chromosome. Approximate
positions of centromeres are depicted for each chromosome. (D) Nucleosome
positioning around translation start sites in  as determined by NucleoATAC. Nomination
of Potential Features That Affect Suitability for
Integration We examined the size of an IGR for its influence
on integration sites. IGRs should have less disruptive effects on
cellular functions, but these regions do contain many functional elements
such as transcription factor binding sites, enhancer-like sequences,
small RNAs, and transcription terminators that could be unintentionally
disrupted. To our knowledge, these features have not been annotated
comprehensively in  as is the case
in most nonmodel hosts. ATAC-seq can partially inform the location
of potential sites of transcriptional regulation through the mapping
of accessibility peaks in putative promoter regions and the nucleosomes
that typically flank these sites. For
example, we mapped the relative frequency of nucleosomes around the
start codon in  and found that two
nucleosomes were often centered 200 bp upstream of the start codon
as well as just after the start codon, suggesting the importance of
the contained region for transcription (D). The genome of  is extremely compact, however, with a median IGR length of only
300 bp (A).
Larger IGRs may be desirable, therefore, to provide sufficient distancing
between the integration sites for heterologous genes and regions of
the genome that are essential for transcription of neighboring genes
or other essential functions. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf In addition to size, we considered the combination of the expression
of genes adjacent to, and intensities of accessibility peaks contained
within, a given IGR. Previous studies have demonstrated a correlation
between the intensity of accessibility peaks in a promoter region
and transcriptional activity of that gene in , particularly when expression is induced in response to a stimulus. We attempted to detect a similar response in  using ATAC-seq by analyzing changes in methanol
utilization genes between the glycerol and methanol conditions. As
expected, the change in the expression of these genes across conditions
was correlated with the change in the overall accessibility scores
of the respective promoter regions (). We extended this analysis to all methanol- and glycerol-specific
genes, and observed a similar relationship primarily for methanol-specific
genes (). To characterize
the relationship between gene expression and accessibility
of the promoter region, we divided genes by expression level into
low (bottom 25%), medium (middle 50%), and high (top 25%) groups,
and compared the overall score for peak intensity within promoters
(C,D). Expression
levels and accessibility peaks were obtained for >92% of genes
across
conditions. Under both conditions, the promoter regions of highly
expressed genes had higher accessibility scores ( < 2.2 × 10) than those of medium expressed
genes, and the trend continued from medium to lowly expressed genes
( < 6.4 × 10). These
results supported our hypothesis that the combination of accessibility
of an IGR and the expression of adjacent genes were important factors
for determining the suitability of sites for integration of heterologous
constructs. The final feature of an IGR that we considered was
the orientation
of the adjacent genes (codirectional, convergent, or divergent). Proper
DNA supercoiling is a requirement for transcription: it influences
the strength of expression, and it can be affected by the neighboring
genes. IGRs bordered by convergent genes
tend to accumulate more positive supercoiling, which can impede transcription. Convergent gene pairs can also form mRNA–mRNA
interactions that regulate expression post-transcriptionally. Nearly 90% of the 1500 IGRs in  for which there were no recovered accessibility peaks were convergent
with a median size less than 50 bp and might form such interactions.
Disruption of these interactions by integration of a heterologous
construct may disrupt cellular functions since gene pairs that form
these interactions are often conserved and associated with stress
response. Codirectional genes may be
coregulated by a single promoter, while expression of divergent genes
may be driven by a bidirectional promoter. Additionally, the orientation
of an IGR is correlated with its size, with convergent IGRs being
significantly smaller than divergent or codirectional IGRs (B). Characterization of genomic properties of IGRs
that potentially
influence suitability for integration of a heterologous gene. (A)
Distribution of intergenic region (IGR) length for each chromosome.
(B) Distribution of IGR length for each orientation of adjacent genes.
(C,D) Overall accessibility score in the promoter region (defined
as 600 bp upstream of translation start site) for low (bottom 25%),
medium (middle 50%), and high (top 25%) expression of genes under
growth on (C) glycerol or (D) methanol. Construction
and Characterization of an IGR Library http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf To assess the importance
of these four genomic and transcriptomic
features, we selected 72 candidate IGRs that spanned different sizes,
orientations, accessibility peak scores, and expression strengths
of adjacent genes. For this demonstration, we sought IGRs that would
permit strong expression both under growth on glycerol and on methanol.
We, therefore, identified approximately 1300 of the 3500 IGRs with
detected accessibility peaks as constitutive, defined here as a change
in expression of adjacent genes by less than 4-fold and in accessibility
by less than 30%. For these 1300 IGRs, we classified the size of IGRs
as small (<450 bp) or large (>550 bp), and average expression
of
adjacent genes as low, medium, or high using the same criteria as
previously. Finally, we calculated an overall accessibility score
by summing the intensity scores of all peaks within each IGR, and
classified these scores as low (<250), medium (300–850),
or high (>1000). Categorization of expression-accessibility into
four
groups (low-low, low-high, med-med, and high-high) covered the design
space observed in the genome (). Our selection of 72 IGRs comprised three IGRs for each of the
24 combinations of sizes, orientations, and expression-accessibility
categories. Because many of these combinations were at the extremes
of the design space, three IGRs per combination corresponded to a
median representation of roughly 20% of possible constitutive IGRs
meeting each set of criteria (). We reasoned, therefore, that the selected subset of IGRs adequately
represented the genome-wide design space for size, expression, accessibility,
and orientation. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf We constructed a library of clones expressing
eGFP for heterologous insertion into each of the selected IGRs (). Expression of
eGFP was controlled by the strong, constitutive TEF1 promoter and
450 bp of IGR-specific homology arms on either end of the donor DNA
mediated homologous recombination. To ensure targeted integration,
a plasmid containing Cas9 and a sgRNA targeting the desired IGR was
cotransformed with the eGFP linear DNA into a strain previously modified
to express mCherry. Successful integrants were obtained for 38 of
the 72 selected IGRs. (The unsuitability of particular IGRs for integration
by CRISPR/Cas9 may have affected our ability to obtain successful
integrants. Several confounding factors exist, however, such as the
efficiency of the sgRNA or the suitability of the local nucleotide
sequence chosen for each IGR, which prevent us from drawing conclusions
about these unsuccessful integrants.) The 38 successful integrants
included representatives for all categories (size, orientation, expression-accessibility),
and were characterized for gene expression and growth (). Evaluation of the impact of IGR properties
on transgene expression
and cell growth. (A) Workflow diagram for creation and analysis of
an IGR targeting library. (B) Normalized GFP fluorescence  IGR size. (C) Fluorescence  IGR orientation. (D) Fluorescence  category
of adjacent gene expression and overall IGR accessibility. (E) Normalized
max growth rate  IGR size. (F) Growth  IGR orientation. (G) Growth  expression-accessibility category. Adjusted -values
computed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test with the Benjamini–Hochberg
correction for multiple hypotheses. Effects of IGR Size and Orientation on Growth and Expression We performed flow cytometry to evaluate relative expression from
each IGR in the library, and independently monitored the growth rates
of each strain. We measured the expression of eGFP relative to mCherry
to correct for intrinsic heterogeneity in expression among single
cells. Expression was well correlated ( > 0.9) between glycerol and methanol conditions, confirming that
integration sites permitted constitutive expression as intended. We did not observe significant differences in expression of GFP or
growth between large and small IGRs (B, E). Given the compact structure of the  genome, it was unsurprising that robust expression was observed
from a heterologous construct despite a small distance between it
and neighboring genes. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf Similarly, the orientation of genes neighboring
an IGR did not
significantly affect expression levels or growth (C, F). Even when considering the pairwise orientations
of the transgene with each adjacent gene, expression did not differ
dramatically (). This result might
suggest that the local sequence context of the heterologous construct
determined and regulated the proper supercoiling necessary for robust
expression of the transgene. Interference
from adjacent genes, therefore, appears insignificant. Previous studies
have focused primarily on the influence of orientation  synthetic gene clusters. The influence of orientation
between an integrated heterologous gene and adjacent endogenous genes,
especially in eukaryotes has been less characterized, however. Between
endogenous genes, a relatively weaker promoter increases susceptibility
to transcriptional interference. This relationship
is consistent with our observations: the strong  promoter was robust to interference from weaker promoters adjacent
to the integration site. While adjacent genes did not appear to influence
expression of the transgene, the reverse may not have been the case.
Interestingly, the maximum growth rate was higher for strains with
a convergent orientation of the transgene and downstream gene  when this orientation was codirectional (). Integration of a strongly expressed
transgene might therefore interfere with the promoter of the downstream
gene. Nearly half of the IGRs in the library are located upstream
of genes involved in central functions such as metabolism, cell cycle,
or stress response, which, if disrupted, might inhibit cell growth. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf While we did not observe local effects from gene orientation, expression
of eGFP did correlate with the chromosome on which a particular IGR
was located. The highest expression was observed for IGRs located
on chromosome 1, then chromosome 2, 3, and 4 in that order (). This ordering follows the decreasing
length of the chromosomes. The mechanism underlying this observation
is unclear, and further study on the topology or structure of the
chromosomes could yield additional insights. Effects of IGR Accessibility and Expression Levels of Adjacent
Genes Unexpectedly, normalized expression of GFP was significantly
higher upon integration into IGRs with low to moderate expression
and accessibility scores (low-low and med-med categories) than those
with high accessibility scores (low-high and high-high categories, D). Three-fold differences
in GFP expression were observed between IGRs with similarly low levels
of expression of adjacent genes but large differences in accessibility
scores (low-high  high-high categories). This
result suggests that the intensity of accessibility peaks dominated
the observed locus effects, rather than the expression levels of adjacent
genes. Transcriptional interference depends on the relative expression
level of adjacent genes in concert with the orientation and proximity
of the respective promoters. It is unsurprising,
therefore, that the expression levels of adjacent genes did not significantly
affect expression of the transgene, given that we also observed a
minimal impact from orientation and proximity (IGR size). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf The
observed trend—that integration into IGRs with high overall
accessibility scores led to lower transgene expression—may
seem counterintuitive. An important distinction exists, however, between
a high overall accessibility score and an open chromatin state. Open
chromatin is required for robust expression, especially in multicellular
organisms, where gene expression is more tightly controlled by epigenetics. In , we detected accessibility peaks
or expression in almost every transcriptional unit under both conditions
tested (), making it
likely that nearly all chromosomal IGRs in this organism are always
in an open state. This result suggests that even IGRs with relatively
low peak intensities are still accessible to recombination and expression
machinery, and may explain why integration into all IGRs resulted
in GFP-positive cells by flow cytometry. In contrast to chromatin
state, peak intensity (as measured by
ATAC-seq) corresponds to accessibility to the transposase, which is
correlated with chromatin activity by chromatin remodeling and transcription
factors. The differences in overall accessibility
score among IGRs in our library therefore corresponded to differences
in the activity of factors that immediately surround the transcriptional
unit of the transgene, not whether the chromatin is open. Our results
suggest that a high amount of this activity nearby the transgene is
correlated with lower expression of that transgene. This correlation
was most prominent in IGRs with divergent or codirectional orientations,
which contain promoter regions and transcription factor binding sites
unlike IGRs with convergent orientations. Extension to Multicopy
Integrations http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf After uncovering
a locus effect related to the intensity of accessibility peaks for
single-copy integration, we next sought to see if there was a similar
effect for multicopy integrations. In , expression of the recombinant gene of interest is typically driven
by several tandem copies of the heterologous cassette, integrated  homologous recombination into a single locus just upstream
of a promoter. To evaluate potential
locus effects, we constructed strains to secrete human growth hormone
(hGH) or granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) under control
of three different promoters (P, P,
P) integrated into the genome upstream of various promoters
(, , , , or ). These IGRs spanned
a range of overall accessibility and expression levels of adjacent
genes (). We did not observe the
integration locus to have a significant effect on expression for any
of the promoters or genes tested, as measured by RNA-seq (). The copy numbers
of transgenes spanned a similar range among loci, ruling out the possibility
of bias in copy number. Expression was positively correlated with
copy number for each promoter tested (P:  = 0.62, P:  = 0.38, P:  = 0.84). In these multicopy insertions, the
transgene is separated from the endogenous locus by multiple copies
of heterologous contextual elements, which can total 30 kb in length
for high-copy integrations. It is therefore likely that the epigenetic
state of heterologous elements, and not that of the endogenous locus,
most influences expression of the transgene. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00299/suppl_file/sb0c00299_si_001.pdf To characterize the epigenetic state of these heterologous
elements,
we performed ATAC-seq on three hGH-expressing strains with multicopy
insertions upstream of the native , , or  promoters (). Sequence elements of these constructs occurring natively
in the genome (such as the  transcription terminator)
adopted similar peak position, peak intensity, and nucleosome occupancy
as the native copy. Interestingly, aligned reads from ATAC-seq formed
a much stronger, but flat (ill-defined peaks), signal across most
of the portion of the cassette that contained the bacterial origin
of replication and the transcriptional unit for the selectable marker—all
sequence elements originating in other yeast or bacteria. Within this
portion of the cassette, only the promoter region of the selectable
marker appeared to have a defined peak, and no nucleosomes were predicted
with high confidence (>80% occupancy). These results may suggest
that
the non-native elements of each construct adopted an especially accessible
chromatin state, but without strong evidence of much chromatin activity
such as by chromatin remodeling or transcription factors. This accessible
and largely inactive context surrounds the transcriptional unit of
the transgene in the case of multicopy insertions. Our collective
findings uncovered an effect of the locus on transgene
expression, but our previous library results suggested a potential
impact of transgene expression on the downstream native gene. To confirm
this downstream impact, we compared the expression of  and  among strains integrated upstream of the  promoter, the  promoter, or another
promoter elsewhere in the genome (). The strong  promoter
is the most common constitutive promoter used in  and  is adjacent to  in
the genome. We chose to drive transgene expression in this case by
one of three other promoters to isolate the effect of the integration
site on the adjacent genes. Surprisingly, integration upstream of the  promoter
led to an 8-fold increase in expression of  (adjusted -value = 2.2 × 10) relative
to integration elsewhere in the genome or even at the
same IGR but oriented in the direction of . We
observed no significant effect on expression of the transgene or . We observed the same effect upon integration upstream
of the  promoter, though to a lesser degree,
with a near 2-fold increase in expression of  (adjusted -value = 4.4 × 10) relative to the other integration groups. These results confirmed
the impact of transgene expression on the downstream gene observed
with single-copy integrants and may suggest that the effect was even
greater with multicopy integrants, perhaps due to positive feedback
with each additional copy. Comparison of transgene
expression among insertion loci across
three promoters (PAOX1, PDAS2, and POLE1) and two heterologous genes
( and ). Transgene expression
was measured by RNA-seq as log(TPM + 1). Each point is
a unique clone and represents the average of triplicate samples analyzed
by RNA-seq. The transgene copy number is indicated for each clone. Influence of expression of heterologous genes
on the downstream
native gene. (A) Expression of , the transgene
( or ), and  as a function of integration either upstream of the  promoter or elsewhere in the genome. Each point represents the average
of triplicate RNA-seq measurements of expression in log(TPM + 1). Adjusted -values were calculated using
DESeq2. (B) Expression of , the transgene ( or ), and  as a function of integration either upstream of the  promoter or elsewhere in the genome. Reconciling Single-Copy and Multicopy Locus
Effects Together, our results suggest a significant locus
effect on transgene
expression for single-copy integrations that diminished for multicopy,
tandem integrations. Each subsequent copy of the heterologous construct
further increases the average distance between the transgene and the
original genomic context. The introduction of multiple copies is thus
likely to surround the transgene in a new epigenetic context, which
contains multiple copies of the promoter driving expression of the
transgene. In yeast, DNA looping can bring together enhancer-like
elements with promoters and even join whole clusters of transcription
units. It is possible, therefore, that tandem copies
of a heterologous construct encourage close association of repetitive
sequence elements in three-dimensional space, forming a new microenvironment.
Such an association of the same binding sites within promoters may
lead to cooperativity and further encourage the binding of factors
needed to promote transcription. Selecting
Integration Sites from ATAC-seq Our data
and observations here provide guidance on the selection of novel integration
sites for genome engineering from a simple, one-time, genome-wide
assay such as ATAC-seq. Our evaluation of the relative impacts of
tested features may reduce the need for performing similar screens
of IGRs in many other hosts. We envision that only an annotated genome
and an ATAC-seq data set collected under the desired conditions may
be sufficient to enable selection of suitable integration sites in
many eukaryotic hosts. Our results suggest ideal sites for integration
are IGRs that are (1) sufficiently far from telomeres or centromeres,
(2) in an open region of chromatin but with only low to moderate intensities
of accessibility peaks nearby, and (3) in a convergent orientation
with the native, downstream gene to prevent unwanted interference.
In cases where weaker promoters drive expression of the transgene,
it may be useful to avoid placing these constructs near highly transcribed
genes to minimize any transcriptional interference. These criteria
may be especially important for single-copy integration of heterologous
genes such as by CRISPR/Cas9. For tandem, multicopy integrations to
drive extremely strong expression, a convergent orientation with the
downstream gene may be most important. We believe that the framework
here using a host’s epigenetic
landscape should guide selection of heterologous insertion sites in
many other eukaryotes. In developing this framework, we have also
uncovered surprising biological relationships between transgene expression
and the locus of integration that warrant further study in yeasts
and higher eukaryotes. With a greater understanding of the impactful
features of an integration site, novel engineering solutions can be
developed to modify these interactions and promote robust expression.
Such solutions might include the development of improved landing pads
with enhancer-like elements or the optimization of synthetic gene
clusters for pathway engineering. Our work underscores the importance
of genome-wide assays such as ATAC-seq to better understand biological
mechanisms and inform engineering decisions for the construction of
improved cell factories. https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gpp/public/analysis-tools/sgrna-design https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gpp/public/analysis-tools/sgrna-design Y-11430 was obtained from the
USDA and modified for subsequent CRISPR/Cas9-based
integration by frameshift knockout of KU70. This strain was further modified to express mCherry by cotransformation
of a donor cassette and a circular plasmid containing Cas9 and guide
RNA sequences, described previously. IGR
libraries were similarly created by cotransformation of a donor cassette
for eGFP expression and a circular plasmid for CRISPR/Cas9-based targeting
to the desired IGR. Donor cassettes contained the following (5′
to 3′): a 450 bp 5′ homology arm, the  promoter, the mCherry or eGFP gene, a transcription terminator,
and a 450 bp 3′ homology arm. The eGFP cassette contained a
phleomycin D1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) selection marker to facilitate
screening for positive transformants. Guide RNA sequences were designed
using the Broad Institute’s Genetic Perturbation Platform sgRNA
tool (), constraining GC content to between 20% and
80% and requiring no homopolymers >4 bp. Successful on-target integration
was confirmed by PCR amplification of the target locus. Strains
were generated to express either human growth (hGH) or granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor (G-CSF) under control of multiple native promoters
(, , ) by modifying the commercial vector pPICZ A (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
A single homology sequence was inserted upstream of the promoter to
direct integration into a locus other than that of the promoter (, , , , ). Plasmids were linearized in
the middle of the homology sequence or native promoter for multicopy
insertion into that particular locus. For collection of samples
for ATAC-seq and RNA-seq, Y-11430 wild-type
cells or multicopy hGH and GCSF cells were grown in 24-well deep well
plates (25 °C, 600 rpm) using glycerol-containing media (BMGY-Buffered
Glycerol Complex Medium, Teknova) supplemented to 4% (v/v) glycerol.
After 24 h of biomass accumulation, cells were pelleted and resuspended
in BMMY (Buffered Methanol Complex Medium, Teknova) containing 3%
(v/v) methanol. Samples were collected for ATAC-seq and RNA-seq from
triplicate cultures after 24 h initial growth in BMGY and after an
additional 24 h growth in BMMY for wild-type cells and only the BMMY
phase for protein-expressing cells. Two million cells per sample were
prepared for transposition as described previously. Spheroplasts were washed once with transposition buffer prior to transposition and PCR amplification
for sequencing, which are described elsewhere. Amplified libraries were size selected using 0.4×
followed by 0.8× Ampure XP beads according to manufacturer instructions
(Beckman Coulter). Size-selected libraries were sequenced on an Illumina
NextSeq to generate 40-nt paired-end reads. Alignments were
performed using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA-MEM) v0.7.5a, sorted, duplicates were marked, and .bam files
were indexed using Picard v1.94 and samtools v0.1.19. Accessibility
peaks were called and scored using MACS2, while nucleosome position
and occupancy were called using NucleoATAC, both as described previously. The −log(-value) score from the narrowPeak output of MACS2 was defined to
be the accessibility score of a peak. Overall scores for promoter
regions or IGRs were calculated as the sum of scores of peaks contained
within these regions. RNA was extracted
and purified according
to the Qiagen RNeasy kit and RNA quality was analyzed to ensure RNA
Quality Number >7. RNA libraries were prepared using the 3′
DGE method and sequenced on an Illumina
HiSeq2500 to generate paired reads of 17 bp (read 1) + 46 bp (read
2). Sequenced mRNA transcripts were quantified with Salmon v0.9.1, using a transcript database consisting of a
single  transcript per gene, each
with a 100-nt extension on the 3′ end, as well as rhGH and
rhG-CSF transgenes. Expression was visualized using log(Transcripts per Million +1) values. Cell Growth and Fluorescence
Characterization Strains
with confirmed integration of the eGFP cassette into the proper IGR
were grown to saturation in YPD in a 96-well plate at ambient temperature
and 1000 rpm shaking for 2–3 days. From these cultures, complex
media containing either 4% (v/v) glycerol or 3% (v/v) methanol was
inoculated to an initial OD of 0.1 in a 96-well plate.
Cultures were subsequently grown in a microplate reader (Tecan), with
OD measurements every hour for 24 h. Growth measurements
were performed on biological triplicates of each library member for
each carbon source. Growth data for each well was fit to a Baranyi
model to obtain a maximum growth rate. Maximum growth rates were scaled
within each plate to account for heterogeneity between plates. In
parallel, cultures were similarly started at an initial OD of 0.1, grown for 4 h, and then analyzed by flow cytometry for GFP
and mCherry fluorescence, gating for horizontal and vertical singlets.
Cells were further gated for positive mCherry fluorescence to eliminate
nonviable or transiently nonexpressing cells. Flow cytometry was performed
on four biological replicates of each library member for each carbon
source. Analytical Assays for Strain Characterization For hGH-
and G-CSF-secreting strains, copy number analysis by qPCR and determination
of protein concentration by sandwich ELISA were both performed as
described previously. Raw and processed ATAC-seq data used
in this study can be obtained from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
(accession number: GSE154330)..