Protein-based molecular machines
are a vital component of living cells and carry out diverse functions
including the transportation of numerous cargoes, muscle contraction,
and cell division. Biological motors are highly complex,
regulated machines, making them challenging to study but also a motivating
target for use in bionanotechnology. Within the
field of synthetic biology, the bottom-up approach aims
to start with simplified, well-characterized, components and modify
or extend their functionality, in this case to produce novel nanoscale
motors. A key design challenge in this area is the level of reproducibility
and transferability of components from one context to another, and
determining the ability of components to be combined without unexpected
interactions occurring is important. Entirely synthetic, biologically
inspired motors have been designed
with varying levels of ability and mimicry, including small molecule
machines such as switches, shuttles, and even a robotic arm. Using more biological starting materials, there has also been significant
progress in the field of autonomous DNA motors and
hybrid DNA–protein motors. Neither
of these areas, however, utilize the same set of initial building
blocks as nature: amino acids. The field of synthetic protein motors
is far less developed due to the higher complexity of amino acid interactions.
There are, however, several examples of combining peptides with small
molecules to create synthetic machines and structures such
as a cyclic peptide-based nanopore, but
there are, to our knowledge, no peptide or protein-based synthetic
motors that avoid the use of existing protein motor domains. This paper describes progress in the realization of a series of
previously published motor designs, including the Tumbleweed and SKIP
motors. These motors are designed to undergo directed
motion through rectified diffusion using ligand-controlled binding
of their “feet” to a DNA track. A peptide “hub”
is proposed to self-assemble, connect,
and organize  protein based “feet”
with the ability to bind orthogonal DNA sequences (in the presence
of orthogonal ligands) to form the motor molecule (see ). Construction of a suitable
DNA track and microfluidic device have since been demonstrated, along with further simulation studies. The proposed hub is composed
of three peptide sequences, each of
which contains two coiled-coil domains, with each domain programmed to assemble with a specified partner
to produce the final configuration (see ). Coiled-coil domains have been selected
for this application, primarily due to their ability to undergo programmed
assembly; however, the rigidity of the folded domain is also desirable
in reducing the probability of backward stepping and hence improving
the efficiency of the final motor. The use of coiled-coils in this
way is not straightforward as individual coiled-coil sequences have
often been found to interact with many other potential partners rather
than interacting only with their biologically relevant partner. It has also been documented in other areas of synthetic biology
that once the complexity of synthetic systems increases, unintended
cross-talk between components can occur. To design the high fidelity sequences required in this application
we must therefore draw on the wealth of information now available
on the folding and interactions of coiled coils. The coiled-coil nanostructure field has
advanced on many fronts in recent years including the use of biological
coiled-coil domains in novel combinations, the design of self-assembling peptides from first-principles, and the use of computational design tools. From these
works we anticipate the need to use a heptad repeat of hydrophobic
residues with polar insertions used to specify the orientation of
helix interactions. Given that our peptides will each contain two
coiled-coil domains, we must consider the formation of intramolecular
hairpins to be a primary route to misfolding and use the combination
of charged amino acids and polar insertions to the hydrophobic core
to specifically design against this eventuality in each peptide. In
addition to the coiled-coil oligomerization information, knowledge
on how to link domains successfully must be extracted from recent
studies and applied in order to provide sufficient
flexibility between domains to allow folding. In this work we
have designed, synthesized, and characterized a
linked system of three coiled coils, suitable for the formation of
a hub for the Tumbleweed motor. The design in this work is presented
as a proof of principle that the combined knowledge within the field
can be successfully applied to a range of new applications requiring
the ordered colocalization of multiple functional components, including
the design of hubs for protein-based synthetic molecular motors. “Y”
configuration of the Tumbleweed Hub. The peptide
hub termini are indicated, showing the parallel coiled coils p1,p2
and p3,p4, and the antiparallel coiled coil p5,p6. To form a hub,
coiled-coil pairs (p1,p2), (p3,p4), and (p5,p6) need to preferentially
interact, while p1 and p6, p2 and p3, and p4 and p5 are covalently
linked, to ensure that all of the coiled coils are connected to form
one structure. The nonhelical central ribbons represent the residues
at one end of every peptide that are designed not to contribute to
a coiled-coil region. Figure adapted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2011 American
Physical Society. Using the design principles laid out previously six peptides were designed to form three dimeric coiled coils: (p1,p2),
(p3,p4), and (p5,p6). Polar residues are included in various hydrophobic
core positions to prevent staggered assembly and electrostatic interactions
are optimized to produce the desired dimeric pairings using an algorithm
reported previously. All contain a tyrosine
residue for UV absorption concentration measurements, a single cysteine
residue for disulfide bond formation, and a linker of glycine and
asparagine intended to form a flexible region outside the coiled-coil
domains on one terminus. The sequences of the six peptides labeled
in  are shown
in . These were
synthesized using solid phase
peptide synthesis and purified with high performance liquid chromatography.
Several facts must be established in order to confirm the success
of the design principles and demonstrate that when all six peptides
are mixed, the three required dimeric coiled-coil structures are produced.
First we must demonstrate that the designed peptide pairs interact
with each other. Second we must show that the structures formed by
these pairs are dimeric in nature. Finally we must find that the three
designed pairs are produced preferentially over other possible oligomers. The secondary structures of the peptides and two-peptide combinations
were studied with circular dichroism (CD). The individual peptides
displayed varying levels of helicity (see Figure S1a). All 15 two-peptide
mixtures were made and measured. The CD spectra of the three specified
dimers, alongside the spectra of the component peptides, are shown
in  panels
a, b, and c. All three pairs indicate the presence of heterooligomeric
interactions, as the measured spectra of the mixtures show greater
helicity than those predicted from the sum of the individual component
peptide spectra. The data from the other 12 possible combinations
of two hub peptides also demonstrate various levels of heterooligomeric
interactions to be present. These data show that the specified pairs
can be formed. To determine whether the desired pairs are formed preferentially
to other interactions, all six peptides were mixed together. The CD
spectrum of this mixture is shown in d. This has been compared to predicted spectra
for six noninteracting species, and to a sample comprising only the
three designed pairs. As expected, the combined spectrum is highly
similar to that predicted under the assumption that no further interactions
are produced when the designed pairs are mixed. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00037/suppl_file/sb7b00037_si_001.pdf Analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC) measurements of the
designed
coiled-coil pairs () gave molecular weights consistent with dimer formation,
and inconsistent with monomers or oligomers of a higher order than
dimers (see Supporting Information,  for further details). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00037/suppl_file/sb7b00037_si_001.pdf Likewise,
dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements of the designed
coiled-coil pairs each exhibited species with 3–5 nm hydrodynamic
diameters, consistent with the hypothesis of the formation of discrete
coiled-coil oligomers, and inconsistent with the formation of fibers
(). To demonstrate the fidelity
of the interactions and to confirm
the utility of the peptides in organizing the motor hub, pairs of
the peptides were covalently linked using a disulfide bond between
terminal cysteine residues, and the disulfide-bonded peptides, p6–p1,
p3–p2, and p4–p5 were produced and characterized. The CD spectra of the disulfide-bonded peptides reveal little about
the system as all of the collected spectra show high levels of helicity
(see SI Figure S1b). This is expected for a system where the peptides
have been designed to form coiled-coils and have been colocalized
by the disulfide tethering causing conditions of high local concentration
and hence nonspecific coiled-coil formation. AUC results are
more informative about the system’s interactions
(see ). The
single disulfide-bonded peptides have the expected masses. (The higher
than expected value found for p2–p3 nonetheless corresponds
well to a single species fit, and the mass found is far closer to
the mass of a single disulfide-bonded peptide than to a pair.) To
study the specificity of coiled-coil interactions, the disulfide-bonded
peptides were mixed pairwise and allowed to associate. The mixtures
of pairs of disulfide-bonded peptides exhibit single species behavior,
indicative of the desired specificity of interaction. Furthermore,
this species in each case has a mass consistent with the interaction
of two disulfide-bonded peptides. The mixture of all three disulfide-bonded
peptides gives a mass consistent with the expected mass of 20 248
Da, again supportive of our design criteria. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00037/suppl_file/sb7b00037_si_001.pdf DLS data of
the individual disulfide-bonded peptides gave hydrodynamic
diameters of 3–4 nm, while DLS data of pairs of the disulfide-bonded
peptides, and of all three disulfide-bonded peptides mixed, showed
a shift to higher values, around 5 nm (see ). The change in size between the single and pairs of disulfide-bonded
peptides indicates that there is interaction between the disulfide-bonded
peptides. The fact that the size of the three-component mixture is
similar to that of the pairs of disulfide-bonded peptides is supportive
that a structure such as that shown in  is formed, and not a lengthy fiber. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00037/suppl_file/sb7b00037_si_001.pdf To further verify that the interactions occurring in the final
structure are due to the three specified peptide pairs, we carried
out disulfide exchange experiments on the linked peptides. We measured
the system of three disulfide-bonded peptides, and then changed the
system’s redox potential, using reduced glutathione, to allow
the disulfide bonds to rearrange. If there are preferred interactions,
the disulfide bonds formed when rearrangement is possible should reflect
these preferences (see ). We measured the species in each of these samples using
MALDI-ToF mass spectrometry, and the results are shown in . Prior to rearrangement,
the species present in the system are the disulfide-bonded peptides
produced in the laboratory (see a). Once the disulfide bonds are given the opportunity
to rearrange (see b), the species present change. Disulfide-bonded versions
of all three of the designed pairs (p1–p2, p3–p4, p6–p5)
produce the dominant peaks, along with a fourth peak attributed to
the starting peptide 2–3 (that is likely due to a failure to
produce a precise 1:1:1 ratio of the starting species). Regardless
of the presence of this peak, it is clear that the three designed
pairs interact when given the opportunity, while none of the other
possible combinations not present in the initial system form during
rearrangement (Supporting Information  for details of peak assignments). This combined information from CD, DLS, AUC, and
disulfide rearrangement
experiments indicates that the hub construction should indeed be possible
from mixing covalently linked species of peptides p1 and p6, p2 and
p3, and p4 and p5, driven by coiled-coil interactions. As such, this
has been a successful test of the hypothesis that the knowledge within
the peptide design field is now sufficient for the design of self-assembling
hubs for diverse applications, including the colocalization of other
motor components. Future extensions of this work could investigate
whether it is
possible to combine this synthetic biology approach to structure design
with active means of actuating the structure. Using the observed ability
of peptides to switch conformation in different conditions could
provide a feasible means of adapting this system to undergo conformational
changes (and hence changes in movement) in the presence of different
stimuli. This will take us one step closer to realizing designed protein
motion. expected heterodimeric molecular weight/Da CD spectra of the three
mixtures of the designed pairs of peptides:
(a) p1 and p2, (b) p3 and p4, and (c) p5 and p6 (shown in green).
Each panel also shows the individual peptide spectra (red and blue,
in numerical order), and the theoretical signal for a mixture of the
two without interaction (a combination of the two single peptide signals,
shown in purple). (d) CD spectrum of all six hub peptides mixed together
(green), compared with the theoretical spectrum predicted from the
individual spectra (shown in magenta), and from the designed pair
spectra (shown in purple). Each sample had a concentration of 20 μM
per peptide, in PBS buffer (pH 7.4), measured at 20 °C. Dotted
lines represent the wavelength cutoff below which data cannot be reliably
obtained, as dictated by the CD instrument. If the designed dimer peptides preferentially
interact, when allowed
to rearrange, the disulfide bonds should switch to being between the
desired pairs, with the species present in the system moving from
p6–p1, p3–p2, and p4–p5 to p1–p2, p3–p4,
and p5–p6. MALDI spectra of glutathione
experiments. The initial spectrum
has prominent peaks due to the p4–p5 (MW 6682 Da) and p3–p2
(MW 7095 Da) species, and smaller peaks due to deletions and the p6–p1
peptide (MW 6470 Da). After rearrangement, the p4–p5 and p6–p1
species are no longer seen, while the p6–p5 (MW 5814 Da), p1–p2
(MW 7039 Da) and p3–p4 (MW 7395 Da) species have appeared.
All of the trace peaks correlate with impurities in the initial samples
and do not correlate with possible rearrangements. We have demonstrated that a set of six
coiled-coil domains can
be designed to self-assemble preferentially into three coiled-coil
heterodimers. We have shown that by pairing the domains covalently,
a hub structure can be formed. This hub can then be used to assemble
multiple functional units into the desired 3D configuration. We propose
using this technology to produce designed protein motor hubs; however,
the methodology exploited here may have wider applications in the
design and production of self-assembling junctions in other areas
of bionanotechnology including the construction of synthetic cages
or other nanoscale devices. Amino acids
and PyBOP were purchased from AGTC Bioproducts Ltd.
DMF was purchased from Rathburn Chemicals and AGTC Bioproducts Ltd.
Rink amide MBHA resin was purchased from Novabiochem. Other synthesis
materials, including Aldrithiol-2, were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
HPLC grade acetonitrile was purchased from Fisher Scientific. Peptides were synthesized using SPPS using a CEM Liberty 1 peptide
synthesizer under standard conditions. HPLC purification was carried
out using linear water to acetonitrile gradients, with a PerkinElmer
785A detector and Series 200 LC pump, and a C column.
MALDI-ToF experiments were carried out using a Bruker Daltonics Autoflex
II ToF/ToF machine, and α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix. To form each disulfide-bonded peptide, one of the contributing
peptides (dissolved in water) was reacted with a 10-fold excess of
Aldrithiol-2 (in acetonitrile), and the products were separated by
HPLC. The peptide product was then reacted with the other contributing
peptide, and through displacement formed a disulfide-bonded peptide.
The waste products of this reaction were then removed using HPLC. Concentrations were determined using UV–vis absorption spectroscopy,
and the tyrosine absorption centered around 276 nm: ε = 1280 cm mol. With the
exception of UV–vis spectra for the disulfide exchange experiments,
which used a Thermo Scientific Nanodrop 1000, spectra were taken using
a Unicam UV2 spectrometer. CD spectroscopy was carried out using
a JASCO J-1500 spectropolarimeter
with mini-circulation bath and Peltier stage, using a 1 mm quartz
cuvette. Samples were made at a concentration of 20 μM per peptide,
in PBS buffer. AUC sedimentation equilibrium data was collected
at 20 °C
in PBS buffer using a Beckman Optima XL-I analytical ultracentrifuge
with an An-60 Ti rotor. The partial specific volume for each of the
peptides/peptide mixtures, and the solvent density, were calculated
using . DLS measurements were taken
on a Malvern Zetasizer μV using
Sarstedt disposable transparent cuvettes. Samples were made at a concentration
of 100 μM per peptide, in PBS buffer. TFA in water solutions
(pH 2) were found to quench the disulfide
exchange reaction, and hence this was used to both prevent rearrangement
of the initial species prior to MALDI analysis, and to quench the
system after rearrangement was encouraged in a second sample. Each
of the disulfide-bonded peptides, in water solution, was added to
both a solution of TFA in water (4 μL TFA in 15 mL water, pH
2) and to a PBS buffer solution containing reduced glutathione. After
10 min, TFA in water was added to the glutathione-containing solution
to quench the reaction. These two solutions were then studied using
MALDI-ToF mass spectrometry..