The methylotrophic yeast , commonly known as  has become one of the major eukaryotic hosts for recombinant protein production, mainly because of its strong and tightly regulated  promoter , ease of manipulation, growth to high cell-densities in inexpensive media and ability to perform complex post-translational modifications . The genome sequence of the  histidine auxotrophic variant GS115 has been published with a curated annotation for its 5313 protein coding genes . This most commonly used and commercially available strain had been derived by mutagenesis of the  WT strain NRRL-Y11430 (ATCC 76273), which was also deposited in the Netherlands as  CBS7435. More recently, the nuclear and mitochondrial genome sequences of the unmodified WT strain CBS7435 were published . Compared to previous sequences, most gaps were closed in the new genome sequence and some sequence and annotation mistakes were corrected. This new information shed light on the formerly poorly known, but important pathways that are responsible for methanol utilization, secretion, glycosylation, proteolytic processing and protein folding. Therefore, this information has increased the potential of  and enabled its further development towards a customized and highly efficient host for heterologous protein production. Due to the lack of stable plasmid systems for , gene expression cassettes are usually integrated into the genome. Stable integration of entire expression cassettes into the  genome is based on homologous recombination (HR) and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). HR dominant in  is an accurate pathway that repairs double-strand breaks (DSBs) by using the information from homologous sequences , . The far less specific process of NHEJ, more dominant in filamentous fungi and higher eukaryotic organisms, is not necessarily accurate and deletions of a few nucleotides are often introduced at DSB-sites –. Gene replacement events in  have been estimated to occur with a frequency of <0.1% when the total length of targeting fragments is <500 bp  and with a frequency of 10–20%  or up to 30%  when extensive ∼1 kb regions of homology are used. However, in previous projects we have observed that success also depends on the genomic locus. NHEJ seems to have a substantial role in the integration events of expression cassettes with flanking homologous sequences and thus limits the efficient generation of specific changes like targeted knock-outs. In NHEJ, double-strand breaks are recognized by the highly conserved and arguably process defining Ku70p/Ku80p heterodimer, which specifically binds to DNA ends and forms a complex with the DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit –. This protein kinase, in a complex with a co-factor-like protein Xrcc4 and other auxiliary factors is known to stimulate end processing, followed by ligation by DNA ligase IV , . Studies in both yeasts and filamentous fungi revealed that by deleting components of the NHEJ-pathway, the random integration of DNA fragments is strongly reduced , . Therefore, in those NHEJ-pathway defective mutants, DNA integrates mainly via the HR-pathway giving rise to high homologous recombination frequencies.  and  cells that are deficient in the Ku80p counterpart of the Ku70p/Ku80p heterodimer have been reported to display telomeric shortening, be radiosensitive and exhibit V(D)J recombination defects and high levels of chromosomal aberrations –. However, opposite results also exist  suggesting that negative effects of deletions in the NHEJ pathway could be dependent on specific species and culture conditions used. In , mutations in the Ku70p counterpart of the Ku70p/Ku80p heterodimer have been shown to greatly impair NHEJ without perturbing telomeric functions . Publications in this research field existed regarding CHO-cells , fungi like  sp. –, 
,  sp.  and yeasts like 
, 
, and 
, but there was no published information regarding  to date. The objective of this study was to show that elimination of the normal function of Ku70p, a conserved DNA end-binding protein essential for NHEJ, significantly increases the homologous recombination efficiency and thus strongly reduces the problematic random integration of DNA fragments in . In order to evaluate possible advantages of a  mutant strain for the quick identification of target genes to generate new auxotrophic strains and selection systems, we targeted three significant proteins of carbon source utilisation pathways. ,  and  from the methanol and glycerol assimilation pathways () were the first targets for deletion. In addition, the well-known auxotrophy marker genes  and  were targeted to characterize the effects of the  deletion and to generate genetically well-defined auxotrophic strains by precise single gene deletions instead of the commonly applied random mutagenesis of the whole genome. Finally, a new and well defined  expression platform was generated based on the wild-type strain CBS7435 including complementary / shuttle vectors for protein expression. 10.1371/journal.pone.0039720.g001 A simplified scheme of the glycerol assimilation pathway in yeast. Glycerol kinase 1 (Gut1p) knocked out in this study is involved in the first step of glycerol metabolism. Gpp1p and Gpp2p: glycerol-3-phosphatases 1 and 2, Gpd1p and Gpd2p: glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenases 1 and 2, Dak1 and Dak2p: dihydroxyacetone kinases 1 and 2, Gcy1p: putative NADP coupled glycerol dehydrogenase, DHA: dihydroxyacetone, DHAP: dihydroxyacetone phosphate, G3P: Glycerol-3-phosphate, “?”: the enzyme responsible for the conversion of DHAP to DHA is not verified. Under aerobic conditions, mitochondrial Gut2p (glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 2) can convert G3P to DHAP. Figure modified from . All  strains used and constructed during this study are based on the wild-type strain CBS7435 (NRRL-Y11430, ATCC 76273) and described in more detail in . Recombinant DNA manipulations were performed in  strains DH5alpha and TOP10F’ (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, CA) according to standard protocols . All  and  strains were cultured in standard media using chemicals and other components as previously described by . Amino acids were added to 40 µg/ml (histidine) or 50 µg/ml (arginine), Ampicillin to 100 µg/ml () and Zeocin™ (Invitrogen) to 100 µg/ml ( or 25 µg/ml () as required.  competent cells were prepared with the condensed protocol and transformations were performed by electroporation, essentially as described by . Before plating out aliquots on corresponding selective media, the cells (80 µl) were allowed to regenerate for two hours at 28°C with 500 µl 1 M sorbitol and 500 µl YPD. To study the effect of knock-outs in the methanol assimilation, glycerol assimilation, purine biosynthesis and amino acid synthesis pathways, target genes were disrupted with a Zeocin™ resistance cassette surrounded by two homologous ends for HR in the target locus. All  platform strains constructed during this study were generated with specific full or partial knock-out of the target gene using a flipper cassette described below and similar to the construct previously described by . 10.1371/journal.pone.0039720.t001 Strains of  used and constructed during this work. The growth rates reported correspond to the maximal growth rates () reached in minimal media during the exponential growth phase. The standard deviation reported is calculated according to the growth rates of three biological replicates. c. = complemented. BM = buffered minimal media with glucose (D), glycerol (G) or methanol (M). Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures. aox1 arg4, his4, aox1 his4, ku70 Growth rates of the  wild-type strain CBS7435 and knock-out strains , ,  and the corresponding complemented ,  and  mutant strains were defined by measuring optical density (OD) of triplicate cultures during exponential growth phase. An overnight culture was inoculated with a single colony in corresponding media and diluted to a starting OD of ∼0.15. The main cultures were grown in standard conditions using 50 ml of buffered minimal media BMD2% (D-glucose), BMG1% (glycerol) or BMM0.5% (methanol) in 250 ml baffled shake flasks (28°C, 120 rpm with 50mm amplitude). Amino acids were added to 40 µg/ml (histidine) or 50 µg/ml (arginine) as required for non-complemented auxotrophic strains. Sequence Analysis and Optimization HIS4 (phosphoribosyl-ATP pyrophosphohydrolase, phosphoribosyl-AMP cyclohydrolase, and histidinol dehydrogenase Nucleotide sequence data were primarily obtained from the public database NCBI ().  genes  (, FR839631 region 302996-304861),  ( region 634689-636812),  (,  region 630077-632200), the trifunctional , U14126.1),  (, AF321097.1) and  (FR839630, region 1598101-1599963, XM_002492501.1) were identified either by their annotation or by a blastx search of the genome sequence of  CBS7435. Other sequences of the  and  genes in public databases contained mistakes due to the wrong assembly of raw data caused by the high sequence similarity of these genes . Excision cassette constructs and plasmids were designed using VectorNTI (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Primers were designed manually and analyzed with EditSeq (DNASTAR, Madison, WI, USA). ClustalW  was used for the pairwise and multiple alignments of known sequences and the pI/Mw tool from ExPASy Proteomics Server was used for calculating the isoelectric points and molecular weights of proteins. To confirm the expected knock-outs and plasmid compositions, the sequences obtained from Sanger sequencing (LGC Genomics, Berlin, Germany) were assembled using SeqMan (DNASTAR). Synthetic genes were codon compromised according to a combined average codon usage of ,  and  using GeneDesigner (DNA 2.0, Menlo Park, CA, USA) . This strategy avoided very rare codons for any of these three hosts to provide vector elements for a broad host spectrum. Excision Cassettes and Gene Disruption GAAGTTCCTATACTTTCTAGAGAATAGGAACTTC The structure of all excision cassettes used to create the new platform strains is, in principle, as described by , wherein the FLP recombinase system  is utilized to enable excision cassette removal. A marker free knock-out strain is created with one 34 bp FLP recombinase recombination target sequence (, ) left in the locus. All cassette components used were either amplified from wild-type strains ( CBS7435,  BY4741) or synthetic fragments. The  promoter was chosen to drive the regulated expression of the  recombinase terminated by the  terminator. A Zeocin™ resistance cassette was amplified from pPpT2 . The above-mentioned parts were surrounded on both sides by identical 34 bp s placed in direct orientation. The outermost parts of each excision cassette, namely the 5′ and 3′ integration sequences, were locus-specific to guarantee a knock-out only in the target region. All parts were amplified and joined by standard overlap-extension PCR using HPLC-purified primers (Eurogentec, Seraing, Belgium) listed in  and Phusion™ High-Fidelity DNA-polymerase (Finnzymes Oy, Espoo, Finland). For the overlap-extension PCRs, equimolar amounts of each fragment were used. In the case of the  knock-out cassette, the  promoter was placed 5′ of the first  to simultaneously function as a promoter for the FLP recombinase and as a 5′ integration sequence. The length of the integration sequences and the extent of the knock-outs (described in ) were dependent on the sequence information available at the time of cassette design. To ensure the inactivation of the  gene, the start codon ATG was also modified to ATAC. An example of the cassette structure is illustrated in . Gene disruption cassettes to study both homologous recombination in the  and  loci of the  deletion strain and the effect of knock-outs in glycerol and methanol assimilation pathways were constructed by overlap-extension PCR joining the Zeocin™ resistance cassette with 5′ and 3′ locus-specific sequences for targeted homologous recombination (). The lengths of the homologous sequences used are depicted in .  illustrates the method used to achieve gene inactivation in  locus despite the extent of homologous integration. The overlap-extension PCR products were purified using Wizard® SV Gel and PCR Clean-Up System (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and cloned into the pJET vector using CloneJET kit (Fermentas). The correct cassette structure was verified by sequencing followed by cassette amplification, purification and transformation into appropriate  strains. Only a low amount of DNA (∼500 ng/80 µl cells) was used to guarantee the prevalence of single-copy integration. Positive transformants were grown in 96-well deep-well plates  for 2.5 days and pinned onto either minimal methanol ( knock-out) or minimal dextrose ( and  knock-outs) agar plates to distinguish between the strains with normal and slow-growth/no-growth phenotypes. The frequency of correct integration into the  locus was defined by observing the transformation plates and calculating red colonies resulting from the accumulation of biosynthetic intermediate phosphoribosyl aminoimidazole. Due to a significant difference in the growth rates of the  and wild-type strains, the plating out of transformants was performed only after significant dilution, with the aim of observing approximately 10 colonies on each plate. Methanol induction to initiate the production of the FLP recombinase and thus achieve cassette excision was performed by two consecutive rounds of cultivation on minimal methanol plates. After a total of 5 days, single colonies were picked from the methanol plates and streaked out on YPD- Zeocin™ plates to identify the clones that had excised the cassette and were Zeocin™-sensitive. 10.1371/journal.pone.0039720.t002 Homologous integration sequence lengths used in the 5′ and 3′ ends of the excision cassettes were defined by the structure of the target locus and the sequence data available at the time point of cassette design. 10.1371/journal.pone.0039720.t003 Homologous recombination frequency (HRFb) in wt CBS7435 and  deletion strains. Length of homology on each side Auxotrophic/total number of transformants counted Over 95% homologous recombination frequencies could be reached in the  deletion strain with as little as 250 bp of homologous sequence on each side of the integration cassette. In the corresponding wild-type strain, only 16.5% homologous recombination frequency was reached with the longest (1350 bp) homologous sequence tested. 10.1371/journal.pone.0039720.g002 Integration cassette composition and function. a)  disruption cassette based on the  FLP recombinase system. On both sides the flipper cassette with  promoter (), FLP recombinase (), CYC1 terminator () and Zeocin™ resistance cassette are surrounded by recombinase target sequences () and locus specific integration sequences (5′int and 3′int). Cassette components are not drawn to scale. b) After methanol induced () FLP production and subsequent  recognition leading to cassette excision only one  (34 bp) is left in the locus in between the 3′ and 5′ integration sequences. c) The lengths of the homologous sequences at 5′ and 3′ ends of the disruption cassettes used to compare the homologous recombination frequencies in wt and ku70 deletion strains varied from 100 bp to 1350 bp in the  locus. Zeocin™ resistance cassette was placed in between the homologous sequences. Cassette components are not drawn to scale. The sequences of the plasmids in our  expression platform were deposited in the GenBank database at NCBI. The plasmids pPpB1_S (JQ519685), pPpB1GAP (JQ519686), pPpB1GAP_S (JQ519687), pPpB1_Alpha_S (JQ519688), pPpT4 (JQ519689), pPpT4_S (JQ519690), pPpT4_Alpha_S (JQ519691), pPpT4GAP_S (JQ519692), pPpT4GAP_Alpha_S (JQ519693), pPpKan_S (JQ519694) and pPpKan_Alpha_S (JQ519695) were constructed as described previously , , . Primers and the components and origins of components used in the plasmid construction are described in  and . The vector maps are elucidated in . The complementation plasmids pPpARG4 (JQ519696) and pPpHIS4 (JQ519697) were constructed as follows. The codon usages of the coding sequences (cds) of both synthetic marker genes were designed to be the combined average codon usage of ,  and  Codons with an appearance of less than 8% in any of the above organisms were excluded. The expression unit, including the  promoter, multiple cloning site and  terminator, was amplified from pPpT2 . The  cds and pUC origin of replication were amplified from pUC8. The synthetic prokaryotic  promoter was constructed using HPLC purified primers. For pPpARG4, the natural promoter and terminator sequences were amplified from the wt genomic DNA. For the plasmid pPpHIS4,  promoter and  terminator were chosen to be used. Both parts were amplified from  wt genomic DNA. All parts were joined by overlap-extension PCR before the linear cassette was digested by XbaI (Fermentas) and circularized using T4 ligase (Fermentas). A glycerol kinase complementation plasmid pPpGUT1 (JQ519698) was constructed using both pPpT2 for  promoter driven expression and a 3275 bp fragment from the glycerol kinase locus that included the natural promoter, cds and terminator for selection in the  deletion strain. This vector was designed as a replacement vector and therefore contained 5′and 3′homologous regions of the  locus for site specific integration and replacement of the antibiotic marker in the  deletion strain. Methods Used in the Characterization of the Strains and Plasmids Genomic DNA was isolated from each strain using DNAeasy kit (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol for large scale yeast DNA isolation. All targeted loci in the  genome were PCR amplified and sequenced to confirm expected knock-outs using primers described in  and Phusion™ High-Fidelity DNA-polymerase according to manufacturer’s recommendations. Southern blotting and hybridization were carried out according to standard protocols  to verify the correct integration of the excision cassettes. PCR amplification of the probes specific to the Zeocin™ gene and knock-out regions in genes ,  and  was performed using DIG-labeled dNTPs (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and AmpliTaqGOLD® (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) polymerase according to the manufacturers’ instructions. Primer details can be found in . Correct plasmid sequences were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. For testing the functionality, an improved version of green fluorescent protein  was cloned into the multiple cloning site of each plasmid. Correct insertion was verified by sequencing. Each plasmid was amplified in , linearized with BglII or SmiI (Fermentas) and transformed into the corresponding  strains. Single colonies were transferred to 96-well deep-well plates for standard cultivation as described previously . To compare the expression levels, GFP fluorescence was measured as described by . In addition to the expected locus, gene disruption cassettes might also integrate at other loci of the genome. Genome walking was used to define the integration sites in strains where targeting of the cassettes seemed to be random. Therefore 2 µg of genomic DNA of each strain was singly digested with BamHI (a), EcoRI (b) and HindIII (c) in order to get fragments of 1 – 5 kb size. The digestion was stopped by heat inactivation, the fragmented DNA precipitated with ethanol and the pellet dissolved in 30 µl of distilled water. 5′-GTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGCACGCGTGGTCGACGGCCCGGGCTGGT-3′ An adaptor fragment was created by annealing adaptor strand 1 () either to adaptor strand 2.a () for BamHI digested DNA, 2.b () for EcoRI digested DNA or 2.c () for HindIII digested DNA. In the annealing reaction, adaptor strand 1 (100 µM, 13,7 µl) was mixed in a 1∶1 molar ratio with adaptor strand 2.a, 2.b or 2.c (100 µM, 4 µl) and denatured in 95°C for 5 min. The mixture was allowed to slowly cool down to room temperature. The three differently annealed adaptors 1+2a (BamHI), 1+2b (EcoRI) and 1+2c (HindIII) were ligated for 3 h at room temperature with T4 DNA ligase to the digested DNA fragments, considering the specific 5′ overhangs that had been created by the restriction enzymes used. The ligation reaction was stopped by incubation for 5 min at 70°C and diluted with 70 µl TE buffer. Two gene-specific primers and two adaptor primers were designed (). The gene-specific primers were designed to bind approximately 100 bp away from the end of the known sequence, considering that no restriction site of the restriction enzymes used for gDNA digestion lay between the primer-binding site and the end of the known sequence. Adaptor primer 1 and gene specific primer 1 were used as a primer pair for a first PCR with 1 µl of the gDNA-adaptor ligation product as template DNA. 1 µl of the first PCR mix was used as the template for a second PCR with adaptor primer 2 and gene specific primer 2. This second primer pair was designed to bind within the first PCR product. Both PCR steps were performed with an annealing temperature of 58°C and an elongation time of 50 seconds. A gene-specific DNA fragment as a product from the second PCR was isolated from a preparative agarose gel, purified and sent to Sanger sequencing (LGC Genomics GmbH, Berlin, Germany) using adaptor primer 2 and the corresponding gene specific primer 2. To test the stability of multiple expression cassettes in the wild-type and  deletion strains during repetitive phases of growth on glucose and methanol, the wt strain CBS7435 and deletion strains CBS7435 mut and CBS7435  were transformed with 3 µg of SmiI- linearized plasmid pPpT4_S_GFP. The resulting colonies were screened for GFP activity as described by  and the best expressing clones were preserved in glycerol stocks. Duplicates of each strain were inoculated to a starting OD of 0.55 in 50 ml BMD1% in 250 ml baffled shaking flasks. The strains were cultivated for 48 h to reach a comparable cell density (28°C, 120 rpm with 25 mm amplitude), followed by a methanol induction phase for 72 h . The growth and induction cycles were repeated for four times, always using the induced culture as a starting material for the next round. DNA was extracted from the starting strains and the strains after four rounds of methanol induction as described previously . Copy numbers were detected with qRT-PCR as described by . Each qRT-PCR was performed at least twice by independent researchers. Strains displaying a standard deviation of over one copy number between independent duplicates were omitted from the analysis. To measure the sensitivity of the  deletion strain to UV light, a spread titer test was performed as follows. Overnight cultures of four biological replicates of each wt and  deletion strain cells grown in YPD were harvested and washed. The OD was adjusted to 1 prior to plating out 50 µl and 100 µl aliquots of 10 and 10 dilutions respectively on YPD agar. The plates were exposed to 0, 50 and 100 J/m UV rays (Bio-Link 254 UV crosslinker, Vilber Lourmat, Marne-la-Vallée Cedex, France), and incubated in the dark for 60 h before calculating the amount of colony forming units on exposed and unexposed plates. Identification of the Target Genes , , ,  and  in the Wild-type  CBS7435 Genome Non-homologous end-joining is one of the main pathways repairing broken genomic DNA in eukaryotes. One of the aims of our study was to investigate if the NHEJ pathway plays an important role in the site targeted specific integration in the genome of  (NRRL-Y 11430, ATCC 76273) and if the NHEJ mechanism can be impaired by knock-out mutagenesis. Homologues to the nucleotide sequences of the  genes  (NM_001182791.1) and  (NM_001182606.1), corresponding to  and  respectively, were identified in the  wild-type genome by blastx. The  homologue (FR839630, region 1598101-1599963) in chromosome 3 shared 28% sequence identity to  and the  homologue (FR839631.1 Region 361953-362288, 362551-364041) in chromosome 4 showed 19% sequence identity to  (both defined by pairwise alignment using ClustalW). Both genes had been annotated as subunits of the telomeric Ku complex (yeast Ku70p/Ku80p) by the automated annotation of the assembled genome. Remarkably, the sizes of the Ku70 and Ku80 proteins, compared to the corresponding proteins of  and , would better cohere with contrary annotation. The  and  cDNAs encode proteins of 620 and 608 amino acids with predicted molecular masses of 71.3 and 69.5kD. The protein sizes are similar to those of  (602aa and 629aa, 70.6 and 71.2kDa),  (P12956 609aa and P13010 732aa, 69.8 and 82.7kDa) and  (Q9FQ08 621aa and Q9FQ09 680aa, 70.3 and 76.7kDa). However, the knock-out of either subunit has been reported to result in reciprocal down-regulation of the other subunit , thus making a confirmation of correct annotation by function troublesome. The sequence identities to already known Ku proteins are generally low. The  Ku70 and Ku80 proteins share only 28% & 19%, 18% & 16%, and 15% & 16% sequence identity with the proteins of ,  and  respectively. For a first feasibility test to generate well defined auxotrophic strains based on the  wt strain CBS7435, the nucleotide sequences of the three genes g 1 (, FR839631 region 302996-304861, 621aa),  ( region 634689-636812, 707aa) and  (,  region 630077-632200, 707aa) from the glycerol and methanol assimilation pathways were elucidated. Construction and Molecular Characterization of a 
 Deletion Strain The  flipper knock-out cassette was constructed with 1299bp 5′ and 1170bp 3′ flanking sequences from the  locus. Both integration sequences were placed partially on top of the coding sequence, so that the deletion caused by the knock-out cassette integration would be only 215bp. This short deletion leading to inactivation of the Ku70 protein is optimal for complementation of the locus if needed. The 6747 bp assembled linear PCR product was successfully used to transform the  wild-type strain CBS7435. Control PCRs were performed to confirm correct cassette integration, excision and expected knock-out in the cds of . In the first PCR reaction, both primers () were located outside the target region. This reaction functioned as a positive control, PCR amplifying ∼2.7 kb, ∼2.5 kb and ∼6.7 kb fragments from the wt, the  deletion strain after flipper excision and the  deletion strain before flipper excision. The second primer pair served as a negative control PCR, since one of the primers bound in the region knocked out in  deletion strains. A ∼1.3 kb product was expected from the wt strain and any other strain having the excision cassette integrated somewhere other than in the  locus of the genome. One strain giving expected PCR product sizes from all control PCRs was chosen for further tests. High quality genomic DNA was isolated from the wt starting strain, the original transformant strain before flipper excision and the final  deletion strain after flipper excision. The purified genomic DNA was subjected to southern blot analysis after two separate digestions with restriction enzymes BamHI and BglII. When using a probe specific to the knock-out region in the  locus, hybridizing fragments of expected sizes (∼4.4 kb for BamHI and ∼4.1 kb for BglII) were observed in the wild-type strain. Fragments were missing in both  deletion strains (before and after cassette excision) verifying correct cassette integration and successful knock-out. To rule out knock-outs elsewhere in the genome, single-copy integration of the excision cassette in the expected locus was tested by hybridizing a probe specific to the Zeocin™ resistance cassette to both BamHI and BglII digested genomic DNA of the before mentioned strains. Fragments of the expected size (8.4 kb BamHI, 4.8 kb BglII) could be observed in the strain still carrying the resistance cassette before induction, suggesting single-copy integration in the expected locus. No bands were observed either from the wt strain or  knock-out strains (). Furthermore a 1.4 kb fragment of the deletion site was amplified from the genomic DNA of the  knock-out strain and sequenced. This sequence () verified a correct gene deletion and the expected FRT sequence left in the locus. The behaviour of the  deletion strain in heterologous protein production was tested with SmiI linearized pPpT4_GFP plasmid in comparison to the corresponding wt strain. The fluorescence intensity landscapes resulting from the screening of two 96-well plates per strain were noted to be more uniform for the  deletion strain (data not shown). No increased amount of inactive clones could be detected. Increased Targeting Efficiency Employing the  Deletion Strain To compare the gene targeting efficiency of the  knock-out and wt strains, the loci of two biosynthetic genes  and  were chosen due to the reliable and simple detection of corresponding auxotrophies.  colonies lacking  develop red color when grown without adenine supplementation and  knock-out colonies can be detected by replica plating on minimal media without histidine supplementation. The excision cassettes to disrupt  and  genes were successfully constructed by overlap-extension PCR as described previously. The cassettes were planned to disrupt the target gene despite the fact that the excision cassette might recombine using either 5′ or 3′ integration sequence only. Increasing the length of homologous sequences has been reported to have a positive effect on the homologous recombination frequency in 
. 1 kbp has been suggested to be the minimum length of 5′ and 3′ homologous regions required for 100% and >85% site-specific recombination and replacement of target genes in  deletion mutants of  and  respectively , . Also, in , longer homologous sequences are important for efficient integration into the genome . Therefore, we chose homologous flanking sequence lengths varying from 1350 bp down to only 100 bp to examine the recombination frequency in the  locus of . The same study was done for the  locus. However, since the homologous recombination frequencies for the  deletion strain with flanking sequence lengths of 1350 bp down to 650 bp were still about 100% in the  locus, a set of shorter flanking sequences varying from 650 bp to 50 bp was chosen to point out strain specific differences for the  locus. The homologous recombination frequencies in the wt and  knock-out strains are depicted in . In contrast to the wt strain, almost all antibiotic resistant transformants of the  deletion strain showed the expected phenotype – even when short homologous sequences of 150–250 bases were used for integration. This observation indicated correct site-specific integration for the majority of the  knock-out strain transformants whereas most of the constructs integrated at different sites in the case of the wt strain. Homologous recombination efficiency in the  deletion strain dropped to the level of the wt with integration sequence lengths as short as 50–100 bp. The potential artefacts caused by variations between transformations and radically different growth rates of wt and  strains were minimized by repeating every transformation for four times and plating small aliquots of diluted cells. However, the possibility of wt colonies overgrowing  colonies and thus affecting the calculation of homologous recombination frequencies cannot be ruled out, especially for the wt host strain with almost no homologous recombination in the  locus. A majority of the cassettes targeted to either  or  loci of the wild-type strain did not result in auxotrophy. Therefore, the integration loci of altogether 18 wt and mut strains were analysed by genome walking in order to verify the assumption that integration happens randomly in these strains. Although very low amounts of DNA were used for transformation, and thus most of the colonies were expected to be single-copy transformants, multi-copy integration could not be ruled out. Therefore only 14 strains delivering a strong main product in the nested PCR of genome walking and high sequence quality were included in the final analysis depicted in . In addition, the integration loci of four strains were verified by digestion with two different restriction enzymes. Cassette integration was detected in every chromosome and, for most of the strains, seemed to be random. No micro-homologies (∼10 bp) at the exact site of integration were detected by sequencing the 5′ end of the disruption cassette. Interestingly, the integration loci of the strains #4 and #11 in chromosome 4 were separated by only ∼3.5 kbp. In addition, the integration locus of strains #2 and #8 in chromosome 4 was identical. No explanation of these facts could be detected by sequence analysis. However, the identical integration locus of strains #2 and #8 could also be explained by a possible clone identity due to duplication of the transformant during the regeneration phase after electroporation. After transformation, the cells were regenerated in sorbitol/YPD for approximately 2 hours, which theoretically allows one cell division. In NHEJ, the possibility of inaccuracy and introduction of small deletions at the DSB-sites has been reported –. Also, in two of the 14 strains analyzed in this study, a single nucleotide deletion in the 5′ end of the disruption cassette was detected. However, considering the fact that only 5′ sequences were determined by genome walking and the relatively low number of analyzed random integrants, no reliable determination of the total frequency of deletions at the DSB sites can be made. 10.1371/journal.pone.0039720.t004 Cell morphogenesis protein Pag1 Non-coding: 64 bp at 5′ side: Protein Tos1, 292 bp at 3′ side: Uncharacterized protein YPL066W Non-coding: 64 bp at 5′ side: Protein Tos1, 292 bp at 3′ side: Uncharacterized protein YPL066W Non-coding: upstream of hypothetical protein Non-coding: 98 bp at 5′ side: Protein Lst4, 310 bp at 3′ side: protein midasin Cell morphogenesis protein Pag1 Non-coding: 66 bp at 5′ side: Zinc finger protein 167, 288 bp at 3′ side: 1,3-beta-glucanosyltransferase Non-coding: 66 bp at 5′ side: Zinc finger protein 167, 288 bp at 3′ side: 1,3-beta-glucanosyltransferase Ammonium transporter protein Mep2 Non-coding: 188 bp at 5′ side: Protein Letm1 and EF-hand domain-containing protein anon-60Da, 143 bp at 3′ side: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase Non-coding: 420 bp at 3′ side: mannose-6-phosphate isomerase Likely SIR2 family histone deacetylase Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 subunit alpha Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 subunit alpha Integration sites of the gene disruption cassettes in  wt strains which remained autotroph after selection marker integration. Application of the  Deletion Strain as a Tool to Screen Targets for the Generation of Auxotrophic Strains Low rates of site-specific integration in the expected gene locus make it difficult to study the effect of site-specific integration or knock-out variants in the wt strains. Many transformants have to be analyzed on a molecular level (e.g. by colony PCR, sequencing, southern blot) since many of the selective markers integrate at other sites. For hard to access loci most of the transformants show integration of the selection marker at different sites (as for  and  described above), which can lead to the misinterpretation that the targeted gene might be essential. The use of the  deletion strain offers a possibility to reduce the number of positive transformants showing integration of the selection marker without disrupting the target gene and therefore facilitates and speeds up knock-out strain identification. After quick identification of a suitable locus, this can still be repeated with the wt strain or alternatively the  deletion can be complemented again. Since all clones where the  and  loci were targeted displayed the expected auxotrophic phenotype, we took advantage of the high rate of site-specific integration in the  strain for a quick and simple evaluation of the feasibility for a few selected genes to serve as targets to generate new auxotrophic strains. For the search of possible new  auxotrophy strains, knock-out cassettes to disrupt ,  and  were constructed and used for successful transformation of the  knock-out strain. Since the knock-out cassettes contain long (500–1000 bp) homologous integration sequences, all eight clones tested had the cassette integrated in the right locus, resulting in the expected gene disruptions. Specific inactivation (partial replacement) of the  gene resulted in a  strain that was observed to have abolished growth on glycerol as the sole carbon source. Initial experiments proved the possibility of complementing the auxotrophy with plasmid pPpGUT1 () and of selecting corresponding transformants on minimal glycerol medium. Even though a disruption of the genes  and  lead to phenotypes with reduced growth on methanol (), the ability to grow on minimal media agar plates with methanol as the sole carbon source was not totally abolished, leading to too high background growth for use as a selection marker. We speculate that another enzyme, like transketolase , with similarity to the known dihydroxyacetone synthases could, to some extent, take over their role in the peroxisomes. Comparative Genetic Stability of Transformants According to , the genetic stability of  strains carrying multiple (≥12) copies of an expression cassette is dependent on conditions which induce target gene expression. However, low-copy transformants (1–6 copies) were shown to exhibit high stability regardless of whether induced or not. To rule out that changes in the normal repair mechanisms of the  deletion strain could cause significantly increased genetic instability of expression strains, a set of  transformants carrying four to seven copies of P-GFP (plasmid pPpT4_S) were employed to investigate the genetic stability of the  deletion strains during methanol induction. No changes in the copy numbers could be detected even after four 72 h rounds of methanol induction, corresponding to a total cultivation time of 480 h and a total induction time of 288 h (over 100 generations) in non-selective media (the results are described in ). Susceptibility of the  Deletion Strain to DNA Damage Induced by UV Light The Ku70p/Ku80p heterodimer has been suggested to be involved in DNA-repair processes . To measure the sensitivity of the  deletion strain to UV light, a spread titer test was performed with four biological replicates and 0, 50 and 100 J/m exposure. The survival rates determined by calculating the amount of colony forming units after 60 h incubation were 58% (±6,9%) for the wt strain and 48% (±6,8%) for the  deletion strain with 50 J/m exposure. The corresponding values for wt and  deletion strains when using an exposure of 100 J/m were 37% (±5,6%) and 27% (±5,6%), respectively, confirming the expected reduced survival rate. New  mut,  Deletion and  Deletion Platform Strains and Complementary / Shuttle Vectors In order to complete the new well characterized toolbox for protein expression based on the  wt strain, a set of new platform strains was generated based on precise knock-outs in the wt strain CBS7435, thereby reducing the risk of undesired additional mutations in the genome that are commonly observed during traditional random mutagenesis approaches. Since negative effects of the  deletion on strain stability and heterologous protein production cannot be excluded yet, the platform strains were made on the basis of the non-mutagenized wt strain rather than on the  deletion variant. All excision cassettes (flipper-cassettes) were constructed with overlap-extension PCR having 5′ and 3′ flanking regions from  (940 bp and 1143 bp, complete cds knock-out),  (963 bp and 1502 bp, partial cds knock-out) and  (844 and 882 bp, partial cds knock-out) loci for targeted integration. Wild-type  was successfully transformed with the respective 5302 bp, 6761 bp and 5985 bp amplification products. Primary selection with Zeocin™ ensured the integration of at least one copy of the cassette in the genome. Transformants were cultivated in 250 µl YPD until reaching stationary phase, followed by stamping on both YPD and MM or MD plates. Normal growth on YPD combined with slow growth on MM ( knock-out strain) or no growth on MD (,  knock-out strains) indicated cassette integration in the target locus. In the  and  loci, approximately 2%, 3% and 1% of the excision cassettes were integrated in the target locus resulting in mut,  auxotrophic and  auxotrophic phenotypes, respectively. Variation in the integration rates might, for example, be caused by differences in the lengths of the homologous sequences used for integration, excision cassette sizes and secondary structures present in the target loci. Since very low amounts of DNA were used in the transformations, most of the positive transformants were expected to have only a single copy of the selection cassette integrated in the genome. Flipper cassettes should stay integrated in the genome as long as the tightly controllable promoter chosen for  is not activated, and thus no FLP recombinase is produced. In the case of the  promoter, activation is attained by adding methanol to culture media that contain no repressing carbon source such as glucose or glycerol . Theoretically the number of flipper-cassettes in every transformant can vary and every cell has an individual chance of cassette excision. Therefore, we produced clean single-colony streak-outs from each positive transformant colony and initially induced the promoter only for a short time until the first strains had excised the cassette. This approach should increase the chance to obtain Zeocin™ sensitive cells where only one selection marker was integrated and excised. Original Zeocin™ resistant colonies were streaked out on minimal methanol plates. After two days, no Zeocin™ sensitive colonies were found, indicating that insufficient amounts of FLP had been produced to locate the flipper cassette and perform cassette excision. Therefore, the population was further streaked out on fresh minimal methanol plates and incubated for 3 days. In the case of the  promoter in the  excision cassette, a five-day induction with methanol on MM plates resulted in the excision of the cassette in ∼7% (16/228) of the single colonies tested, thus rendering the cells Zeocin™ sensitive. To verify correct cassette integration and excision, high quality genomic DNA was extracted from the wild-type strain and from all knock-out strains before and after cassette excision. Target loci were sequenced using primers located both outside and inside the integration sequences (). The lengths and sequences of the PCR products with all primer combinations were as expected. The sequences of the targeted sites () confirmed the expected total ( locus) or partial ( and  loci) deletions. Only one  sequence was left in the genome locus. DNA samples from the  deletion strain and the auxotrophic strains before and after knock-out cassette excision were subjected to southern blot analysis to verify the expected knock-out and to define the location and number of excision cassettes integrated in the genome. The results and expected fragment sizes are summarized in . Wild-type strain CBS7435 was used as a control. ,  and  deletion strains were digested with at least two separate restriction enzymes each: NdeI and SspI for the  locus, and DraI and BglII for the  locus. Every probe targeted specifically to either  or  wild-type locus showed a band of expected size with the wt control strain CBS7435. As expected, the corresponding fragments were not present in the before and after induction strains with the wild-type locus excised. When using a probe targeted to the Zeocin™ resistance cassette, one band of expected size was observed in all before induction strains still including the excision cassette in the target locus. As expected, no bands could be observed with either wild-type starting strain or any of the after induction strains with the excision cassette flipped out of the genome. These results suggest a successful, targeted, single-copy integration of the cassettes in the expected locus in all loci tested. Both PCR analysis and sequencing of the modified loci and the results from the southern blots verify the expected excision of the flipper- cassette, leaving only one 34 bp  in the genome. Also, a series of new / shuttle vectors were constructed during this study. GFP was used as a model protein to test the functionality of all vectors. An overview of the vector features and properties are summarized in . All pPpB1-based vectors (including the  promoter and terminator to regulate the expression of the Zeocin™ marker gene) were noted to display distinct background growth upon primary selection of positive transformants. Therefore, only the largest colonies from each plate should be chosen for further screening. However these vectors favour multi copy gene integration and copy numbers of up to 60 gene copies per cell have been reached with this group of vectors (personal communication with Andrea Mellitzer). Contrary to the pPpB1 vectors, transformations with pPpT4–based vectors with ILV5 promoter and AOD terminator to regulate the expression of the Zeocin™ marker gene were noted to lead to no or very little background growth and usually low copy numbers (up to 7 copies/cell). Single copy integration was preferred if a low amount of DNA was used for the transformation. 10.1371/journal.pone.0039720.t005 New shuttle vectors constructed during this study. Promoter to regulate the expression of the gene of interest. Localization of the recombinant protein. Vectors aimed for intracellular production can be used for the secretory production by adding a signal sequence. Comparison of Growth Rates of  CBS7435 Derived Platform Strains The growth rates of all strains used and created during this study are depicted in . For all shake flask cultivations, buffered minimal media were used to achieve reproducible results. The growth rates of the  deletion strain in baffled shake flasks was observed to be only 11% (±0,00%), 10% (±0,01%) and 30% (±0,01%) lower than that of the wild-type starting strain CBS7435 in the respective dextrose, glycerol or methanol minimal media. The ,  and  deletion strains constructed during this work showed expected growth rates. Since the commonly used  promoter was chosen to activate the transcription of the  gene in the complementation plasmid pPpHIS4, species specific activation and de-repression of yeast promoters  could cause the observed lower growth rate of the complemented  deletion strain on glycerol. To enable quick and efficient mutant construction for target gene knock-out and characterization in , a new strain with reduced non-homologous recombination and thus precise and exclusive integration at the targeted sites is required. In filamentous fungi and higher eukaryotic organisms, the integration of foreign DNA has been reported to occur preferentially via the NHEJ pathway joining DNA ends with little or no homology , while in  HR has been reported to be dominant and non-homologous recombination only observed if HR was blocked or homologous chromosome unavailable to serve as a template . The repair process is initiated by a Ku70p/Ku80p heterodimer . This study describes the elucidation of  and  genes and for the first time shows experimental data of the involvement of the  homologue in NHEJ. To date, most of the modified  strains have been constructed using unspecific mutagenesis methods or excessively long integration sequences. Gene replacement events have previously been described to occur with a frequency of <0.1% when a total of <500 bp homology, short enough for high throughput screening, is used . We have constructed and characterized a  deletion strain with a specific 215 bp knock-out in the  locus. Through analyzing the homologous recombination frequencies in this strain using two well-known auxotrophic loci and homologous sequence lengths varying from 50 bp to 1350 bp, we have shown that when using the  deletion strain, 100% homologous recombination frequencies can be achieved with as little as 650 bp homologous flanking regions on each side of the integration cassette. For the tested sites, a reasonable number of specific disruptants (>85%) was achieved using a minimum flanking sequence length of 250 bp to 650 bp. This is short enough even to be made synthetically using 1 to 3 oligonucleotides for high throughput screening of genomic loci in  mutant strains. Only low numbers (0–17%, correlating with the size of the integration sequences) of disruptants can be achieved in the wt strain with any flanking sequence length tested. In the well accessible  locus of the  knock-out strain, over one third of the cassettes showed correct integration with a homologous sequence length as short as 100 bp. Furthermore, the differences between the  and the  loci confirmed the frequently discussed observations that the efficiency of site-specific integration and absolute knock-out efficiency are locus dependent. This has often caused significant troubles in achieving specific knock-out strains of  previously (unpublished results). The  locus seems to play an essential role in the NHEJ mechanism of . Knocking out  reduced the fraction of randomly integrated DNA fragments dramatically. To demonstrate the use of the  mutant strain in the search of new auxotrophies, we successfully disrupted the  gene from the glycerol assimilation pathway creating a new  deletion strain and complemented the locus with the / shuttle vector pPpGUT1. In addition to the use as an auxotrophic strain, a  deletion strain with complemented  locus might also be useful as a whole cell biocatalysis platform for biotransformations using glycerol as a substrate due to its inability to efficiently utilize glycerol as a carbon source for biomass production. For most of the transformants where the selection marker was integrated and no auxotrophy was observed, the  or  disruption cassettes were expected to be randomly integrated in the genome. By sequencing the integration loci of such “false” and undesired transformants we detected no notable homology of the integration site to the 5′ end of the integrated disruption cassette. Cassettes were found in both coding and non-coding regions distributed among all four chromosomes. Only two strains showed integration of the cassette in the same region, thus provoking discussion about an integration “hotspot” with chromatin structure more permissive for integration. However, future studies with large sets of strains are required to confirm these suggestions. In accordance to previous studies – in yeasts, in two of the 14 strains there was also a single nucleotide deletion at the DSB site. In addition to the role of Ku70p/Ku80p heterodimer in DNA end joining, it has also been shown to play an important role in the regulation of normal DNA end structure in telomeres , . Ku deficient  strains have been reported to have growth defects markedly specific to the culture conditions. Especially cultivation at elevated temperatures has been reported to lead to growth arrest , . Ku-deficient  and  cells have been reported to have V(D)J recombination defects, display telomeric shortening and high levels of chromosomal aberrations , –. However, our results are more consistent with previous studies in 
 and 
, where no severe defects in the development and growth could be detected in normal growth conditions. The  mutant strain was observed to grow only 11% (±0,00%) slower than the corresponding wt strain in minimal dextrose media liquid cultures at 28°C, indicating at least that differences exist for  too. As suggested previously , it is possible that the normal telomerase activity suffices and the activity of the Ku complex in establishing a correct terminal DNA structure is not required when the cells are not dividing too rapidly. However, the effects of the KU70 knock-out on protein expression in large-scale cultivations with higher stress levels have not been evaluated so far. Thus, at this stage direct industrial applications without restoring the normal activity of the Ku70p/Ku80p complex by complementing the locus are not recommended. The slower growth rate could also be caused by DNA damage-induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis . When exposed to UV rays, the  mutant strain was observed to be more sensitive than the corresponding wt strain. This fact suggests that the  Ku70 protein could be involved in the DNA-repair processes. However, despite the possible role of the Ku70 protein in DNA-repair, our results suggest that at least in case of overexpression of non-toxic heterologous proteins such as GFP, deleting the normal function of the  Ku70 protein neither leads to severe genetic instability nor to an increased loss of expression cassettes within reasonable cultivation times corresponding to 200–300 generations, suggesting that the strain is a suitable host for simple lab-scale experiments. Therefore, the  mutant strain offers a noteworthy choice, for example, for primary functional studies and screening for selectable markers. Due to the decelerated growth and possible DNA-repair defects exposing the strain to increased genomic instability, complementing the KU70 locus or verification of promising results in the wild-type strain background is recommended. This is of particular importance if the strain generated is destined for industrial scale production of heterologous proteins. In conclusion, in this study we have shown that the  deletion strain enables the quick construction of precise site directed genomic integrations and thus contributes, for example, to gene function analyses and the identification of target genes to generate new selection systems. In addition, effects of the overexpression of individual genes can be separated from undesired effects caused by random integration in other important loci of the genome. Although no lethality, severe growth retardation or loss of expression cassettes during four rounds of methanol induction was detected, the  deletion strain was observed to express decelerated growth and have possible defects in DNA-repair processes. Inactivation of  could also cause unknown metabolic changes. Therefore, when analyzing the specific functions of genes, the normal activity of  can also be restored after successful gene targeting. The simplicity of locus complementation is aided by the extremely high homologous integration frequency and the minimal deletion in the  locus. The observed simplicity of targeted integration in the  deletion strain together with the wealth of information provided by the  full genome sequence opens a new era for the creation and testing of designer strains, for applications in synthetic biology and for supplementing the very limited amount of selectable markers available for . Especially regarding gene disruption studies, the efforts to find more biosynthetic markers for the production of pharmaceuticals and the co-expression of multiple proteins or multi-subunit proteins are slow and cumbersome due to the problems caused by NHEJ. Basic expression systems for recombinant protein production in  have been commercially available in the recent past, but diversity of the available tools has still been low. With the help of the new  deletion strain of this study we identified a 
 deletion strain, which shows no growth on glycerol. This deletion can be simply complemented again, offering antibiotic free selection based on specific carbon sources in the growth media. The  deletion strain provides quick access to new selection markers and highly specific targeted gene disruptions and insertions for foreign pathway construction. In order to provide a new second generation  platform without unknown undesired mutations in the genome, we also constructed a series of precise new deletion strains based on the fully sequenced  wt strain CBS7435, obtained from the Dutch strain collection (also deposited as ATCC 76273) and developed a complementary new versatile platform of / shuttle vectors enabling the production of a wide variety of proteins with different requirements concerning promoter efficiency, choice of markers, secretion and, due to the special properties of the  deletion strain, also precise site specific gene integration and knock-out. Furthermore, the  deletion strain facilitates the functional characterization of the genome and the metabolic routes of this important protein production host, and it will accelerate further developments of this host platform and corresponding metabolic models. shuttle vectors constructed during this study. The origins and functions of plasmid components are depicted in . Click here for additional data file. Southern blots confirming the expected knock-out in the a) BamHI (columns 2–5) and BglII (columns 6–9) digested DNA of the wt CBS7435 strain (columns 2 and 6), the  strain before induction (columns 3 and 7) and two strains after induction (columns 4–5 and 8–9) were detected with a probe specific to the knock-out region in the  locus. A band of the expected size can be observed in the wt strain only (4368 bp for BamHI and 4127 bp for BglII). b) BamHI (columns 12–15) and BglII (columns 19–22) digested DNA of the wt (columns 12 and 19),  after induction (13–14 and 20–21) and  before induction (columns 15 and 22) strains detected with Zeocin-specific probe. A band of the expected size can be observed in the before induction strain only (8412 bp for BamHI and 4837 bp for BglII). Lanes 16 and 23 are empty. Five µl of DIG-labelled ladder #II (Roche) was loaded to lanes 1, 17 and 24, and five µl of DIG-labelled ladder #VII to lanes 10, 11, 18 and 25. Click here for additional data file. The sequences of the targeted sites confirmed the expected total () or partial (, ) deletions. Only one  sequence (underlined) was left in the genome locus. Click here for additional data file. AOX1flipper: primers used in the construction and analysis of the  strain; probe: primers used for the amplification of the southern blot probes; Ku locus: primers used for the construction and analysis of the  deletion strain; ARG4flipper: primers used for the construction and analysis of the  strain; HIS4 flipper: primers used for the construction and analysis of the  strain; Targeting: primers used for the construction and analysis of the disruption cassettes to evaluate targeting efficiencies; pPp: primers used for the construction and analysis of the complementation plasmids; GUT1disrupt: primers used for the construction and analysis of the  strain; seq: sequencing primer. Click here for additional data file. The origins and functions of the Click here for additional data file. Estimation of the copy number of the GFP expression cassette. Copy numbers were calculated according to absolute (Abs. Q) and relative (Rel. Q) quantification. Q.1 = quantification before methanol induction, Q.2 = quantification after four rounds of cultivation and induction. No significant changes could be detected in the copy numbers of the wt, mut and Δ strains. GFP production is shown as relative fluorescence units (RFU) normalized by OD. Click here for additional data file. Southern blot analysis of the knock-out loci Southern blot analysis was performed to verify the expected knock-outs and to define the location and number of the excision cassettes integrated in the targeted genomes. Fragment  =  size of the hybridizing fragment in the analysis. Probes targeted to the coding sequence (cds) and Zeocin™ resistance cassette (zeo) were used to detect the wild-type (wt) locus, the location and number of Zeocin™ resistance cassettes in the before induction strain still carrying the excision cassette in the targeted locus (flipper in) and the expected knock-out and removal of the Zeocin™ resistance cassette in the final strain after FLP recombinase induction (knock-out). Click here for additional data file..