The development of cyanobacteria
as host organisms for biotechnological applications has attracted
increasing interest in recent years. Several production systems for
compounds with low structural complexity, such as alcohols, sugars
and fatty acids, have been established in cyanobacterial model strains
(for a review, see Savakis and Hellingwerf, 2015). The advantage offered by these photosynthetic microorganisms
is a truly sustainable production of target compounds, using water
and carbon dioxide as substrates and sunlight as the energy source,
thus eliminating the need to supply feedstock for growth. Interest
in production of valuable compounds in cyanobacteria has also emerged
from the space science community, where engineered phototrophic microorganisms
are being explored for converting waste materials and carbon dioxide
into chemicals needed on prolonged space missions. Terpenoids are a structurally diverse group of molecules
with a
wide range of biological functions in all organisms. Many terpenoids,
and in particular plant diterpenoids, have pharmacological activity
and are used in medical applications, but they are also used in cosmetics,
as food additives or fragrances. Yet often,
they are found in only small amounts in specialized tissues in the
plant and they may be difficult to harvest, extract and purify from
the plant material. Furthermore, the plants accumulating high value
diterpenoids may be difficult to grow efficiently. Chemical synthesis
is possible; however, for most diterpenoids, this route does not provide
a commercially viable source of these complex compounds. For these reasons, microbial production systems may offer an attractive
alternative. Biosynthesis of terpenoids takes place in the cytosol
in plants
through the mevalonate (MEV) pathway, while the substrate for terpenoid
formation in plastids is supplied by the methyl-erythritol phosphate
(MEP) pathway. The products of these two
pathways, the two five-carbon building blocks isopentenyl diphosphate
(IPP) and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) are combined to form C10,
C15 and C20 precursors for terpenoid molecules, which are then further
modified and decorated to create the wide structural diversity of
terpenoids (). The enzymes catalyzing formation of the often multicyclic diterpene
scaffold/backbones belong to the families of diterpene synthases (diTPSs),
while cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYPs) introduce site- and stereospecific
oxidative functionalization. In cyanobacteria, the MEP pathway
is the exclusive native route
to formation of terpenoids. The genes encoding the pathway have been
identified in cyanobacterial genomes, but little is known about their
natural production and diversity of terpenoids, other than carotenoids. Cyanobacteria may, however, be especially suitable
as host organisms for microbial terpenoid production, since they naturally
produce high amounts of terpenoids in the form of carotenoids and
the phytol side chain of chlorophyll. There are a few examples of
engineering cyanobacteria for heterologous production of commercially
interesting terpenoids (for reviews, see Savakis and Hellingwerf,
2015, Pattanaik and Lindberg, 2015). In all cases reported so far, the terpenoids
are structurally simple and require only introduction of a single
enzymatic step for their formation. However, production of di- to
multicyclic diterpenoid backbones in many cases requires expression
of pairs of diTPSs. Cyanobacteria
may be also a favorable choice for production of
more complex terpenoids. The activity of the P450s involved in formation
of complex plant terpenoids is typically dependent on reduction by
NADPH,  a NADPH-P450 oxidoreductase. In most heterotrophic bacteria or in yeast cells, regeneration of
NADPH is a limiting factor for P450 activity. In a cyanobacterial cell, NADPH can be readily provided by photosynthesis,
or photosynthesis can be directly linked to terpenoid formation to
provide the necessary reducing equivalents. In support of this idea,
it has recently been shown that photosynthesis can be used to drive
light dependent activity of a P450 enzyme physically linked to photosystem
I in a cyanobacterium. This work
focuses on the engineering of  sp. PCC
6803 () for the production
of 13R-manoyl oxide (13R-MO), a precursor of the high value diterpenoid
forskolin. Forskolin has been shown to have pharmaceutical activity,
conferred by modulating cAMP levels in mammalian cells through activation
of the enzyme adenylate cyclase, and is used in the treatment of glaucoma. Recently, forskolin, along with its diterpenoid precursor 13R-MO,
was found to be localized to oil bodies present in specific root cork
cells in . In ,
the diterpene synthases CfTPS2 and CfTPS3 in tandem catalyze the formation
of 13R-MO from the general diterpene precursor geranylgeranyl diphosphate
(GGPP) (). In this study, we show that stable chromosomal
integration and
functional expression of CfTPS2 and CfTPS3 leads to stereospecific
formation of 13R-MO in . Effects on
the productivity by choice of promoters and localization in the genome,
as well as of coexpression of two additional genes from the MEP pathway
of , are investigated. Furthermore,
we report the construction of a new series of integrative vectors
for expression in  a well characterized,
easily engineered model cyanobacterium whose genome has been sequenced. The modular and integrative system developed
in this work will be the basis for the further development of expanded
biosynthetic pathways for, , forskolin, including
additional oxidation and decoration. To simplify and standardize
the genetic engineering required for
biosynthesis of 13R-MO in , a series
of integrative vectors, named “pEERM”, were constructed.
The base pEERM vectors are ready made for transgenic overexpression
in the genome, and contain all genetic parts needed for integration
and expression (). The only subcloning steps required are to amplify the gene or
genes to be expressed, and ligating them into the vector, using a
method similar to BioBrick cloning. Several
versions of the pEERM vectors were created for integration into different
sites in the genome, with either the strong native  promoter or the nickel inducible  promoter driving expression
of the inserted genes (). This standardized vector system provides reliable and consistent
heterologous expression of target genes. CfTPS2 and
CfTPS3 from  were cloned
as an operon into pEERM 1, 3, and 6 for integration into the  site, neutral site () and
squalene synthase () site, respectively. Integration
in the open-reading frame of  allows for use
of the strong, light inducible  promoter to
drive gene expression, and deletes the native  gene encoding the D1 protein of photosystem II. Because of compensatory
expression of  when  is
deleted, no phenotypic change has been
reported from the use of the site. Neutral site  encodes a hypothetical protein that is deleted when the site is
used for integration. encodes the enzyme squalene synthase, which is the first step in
the hopanoid triterpenoid biosynthesis pathway in () Deletion of  by
integration of CfTPS2 and CfTPS3 removes a pathway potentially competing
for substrate with the CfTPSs (). We have previously shown that removing the triterpenoid
pathway has no detrimental effects on growth under standard conditions. The expression of the CfTPS operon in both the
neutral site and in the  site is driven by the
Ni inducible  promoter, which in
previous experiments using a fluorescent reporter protein has been
shown to reach expression levels similar to P upon induction with 2.5 μM Ni [E. Englund, unpublished]. Stable transformants were generated with the CfTPS2 and CfTPS3
operon in all three sites, to generate strains TPS-P, TPS-N and TPS-S
(see ). Transformants
were isolated, and gene insertion and segregation confirmed by genotyping
(data not shown). Using reverse transcription (RT-)PCR, the presence
of a transcript of the inserted genes could be confirmed in all engineered
strains (). To analyze production of 13R-MO, strains expressing
CfTPS2 and
CfTPS3 were grown at 20 μE (μmol photons s m), and after 4 days, the OD was
determined (see ), cultures were harvested and lipids were extracted. Using GC–MS,
13R-MO was detected as the sole manoyl oxide isomer in the samples
(). Nonfunctional
expression of CfTPS3 has in previous studies resulted in the biosynthesis
of racemic mix of 13R-MO and 13S-MO. Hence
the detection of only 13R-MO support that both CfTPS2 and CfTPS3 were
functionally expressed. While no 13R-MO was detected in the wild-type, all three
CfTPS
expression strains were producing 13R-MO (A). Expression of CfTPS2 and CfTPS3 driven
by the  promoter in the neutral site resulted
in the highest levels of 13R-MO accumulation, with 0.24 mg g DCW 13R-MO detected in TPS-N, compared to accumulation of 0.11 mg
g DCW in the TPS-P and 0.15 mg g DCW in the TPS-S strain. The disruption of  in
TPS-S did not seem to enhance product formation even though previous
work has shown that disruption of the squalene-hopene cyclase, the
second gene in the triterpenoid pathway which converts squalene into
hopanoids, led to accumulation of 0.67 mg L OD750 squalene (0.80 mg g DCW), considerably
more than the 13R-MO observed in this study. This suggests that the unused FPP for triterpenoid products is not
redirected into GGPP-based 13R-MO product formation or that the entire
terpenoid biosynthesis pathway is down-regulated in response to an
excess of FPP. In low light conditions,
expression driven by the nickel inducible
promoter resulted in higher production of 13R-MO compared to production
based on the  promoter. As P is one of the strongest native protein-expressing promoters in , this suggests
that the  promoter can be a valuable addition
to the synthetic biology toolbox for . Unlike the constitutive expression from the  promoter, the  promoter provides an inducible
system, which may facilitate genome integration of potentially detrimental
genes by keeping expression low until the time of induction. Production
of 13R-MO was stable in the engineered strains even after months of
continuous cultivation, which may indicate that using the  promoter might help ease the problem of genetic instability
of introduced expression constructs, something that has been reported
as a recurring problem. To improve
the production of 13R-MO in the strains expressing CfTPS2
and CfTPS3,  deoxyxylulose 5-phosphate
synthase (CfDXS) and geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (CfGGPPS)
(Andersen-Ranberg , unpublished) were expressed.
DXS is the first enzyme in the MEP-pathway, whereas GGPPS catalyzes
the formation of GGPP from IPP and DMAPP (). A series of strains was generated overexpressing
CfDXS and CfGGPPS, both individually and in combination, in the background
of strains engineered for production of 13R-MO (see ). The genes were integrated
in front of  (neutral site 2), a gene already
inactivated in the glucose tolerant  strain, using the vector pEERM4 (). Successful double
transformants were obtained for all combinations of genes as confirmed
using genotyping and RT-PCR (), except for the strain TPS-N with addition of CfDXS
in neutral site 2, which could not be successfully generated and was
therefore left out of the study. 13R-MO was quantified in these
doubly engineered strains, expressing
the CfTPSs and CfDXS, CfGGPPS or both in addition to the native DXS
and GGPP synthase (CrtE) (). Expression of an additional, transgenic DXS increased
production by 4.2 times to 0.45 mg g DCW in TPS-PD
while TPS-PG increased production 2.6 times and TPS-PDG 3.5 times
compared to TPS-P (A). The 4.2 times increase upon CfDXS overexpression is larger
than previously reported for heterologous production of other terpenoids
such as carotenes and the monoterpene limonene in  with overexpression of the endogenous DXS, indicating that the native DXS may be subjected to regulation, which
may not apply to the enzyme from the higher plant. The titer reached
in the highest producing strain (TPS-PD) is similar to those achieved
for other terpenoids in cyanobacteria (see Pattanaik and Lindberg,
2015 and references therein). Expression
of CfDXS and CfGGPPS failed to increase 13R-MO accumulation
for the neutral site and  strains, and resulted
in a decrease in the amount of 13R-MO produced in some cases, the
reason for which is unclear (A). Multiple copies of the  promoter,
used to drive the expression of CfTPS2 and CfTPS3 as well as the heterologous
MEP-pathway enzymes, could provide a possible explanation for this,
if it results in effective dilution of the necessary transcription
activator NrsR. However, the RT-PCR results
() do not support
this hypothesis. The first series of experiments were performed
at a light intensity
of 20 μE. Since it is known that the  promoter
has a higher activity at high light, the
experiments were repeated for a subset of the 13R-MO producing strains
at high light (100 μE). At higher light intensities, it is also
expected that the biosynthesis of carotenoids will increase to enhance
photoprotective mechanisms in the cell. This may lead to an increase in the native flux through the MEP-pathway,
and increase the substrate availability for CfTPS2 and CfTPS3. When comparing the production of 13R-MO under the two different
light conditions, significant differences in the accumulation of 13R-MO
was detected, possibly due to changes in promoter activities. In the
TPS-P strain, the 13R-MO accumulation increased 3-fold at high light,
while TPS-N had 5.3 times lower amounts at high light than under low
light (B).
Increased expression of the  promoter in high
light is well established and expected but the reduction in P-driven production of
13R-MO with increased light intensity requires further investigation.
It was also observed that expression of CfDXS and/or CfGGPPS in the
TPS-P strain did not enhance 13R-MO production in high light, as observed
in low light (A). A low expression from the  promoter at high
light could be the reason why expressing CfDXS and CfGGPPS does not
give the same increase in production as in low light. Replacing P with a stronger promoter may result in an enhancement
of productivity from the expression of CfDXS and CfGGPPS also under
high light. There are multiple opportunities for improving the
yields in future
work. The genes used for expression here were not codon optimized
for cyanobacteria, which has previously been shown to enhance expression
of a plant enzyme in cyanobacteria. To
reach maximal productivities, the growth conditions could be further
optimized; the growth period could be extended to reach higher cell
densities, and effects of growing the cells mixotrophically with addition
of glucose could be investigated. Use of stronger promoters in the
expression constructs may also increase the yield. While the
focus of this study was production of 13R-MO, expression
of the CfTPSs and the additional copies of CfDXS and CfGGPPS might
affect other parts of the general metabolism, and specifically the
native diterpenoid and tetraterpenoid biosynthesis. Both the tetraterpenoid
carotenoids and the diterpenoid phytol tails of chlorophylls are derived
from GGPP, and to investigate what effect the different expression
strains had on them, pigments were extracted and quantified for both
low light- and high light-grown cells of the different strains. In low light, while the chlorophyll content remained relatively
constant for each strain, TPS-N accumulated significantly lower amount
of carotenoids than the wild type strain, while there was no difference
for TPS-P and TPS-S (A). Those results are consistent with the 13R-MO findings,
since the only strain that contained lower amounts of carotenoids
was the strain producing the largest amounts of 13R-MO. This suggests
that substrate in this strain is being redirected toward 13R-MO production
to such an extent that it affects carotenoid biosynthesis. A loss
of triterpenoid production through the disruption of  did not have an effect on carotenoid content, which indicates that
terpenoid precursors are not redirected from triterpenoid biosynthesis
to GGPP derived terpenoids. With the coexpression of CfDXS, CfGGPPS, or both, the general
trend
indicated an increase in carotenoid content for expression of CfDXS
or both enzymes together (A), possibly by increasing the flux through the MEP-pathway.
However, expression of only CfGGPPS resulted in a reduction of the
amounts of carotenoids. The reasons for this observation remain unclear. When selected strains were grown at high light, in the wildtype
there was an increase in the carotenoid contents, consistent with
earlier reports, and a decrease of chlorophyll
compared to cells grown at low light. Because of the large variation
of the amount of both carotenoids and chlorophyll in the 13R-MO producing  strains grown at high light, it is difficult
to distinguish if there is a difference in a specific pigment or across
every pigment. In this paper, we demonstrate the use of cyanobacteria
for the
production of a complex diterpenoid from plant specialized metabolism.
The highest producing strain reached 0.45 mg g DCW 13R-MO by expressing CfTPS2 and CfTPS3 in the  site with coexpression of DXS from  This strain provides a platform for future light driven production
of oxidized plant diterpenoids of commercial value. Furthermore, we
have expanded the genetic toolbox required for synthetic biology engineering
in . Terpenoid biosynthesis  the MEP pathway in
engineered . The native enzymes relevant
for this paper are marked in blue, and the introduced  enzymes in green. Hemi-, mono- and sesquiterpenoids have not been
identified in  and are marked with dashed
boxes. Abbreviations used: G3 = glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate,
DXP = 1-deoxy--xylulose 5-phosphate, MEP = methylerythritol-4-phosphate,
CDP-ME = diphosphocytidylyl methylerythritol, CDP-MEP = methylerythritol-2-phosphate,
ME-cPP = methylerythritol-2,4-cyclodiphosphate, HMBPP = hydroxymethylbutenyl
diphosphate, IPP = isopentenyl diphosphate, DMAPP = dimethylallyl
diphosphate, GPP = geranyl diphosphate, FPP = farnesyl diphosphate,
GGPP = geranylgeranyl diphosphate, NADP(H) = nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate, CTP/CMP = cytidine tri(mono)phosphate, PPi
= diphosphate, ATP/ADP = adenosine tri(di)phosphate, Fd/ = ferredoxin reduced/oxidized, OPP = diphosphate group. Schematic overview and
utilization of the pEERM vectors. The base
pEERM vector (A) and the open-reading frame (ORF) to be inserted (B)
are cut with XbaI and I and ligated together (step
1). Additional genes can be cloned downstream of first gene by cutting
the new vector (C) with SpeI and I and the next
insert (D) with XbaI and I, and ligating them
(step 2). A SpeI/XbaI scar will form between the two inserts in the
resulting plasmid. When all genes have been inserted, the final construct
(E) can be directly transformed into the  genome through homologous recombination. RT-PCR
analysis of engineered strains. Total RNA was converted
into cDNA and the presence and abundance of transcripts was verified
with gene specific primers and specific amounts of PCR cycles. −RT
= RNA samples before conversion to cDNA using reverse transcriptase
amplified with 16S primers, gDNA = genomic DNA of TPS-PDG. Detection of 13-MO by GC–MS analysis.
13R-MO detection in
extracts of engineered  strain TSP-N,
grown with and without 2.5 μM Ni induction, comparing
with authentic standard and extracts of the wild type strain. Identification
of 13R-MO was confirmed by the retention time and mass spectra of
an authentic 13R-MO standard. 13R-MO production in engineered  strains.
13R-MO was quantified from cell pellets of strains with CfTPS2 and
CfTPS3 inserted in different sites on the genome and with combinations
of CfDXS and CfGGPPS, in cells grown at low light (A) and high light
(B). Results represent the mean of six biological replicates, error
bars represent standard deviation. n.d. = no 13R-MO detected, DCW
= dry cell weight. Pigment analysis. Carotenoid content (left axis)
and chlorophyll
content (right axis) of 13R-MO producing strains of  at low light (A) and high light (B). Asterisks represents significant
differences between carotenoid samples, * =  <
0.05, ** =  < 0.01. Results represent the mean
of two technical replicates per three biological replicates, error
bars represent the standard deviation from the biological replicates.
DCW = dry cell weight. Characteristics of the pEERM Series
of Integration Vectors and  Strains
Generated in This Work CfDXS, CfGGPPS or CfDXS and CfGGPPS site of CfTPS2 and CfTPS3 integration expression of GGPP biosynthesis genes OD at extraction low light/high
light Neutral site
is , neutral
site 2 is between  and . Cm = chloramphenicol, Km = kanamycin.
The OD of cultures after 4 days growth at 20 μE
and 100 μE
starting from an OD of 0.1 is reported as a measure of growth for
each strain. Construction
of the pEERM-Series of Vectors To construct
the pEERM-series of integrative vectors, regions for homologous recombination,
promoters, terminators and antibiotic cassettes were synthesized by
DNA2.0. The antibiotics cassette from the DNA2.0 plasmid backbone
pJ344 was removed using Gibson assembly. Further versions of the vectors were made by modifying the homologous
regions and promoter of an existing pEERM vector using overlap-extension
PCR or Gibson assembly and by changing the antibiotic cassette with
restriction enzyme digestion and ligation. Construction of Transgenic  PCC
6803 Strains and  (GenBank ID: KF444507 and KF444508) were amplified from plasmids
described in Pateraki , 2014, cloned into pEERM 1, 3, and 6 using Gibson assembly, and
transformed into  according to established
methods. Transformed cells were selected
on BG11 plates with 50 μg/mL kanamycin, and single colonies
were isolated and grown for characterization. Genomic DNA was isolated
using phenol-chloroform extraction, and
the correct insertion of genes was verified by PCR amplification. CfDXS and CfGGPPS (GenBank ID: KP889114 and KP889115) were amplified
from a plasmid containing the  cDNA
(Andersen-Ranberg , unpublished). The N-terminal
plastid signal localization sequences were identified using ChloroP and removed. XbaI, SpeI and I sites were removed using overlap-extension PCR, and the sequences
encoding the pseudomature enzymes were cloned directly into the XbaI
and I sites of pEERM4. To generate the CfDXS and
CfGGPPS operon construct, pEERM4 with CfDXS was cut with SpeI and I and CfGGPPS was amplified with primers that added the
strong ribosome binding site RBS*, then
cut with XbaI and I and ligated into the plasmid
creating a XbaI/SpeI scar. Transformation into , selection and screening was performed as described above. Triplicate cultures were inoculated
at an OD of 0.1 and grown in 25 mL BG11 with appropriate
antibiotics (50 μg/mL kanamycin, 20 μg/mL chloramphenicol)
in 100 mL Erlenmeyer-flasks at 20 μE (μmol photons s m) or 100 μE. For induction
of P, 2.5 μM NiCl × 6HO (Merck) was added. After 4 days, OD was measured
and two 1 mL samples of each triplicate culture were pelleted at 17000 for 5 min and frozen at −20 °C for carotenoid
and chlorophyll analysis. For quantification of 13R-MO, 18 or 20 mL
of cultures were harvested by centrifugation at 4500 for 10 min and pellets were stored at −80 °C until extraction.
Cultures used for RT-PCR were grown in duplicates under 20 μE
light intensity, and sampled in same way as for 13R-MO quantifications
except 10 mL of cultures was used for extraction of RNA. RNA was extracted using Trireagent (Sigma-Aldrich)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA was removed
from samples using RapidOut DNA Removal Kit (Thermo Scientific) and
successful removal of DNA was confirmed using 30 cycles of PCR with
primers amplifying 16S (5′-CACACTGGGACTGAGACAC-3′,
5′-CTGCTGGCACGGAGTTAG-3′). 1 μg of
total RNA was converted into cDNA in a 20 μL reaction using
iScript Reverse Transcription Supermix for RT-qPCR (Bio-Rad) and detection
of transcripts was normalized to 16S abundance. The inserted genes
were amplified from 1 μL of cDNA template with primers: CfTPS2
(5′-GTTCCTGCCACTCTTGAAAG-3′, 5′-ATGAAGGCGTGGCATTTAAG-3′),
CfDXS (5′-AAAGGAATGATGGGGAAACC-3′, 5′-CAAACTTCACCACACCATGC-3′)
and CfGGPPS (5′-CCCTTCAATTTCAACGCCTA-3′,
5′-CGTGGATGAGAGACATGGTG-3′). Lipids were extracted from pelleted
triplicate cultures, from two separate experiments for a total of
six biological replicates, according to a protocol adapted from Schmerk  2011. Cultures were
thawed and extracted using 8 mL 10% KOH (Merck) in methanol (wt/vol)
(Merck) at 65 °C for 1 h. This was followed by addition of 2
mL hexane. After mixing and separation, 1 mL of the upper hexane phase
was filtered using 0.2 μm PTFE filters, and the filtrate was
used for analysis of manoyl oxide content. GC–MS and GC-FID
Analysis for Identification 13R-Manoyl
Oxide Extracts were analyzed on a Shimadzu GCMS-QP2010 Ultra
using an HP-5MS column (20 m × 0.180 mm i.d., 0.18 μm film
thickness, Agilent Technologies). Injection volume and temperature
was set at 1 μL and 250 °C in splitless mode. The GC program
was: 60 °C for 1 min, ramp at rate 30 °C min to 200 °C, ramp at rate 10 °C min to
280 °C, ramp at rate 30 °C min to 320
°C and hold for 3 min. H was used as carrier gas
with a linear velocity at 66.5 cm s and a purge
flow of 4 mL min for 1 min. The ion source temperature
of the mass spectrometer (MS) was set to 300 °C and spectra were
recorded from 50 to 400 / with
a solvent cutoff at 4 min. Compound identification was done through
comparison of retention time and mass spectra to an authentic standard
of 13R-MO obtained by method described in Nielsen , 2014. 1 ppm 1-eicosene was used as
internal standard (ISTD). Quantification of 13R-MO was performed
on a SCION 436 GC-FID (Bruker). A 3 μL sample was injected in
splitless mode at 250 °C. The GC-program was as follows: 60 °C
for 1 min, ramp at rate 30 °C min to 180
°C, ramp at rate 10 °C min to 250 °C,
ramp at rate 30 °C min to 320 °C and
hold for 3 min. H was used as carrier gas with a linear
flow of 50 mL min. The FID was set at 300 °C,
with a N flow of 25 mL min, H at 30 mL min and air 300 mL min. Data sampling rate was 10 Hz. 13R-MO was identified by comparing
the retention time with an authentic standard. 13R-MO was quantified
by integration of the peak area normalized to the ISTD peak area.
The relative response factor (RRF) was set to 1, which was confirmed
experimentally. Products were calculated per gram dry cell weight
by converting OD values using a correlation factor ( = 0.99). Extraction and quantification
of carotenoid and chlorophyll pigments was based on the method by
Chamovitz , 1993. Frozen pellets were thawed, loosened by vortexing and resuspended
in 1 mL ,-dimethylformamide (Merck).
Samples were incubated in darkness for 5 min, and then pelleted by
centrifugation at 17000 for 5 min. The absorbance
of the supernatant was then measured at 461 and 664 nm, and pigment
concentrations were calculated using the equations: Colored carotenoids
[μg/mL] = (OD – (0.046 × OD)) × 4; Chlorophyll [μg/mL] = OD ×
11.92. All extractions were performed on three biological replicates
and each culture sampled twice; the results represent the mean with
the standard deviation calculated from the biological replicates.
Statistical significance was tested using a two-tailed Student’s  test..