Enterococci
have undergone
a remarkable metamorphosis in the last quarter century, from low grade-pathogens
to a major burden to health care systems. Before the first reports of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus (VRE)
strains in the late 1980s, these microbes were considered harmless,
if not helpful, commensals of the human gastrointestinal (GI) tract.
Now enterococci are also viewed as a major cause of hospital-acquired
infections. According to these recent
reports, VRE colonization in health-care institutions has reached
endemic proportions. VRE are easily spread through direct contact
and are resilient and versatile organisms thriving on nearly every
type of environmental surface tested. As a consequence, patients with
VRE infection have increased mortality, morbidity, length of hospital
stay, and hospital costs, in comparison to uninfected groups. The enterococcal strains that dominate pathogenesis
in the human GI tract are  and . Most enterococcal infections are caused by ; yet,  is currently
the most difficult to treat. As of 2007, 80% of  isolates were vancomycin resistant compared to just over 5% of . Since the
source for many enterococcal infections is the intestinal
tract, antibiotic technologies that can effectively prevent or treat
enterococcal intestinal colonization may limit the public health harm
caused by these microorganisms. Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) have emerged as potential vehicles for
drug delivery in the GI tract. They are
bile-resistant organisms and have the ability to survive passage to
the GI tract. Importantly, some of these LAB are generally recognized
as safe (GRAS) for human and animal consumption. is a model LAB, being one of
the most amenable expression cell factories for heterologous protein
secretion. Indeed,  is being explored as the first genetically modified organism used
alive for the treatment of human Crohn’s disease by the production
of interleukin-10 in the GI tract. Several expression systems have been developed in LAB. One of the
most successful and widely used inducible systems is the NIsin Controlled
gene Expression (NICE) system. The NICE system is based on the  operon, which is involved in the biosynthesis of nisin
A, a post-translationally modified antimicrobial peptide produced
by several strains of . In previous experiments, induction is initiated with nisin
A in culture, before LAB are supplied to animals. Consequently, the
recombinant bacteria entering the host are activated, producing the
protein of interest, not unlike in the case of a constitutive promoter. The difference, of course, is that the NICE
system will be turned off once the intracellular nisin A is degraded.
It may then be difficult to control the duration of protein production
or the amount produced. Other LAB expression systems are inducible
under various conditions
such as phage attack, temperature or pH shift, or the presence of
specific sugars. Regulation of gene expression
with these promoters is challenging, often because of leaky expression.
To say that there are limits in these expression systems is not to
say that they have little or no value. Nonetheless, an ideal system
would be one that remains inactive when administered to the host,
survives passage to the GI tract and then produces the proteins of
interest only when needed, for example, only in the presence of pathogens.
Here, we discuss such a LAB-based system that acts as a sensitive
enterococcal detection device and then, upon detection, produces and
secretes a molecular arsenal of antimicrobial peptides to specifically
target the sensed enterococci. We designed a set of vectors
based on the pheromone-mediated intercellular
signaling system pCF10 that regulates expression of conjugative plasmid
transfer genes in  This plasmid
contains genes for resistance to tetracycline, virulence factors,
along with genes for conjugative plasmid transfer. Conjugation and plasmid transfer between donor cells and
receiver cells is stimulated by pheromone cCF10. This heptapeptide
(LVTLVFV) is produced from a conserved chromosomal gene present in . cCF10 induces
high gene expression in donor cells carrying pCF10. When donor cells import cCF10 into the cytoplasm, the pheromone
binds to the pCF10-encoded master protein regulator PrgX. This binding
abolishes repression of transcription of the prgQ operon, encoding
conjugation genes. The donor cells produce reduced
but still active levels of cCF10. This
residual pheromone activity is neutralized by the production of peptide
iCF10 from the prgQ locus of pCF10. Peptide
iCF10 (AITLIFI) competes with cCF10 for binding to PrgX, opposes cCF10
effects, and causes PrgX to repress gene expression. While the direct effects of the regulatory peptides on
transcription initiation from the  promoter  are modest, the multiple layers of post-transcriptional
regulation via antisense RNAs and interference between colliding RNA
polymerase elongation complexes (illustrated in the  Figures S1 and S2) endow the system
with extremely tight control and a high dynamic range of expression. We engineered cCF10-inducible vectors in  to express bacteriocins. Bacteriocins are defined as ribosomally
synthesized peptides produced by bacteria that inhibit the growth
of other closely related bacteria. We focus on class IIa enterocins,
particularly, enterocin A (EntA), enterocin P (EntP), and hiracin
JM79 (HirJM79). These are antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) produced by
enterococci, with strong antimicrobial activity against other enterococci,
including VRE. The two organisms share common protein expression
machinery allowing the transfer of components from one to the other.
In , we discuss previous examples of
successful cloning of enterococcal components into . Experiments reveal that the recombinant LAB are able to detect
the cCF10 naturally produced by  and to
respond by producing the bacteriocins with high activity against enterococcal
strains. and  are
threats to human health partly because of their remarkable ability
to acquire and spread determinants of antibiotic resistance via horizontal
gene transfer. employ peptide-pheromones as signals to communicate with each other
and trigger the expression of genes involved in conjugation and plasmid
transfer. We turned their capacity to
detect their own cell population density against enterococci by hijacking
components of plasmid pCF10 to engineer recombinant LAB capable of
sensing and responding to enterococcal pheromones. In the following,
we detail how (1) we designed a set of inducible and constitutive
expression vectors for controlled expression of proteins by , (2) the engineered -based systems are induced in the presence of , (3) the recombinant  produce and secrete
bacteriocins with activity against  and , and (4) we combined sensing and inhibition components
so recombinant LAB can be used to detect  and then produce a molecular arsenal of antimicrobial peptides to
target the sensed enterococci. To our knowledge, this is the first
LAB-based system engineered for both detection and inhibition of specific
pathogens. Function and Optimization of the Detection System in LAB Supporting
Information Figure S1 Supporting Information Figures S1
and S2 We designed and tested a set of expression plasmids in , originally characterized in , for their ability to confer expression of
a transcriptional  reporter gene in response
to exogenously supplied cCF10 peptide (). Plasmid pBK2 encodes the key components
of the pCF10 genetic switch. Plasmid pBK1 contains a deletion of the , and thus shows no repression of the  promoter. In plasmid pBK2idT, the deletion of three nucleotides
from  leads to the production of an inactive
iCF10-derivative, which can no longer bind to PrgX, reducing PrgX
repression (). As expected, highest levels of β-gal production
were observed for -pBK1, where the absence
of  prevents the repression of P by
PrgX, and therefore P works as a constitutive promoter,
with the expression of  always on (Figure ). Strains carrying either pBK2 or pBK2idT both
produced β-gal upon induction with the pheromone cCF10, with
the latter strain showing higher levels of induced expression (Figure ). Although we presented induction results using
50 ng/mL of cCF10, we found that lower levels of pheromone (25 ng/mL
and 10 ng/mL) resulted in comparable expression. To increase sensitivity to exogenous cCF10, we cloned and
expressed  (coding for PrgZ, a surface cCF10-binding
protein known
to mediate pheromone import) under the
control of the strong constitutive promoter P, in the
plasmids pBK2 and pBK2idT. The β-gal activity from recombinant
strains originated, -pBK2Z and -pBK2idTZ, was approximately 15% higher than that from
strains lacking  (-pBK2
and -pBK2idT, respectively). Overall, pheromone-detecting  produced the highest β-gal activity when
carrying vector pBK2idTZ. This vector presents two major improvements
over the original pBK2. The first is the elimination of the repressor
molecule iCF10. There is then no iCF10-cCF10 competition for PrgX.
Consequently, the P promoter is on, until cCF10 is sufficiently
degraded. The second difference is the presence of prgZ regulated
by the strong constitutive promoter P. PrgZ is an extracellular
peptide-binding protein, acting as a strong receptor of cCF10. PrgZ delivers cCF10 to the oligopeptide permease,
Opp, which subsequently imports it inside the cell for induction.
It is worth noting that deletion of prgZ in  decreases the sensitivity of the donor cells to cCF10. We have also observed that the presence of PrgZ
is not necessary for pheromone import, presumably because OppA can
fulfill this role, albeit with lower affinity. Nevertheless, the overexpression of  markedly augments cCF10 transport inside , in effect enhancing the activity of P. Current
results confirm previous studies, demonstrating that the
PrgX-PrgQ system is tightly regulated. In the absence of cCF10,
we observed no measurable β-gal production. As discussed previously,
out of the opposing and overlapping orientation of the P and P promoters emerges a synergy of transcriptional
interference with antisense regulation. This synergy results in a tightly regulated bistable switch behavior.
Other LAB inducible systems, such as the NICE or the SakP-based system
(pSIP), have been shown to be efficient and well regulated when using  or  as hosts, respectively.
However, they often exhibit significantly leaky basal activity in
other hosts. Furthermore, these other systems
typically rely on the autoregulation of the inducer via a two-component
system composed of a membrane histidine protein kinase (HPK) and a
response regulator (RR). In some cases,
these systems can only be used by specific strains containing the
regulators integrated in the chromosome or by employing two different
plasmids. In our system, the inducer cCF10 is transported to the cytoplasm
where it directly interacts with the repressor PrgX, to modulate gene
expression by P. All the components involved in the regulation
are located within a single plasmid. In addition, the cCF10 inducer
peptide is nontoxic, allowing the use of very high inducer levels,
without impacting growth of the producer strain. These results demonstrate
the function of the pCF10 pheromone sensing system in  and how the natural system can be manipulated to vary the sensitivity
to an inducing signal. β-gal activity
(Miller Units) from recombinant  strains carrying engineered plasmids (pBK1, pBK2,
pBK2iDT, pBK2Z, pBK2idTZ). Exponential cultures of each strain were
induced with 100 ng/mL cCF10 90 min prior to harvesting cells for
β-gal assay. The results are shown as averaged results from
two independent experiments, each done in triplicate. The error bars
represent the standard deviation. To determine whether the natural production
of pheromone cCF10 by  is sufficient to
induce the expression of  by recombinant , we carried
two different sets of experiments, in semisolid and liquid medium. When  and recombinant  were grown together on agar plates, we observed three different
levels of β-gal production: high, medium, and low. As observed
in Figure A, -pBK1
exhibited high levels of β-gal production on the plate. The
interaction between recombinant -pBK2Z or -pBK2idTZ with  OG1RF
triggered the expression of  by these two strains.
β-gal production was higher when using -pBK2idTZ. No β-gal production was detected in those colonies
located outside the area of interaction with  OG1RF. The observable response
to cCF10 was markedly improved when the
experiments were repeated in liquid medium. We mixed either  OG1RF or  JRC101
(a cCF10 deficient strain) with -pBK2idTZ
in cocultures at different ratios. Substantial induction of  reporter expression was observed at different  OG1RF/-pBK2idTZ ratios
(Figure B). Furthermore, no β-gal production
was detected when growing -pBK2idTZ together
with  JRC101, or when any of the strains
was grown alone, confirming that the promoter controlling  is tightly regulated by cCF10, secreted by  OG1RF. To probe the specificity of the
system toward , we repeated the liquid
experiments using instead different  spp.,
that are naturally non producers of cCF10.
No significant β-gal production was detected in the media, which
confirms the high specificity of the pheromone cCF10 against PrgX. expression of recombinant  in coculture with . (A) Plate experiments:
10 μL dot of  OG1RF and 5 μL
dot of recombinant  (pBK1, pBK2Z and pBK2idTZ)
grown in BHI plates supplemented with X-gal. The blue staining corresponds
to the expression of  by recombinant  strains. These are representative images of an
experiment that was repeated several times. (B) Absorbance at OD and image of  OG1RF and -pBK2idTZ grown in cocultures at different ratios
(v/v) in M9X media. The results shown are averaged from two independent
experiments, each done in triplicate. The error bars represent the
standard deviation. cCF10-Inducible Bacteriocin Production by We constructed three separate constructs, replacing  in pBK2idTZ with the genes SP:, or , coding for
the bacteriocins enterocin A, hiracin JM79, and enterocin P, respectively.
In each case, along with one of the enterocins, we cloned the corresponding
immunity gene (, ,
and , respectively). Furthermore, we constructed a polycistronic sequence with the
6 genes (three AMPs and three corresponding immunity genes), and cloned
it into pBK2idTZ (dubbed pBK2idtZ:Bac). In order to quantify
bacteriocin inhibition with our expression vectors, we first induced
the recombinant  cultures with cCF10, collected
the supernatants and then tested them against various  and  indicator strains. We had previously
determined that the maximum or near-maximum expression levels were
obtained 3 h after inducing  with cCF10
at an OD of 0.4. In order to increase the bacteriocin
concentration in the medium and avoid false negatives, we also performed
protein precipitation of the supernatants with ammonium sulfate. Both
the concentrated and nonconcentrates supernatants from recombinant  showed antimicrobial activity against all the
strains tested in an agar diffusion test (ADT) (see Figure  for results using  8
as indicator). The activity against enterococci was most accentuated
when all
three bacteriocins were expressed from the same strain, although modest
antimicrobial activity was exhibited by the supernatants containing
individual bacteriocins. No activity was observed in the supernatant
of the control strain  NZ9000-pBK2idTZ. Subsequently, we tested the activity of supernatants from -pBK2idTZ:Bac by a 96 well plate assay. We observed
inhibition against all  and  indicator strains used in the study (Table ). Notably, the antimicrobial activity from the
supernatants was higher against  compared
to . Three of the  strains tested had been identified by the University of Minnesota
Clinical Microbiology Laboratory as exhibiting high-level Vancomycin
resistance with minimum inhibitory concentrations >256 mg/mL whereas
one strain (7a) was sensitive to Vancomycin (Dr. Patricia Ferrieri,
personal communication). All four isolates were equally susceptible
to killing by bacteriocin-producing LAB, suggesting the potential
utililty of this system in control of multiresistant enterococci in
clinical settings. In this work,
we used the bacteriocins enterocin A, hiracin JM79,
and enterocin P, all of them naturally produced by enterococcus spp. All three peptides have been previously cloned and expressed in  individually, showing antimicrobial activity against  and  spp. We observed a substantial increase of antimicrobial activity when
the three were produced and secreted together. The synergistic effect
of combining different bacteriocins has been previously studied and
exploited to reduce the count of food borne and pathogenic bacteria
in various applications. This type
of synergism is presumably the result of the lower chance
for an individual enterococcus cell to resist all three molecules.
Genes for bacteriocin production as well as for immunity against these
three bacteriocins are common among enterococci, but apparently only
in a few cases do the genes for the three bacteriocins appear within
the same enterococcal strain. Nevertheless,
and perhaps not surprisingly, we observed the appearance of mutants
resistant to all three bacteriocins in our plate experiments. The
appearance of resistant mutants to class IIa bacteriocins has been
previously documented. A potential future
exploration can combine the use of class IIa bacteriocins with other
bacteriocins or peptides having different modes of action. Antimicrobial activity of supernatants (SN) and ammonium
sulfate
precipitated peptides (AS) from recombinant  strains. Exponential cultures of each strain were induced with 100
ng/mL cCF10 120 min prior collecting the supernatants. The antimicrobial
activity was determined by an agar well diffusion test (ADT) with  8 as the indicator microorganism. Antimicrobial Activity (Bacteriocin
Units/mL) of Supernatants from Recombinant  NZ9000-pBK2idTZ:Bac, against Different  and  Indicator Strains Exponential cultures
of each strain
were induced with 100 ng/mL cCF10 120 min prior collecting the supernatants.
The results are shown as averaged results from two independent experiments
that were each done in triplicate. ± represents the standard
deviation. Coculture Detection and Inhibition The ultimate goal
of this work was to engineer  strains to
detect  in the environment and then produce
a set of antimicrobial peptides. Once we established that both detection
of  and production of active bacteriocins
by recombinant  were separately functional,
we tested whether  could perform both tasks
concurrently. The lactococcal strain selected for this set of experiments
was  pBK2idTZ:Bac, the one with the highest
sensitivity to cCF10 as well as the highest antimicrobial activity
against . We grew this strain in coculture
with  OG1RF, under two different conditions,
with or without an external addition of cCF10, and measured the enterococcal
viability over time. We also cocultured  pBK1:Bac with  OG1RF, in order to determine
the inhibition caused by the constitutive system. To further verify
that the inhibition of  is caused by the
expression and production of the three bacteriocins and discard any
antimicrobial activity from the native lactococcal strain, we cultured
the control strain -pBK2idTZ together with  OG1RF. To show that the induction of the AMPs
is specifically triggered by cCF10, we cultured  pBK2idTZ:Bac together with  JRC101,
an  OG1RF-derivative with a knockout in
the gene coding for cCF10. As observed in Figure , the highest reduction of  OG1RF
counts was achieved by -pBK1:Bac and -pBK2idTZ:Bac induced with cCF10. Under these conditions
we observed reductions of the enterococcal strain of up to 6 and 4
logarithmic units, respectively, in the first 2 h postinoculation.
However, when using uninduced -pBK2idtZ:Bac
we observed a reduction of up to 2-fold in the total number of enterococcal
CFU in the coculture in comparison with the control (Figure ). These differences were not significant during
the first 3 h, and reached the highest levels after 5–9 h of
coculture. A useful comparison is
one between the AMP-containing supernatants
and commonly used antibiotics (Ampicillin, Vancomycin, and Streptomycin).
In Figure , 8
growth curves are presented when the bacteria are treated with supernatant
from -pBK2idtZ:Bac and with each of the
three antibiotics. The results are indicative of the inhibitory activity
of secreted bacteriocins on  We note that
we observe similar profiles for other enterococcal strains studied
here. The inhibition of  OG1RF
by uninduced -pBK2idtZ:Bac is significant
compared to the inhibition
by the control lactococcal strain. Because the pheromone-levels produced
naturally by  are low (around 2 ×
10 M), we can conclude that the systems described
herein are notably sensitive to cCF10. Certainly, there is room for
improvement, as exogenous cCF10 in higher quantities induces much
stronger expression of genes in  Future
strategies may involve transcriptional autofeedback loops to amplify
initial signals, for example, modifying  to express additional cCF10 in the presence of enterococcus-produced
cCF10. Another direction may involve the design of other bacteriocins.
In Figure A, it can be observed that  OG1RF is starting to grow again, albeit slowly,
after approximately 5–6 h. As a first explanation this may
be attributed to the stability of the pheromone and antimicrobial
peptides. As  counts decrease, there is
likely less cCF10, which may result in less bacteriocins expressed
from the prgX/prgQ system. The finite stability of these peptides
may then result in a dynamic interplay between the two species in
coculture. More stable peptides may then further tip the balance in
favor of . To conclude, we note that
there is an increasing volume of scientific
evidence for the beneficial role some LAB play in human health. The
pBK systems described here exhibit several advantages in comparison
to expression systems previously described for LAB. Arguably the most
significant advantage is pathogen detection. These detection-based
promoter systems allow for spatiotemporal control, ideally releasing
proteins at the site and time of infection. In our experiment, we
used other closely related bacteria, such as , and found no detection responses. This reinforces the idea that
the production of recombinant peptides by LAB would specifically be
triggered upon detecting . This concept
can potentially be explored with other pheromone systems, endogenous
to different enterococcal, or other bacterial, strains. We note
that there are significant regulatory, ethical, environmental,
public health, and public policy aspects for the development and use
of a technology that is based on genetically modified organisms. Yet,
we believe that it would be out of the scope of the current manuscript
to discuss in length these important aspects of technology use. Nonetheless,
we note that technology applications that face surmountable obstacles
may be related to animal health. Certainly, there is a need to explore
alternative technologies to antibiotics used in agriculture. We can
envision important benefits to farm animals and humans that may be
realized with successful development of the proposed technology. This
intervention may result in healthy animals, decrease the emergence
of antibiotic-resistance in foodborne pathogens, decrease the supply
of antibiotics to animals, and reduce the rates of transmission of
infectious diseases from animal farms to humans. viability when grown in coculture
with recombinant  strains. (A)  OG1RF viability at different time points when cocultured
with -pBK2idTZ (blue diamonds), -pBK1:Bac (purple x’s) or -pBK2idTZ:Bac induced with 100 ng/mL cCF10 at time 0 (yellow circles).
The viability is expressed as the log of the total  OG1RF colony forming units per ml (CFU/mL).
(B)  OG1RF viability at different time
points when cocultured with -pBK2idTZ:Bac
(red squares) and, shown again for cross-reference to Figure 4A, -pBK2idTZ (blue diamonds). Also shown is  JRC101 (a cCF10 deficient strain) viability
when cocultured with -pBK2idTZ:Bac (green
triangles). The viability is expressed as the total number of  CFU/mL. Cell ratios are as described in the
text. All results are shown as averaged results from two independent
experiments, each done in triplicate. The error bars represent the
standard deviation. inhibitory activity comparison between
secreted bacteriocins and commonly used antibiotics. Growth curves
of  8 treated with different antibiotics
and the supernatant of -pBK2idTZ:Bac. An
overnight culture of  8 was diluted to
an optical density at 600 nm (OD ) of 0.1 in BHI broth
supplemented with different antibiotics: Ampicillin 100 μg/mL
(Amp 100), Vancomycin 50 μg/mL (Vanco 50) and Streptomycin 50
μg/mL (Stm 50); and with a 10% (v/v) supernatant of  pBK2idTZ:Bac (Bact 10%).  8 grown in the absence of any treatment was used as control. The
cultures were incubated at 37 °C and the OD was
measured at various time periods. The experiments were repeated three
times. The error bars represent the standard deviation. Bacterial Strains,
Growth Conditions, and Plasmids Bacteria used in this study
are listed in Table .  NZ9000 was cultured at 30 °C
in M17 broth (Oxoid Ltd., Basingstoke, U.K.) supplemented with 0.5%
(w/v) glucose (GM17). The  strains were
grown in BHI broth (Oxoid) at 37 °C.  strains were grown in LB broth (Fisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ,
U.S.A.) at 37 °C, with shaking. Agar plates were made by the
addition of 1.5% (wt/vol) agar (Oxoid) to the liquid media. When necessary,
Rifampicin (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.) was added to
the media at 50 μg/mL, and chloramphenichol at 5 μg/mL
or 20 μg/mL, for  or , respectively. Bacterial Strains Used in This Study plasmid-free
strain, derivative of MG1363; pepN::nisRK, nonbacteriocin
producer ATCC 700802; St. Louis, MO, U.S.; first
isolated vancomycin-resistant
and first sequenced  genome Boston, MA, U.S.;
Gent/Kan/Strep/Tet/Erm/Pen resistant, β-lactamase-producing
isolate ATCC 47077; plasmid-free, Rif/Fus resistant mutant of OG1;
common laboratory strain OG1RF,  (not producer
of cCF10) U.K.; Rif/Fus resistant mutant; common laboratory strain UMN isolate, Amp/Vanc/Linezolid resistant UMN isolate,
Amp/Linezolid resistant UMN isolate, Amp/Vanc/Linezolid resistant UMN isolate,
Amp/Vanc/Linezolid resistant Construction of Plasmids and  Transformation Supporting Information Table S1 Plasmids were constructed using standard molecular cloning techniques. All restriction enzymes were purchased from
New England Biolabs (Beverly, MA, U.S.A.). Primers used in PCR reactions
are listed in . Fragments obtained and plasmids used are listed in Table . Detailed information on the plasmids constructed
and the structure of engineered promoters can be found in the suporting
information ( Materials
and Methods, Figures S1 and S2). Electrocompetent  cells were transformed with a Gene Pulser XCell (Bio-Rad
Laboratories, Hercules, CA, U.S.A.) as described previously. Plasmids and Fragments
Used in This
Study ; inducible expression vector
carrying the prgX/prgQ system and ; constitutive
expression vector;
pBK2 derivative with a deletion of the entire ; inducible expression vector;
pBK2 derivative with 1 amino acid deletion (19Tdel) in the  region coding for iCF10 pBK2idT derivative with 23::PrgZ pBK2idTZ derivative
with HirJM79 202-bp I fragment
containing 23 constitutive promoter and a restriction
site for I 1,628-bp HI-RI fragment
containing the enterocin A structural gene ()
with its immunity gene (), the enterocin P structural
gene () with its immunity gene () and the hiracin JM79 structural gene ()
with its immunity gene () 538-bp HI-RI fragment
containing 546-bp HI-RI fragment
containing 504-bp HI-RI fragment
containing To
determine the sensitivity
of the expression vectors to cCF10, we used a β-galactosidase
(β-gal) assay to measure the levels of lacZ expression from
recombinant  upon induction with pure cCF10
added externally. Strains were grown overnight in GM17 medium
and then diluted 1:5 into fresh GM17 medium and grown for an additional
hour (OD = 0.4–0.5) before addition of cCF10 (50 ng/mL). After
induction the cultures were incubated for 90 min. β-gal assays
were performed as described previously. Activity was expressed as Miller Unit equivalents (MU). Expression
of lacZ by  in Coculture
with β-gal activity of -pBK2idTZ was also measured when grown in coculture
with cCF10 producing  OG1RF. For
liquid experiments the strains  OG1RF
(OG),  JRC101 (JR) and  NZ9000-pBK2idTZ (NZ) were grown overnight in their respective liquid
media. The cultures were reinoculated and grown to an OD of 1. Then OG and NZ or JR and NZ were inoculated into 1 mL M9 media
and M9 media supplemented with X-gal (250 μg/mL) (M9X) at different
ratios (v/v) (OG/NZ and JR/NZ at 10:50; 50:50; and 100:50). As positive
control NZ was grown in M9 and M9X media with cCF10 (50 ng/mL). The
cocultures were incubated overnight at 32 °C for 16 h and then
β-gal activity was measured by subtracting the OD values from the cocultures grown in M9X and M9. For plate
experiments OG, NZ,  NZ9000-pBK2iZ
and  NZ9000-pBK1 were grown overnight in
their respective liquid-media. The cultures were reinoculated and
grown to an OD of 1, then 10 μL of OG were spotted
in BHI-agar plates supplemented with X-gal (250 μg/mL). Once
dried, 5 μL of the  cultures were
spotted into the edges of the OG drop and let dry. The plates were
incubated overnight at 32 °C for 16h and then  expression was observed by the growth of blue staining colonies. The antimicrobial activity
of individual colonies was examined by the stab-on-agar test (SOAT),
as previously described. Recombinant
LAB cultures, transformed with either pBK2idTZ:Bac, pBK2idTZ:EntA,
pBK2idTZ:HirJM79, and pBK2idTZ:EntP were induced for bacteriocin production
at an OD of 0.5, using 50 ng/mL cCF10. The induced cultures
were grown at 32 °C during 2 h. Cell-free culture supernatants
(SN) were obtained by centrifugation of cultures at 12 000, 4 °C for 10 min, filtered through 0.2 μm pore-size
filters (Whatman Int. Ltd., Maidstone, U.K.), and stored at −20
°C until use. Ammonium sulfate precipitation (AS) was performed
to increase peptide concentration. Ammonium sulfate (4 g; Sigma) was
added to 10 mL SN, mixed and let stand on ice for 1 h. Then the tubes
were centrifuged at 12 000, 4 °C for
10 min, the SN discarded and the precipitated pellet eluted in 1 mL
fresh GM17. The antimicrobial activity of the supernatants was examined
by an agar well diffusion test (ADT) and a microtiter plate assay
(MPA), as previously described using  8 as indicator microbe. With the MPA, growth
inhibition of the sensitive culture was measured spectrophotometrically
at 620 nm with a microplate reader (SpectraMax Plus384; Molecular
Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). One bacteriocin unit (BU) was defined as
the reciprocal of the highest dilution of the bacteriocin causing
50% growth inhibition (50% of the turbidity of the control culture
without bacteriocin). The antimicrobial activity of recombinant -pBK2idTZ:Bac was also tested against different  and  strains using
the MPA. Growth-Inhibition in Coculture
with Recombinant Overnight cultures
of recombinant -pBK2idTZ, -pBK2iDTZ:Bac, and -pBK1:Bac were inoculated
(20%) in 20 mL fresh media until an OD of 0.5. The cultures
were then inoculated with 2 × 10 CFU (Colony Forming
Units) (200 μL) of  OG1RF and let
grow at 32 °C. One of the -pBK2idTZ:Bac/ OG1RF cocultures was also induced with 50 ng/mL
cCF10 at time 0. In parallel, and as negative control, -pBK2idTZ:Bac was inoculated with the non-cCF10 producer  JRC101. Samples were taken every hour for 10
h, and the number of CFU per mL (CFU/mL) was determined by plating
10 μL of serial dilutions of the cocultures on GM17 agar plates
supplemented with Rifampicin. The plates were incubated at 37 °C
for 16 h, and the number of viable  OG1RF
cells was assessed by counting CFUs..