Most biological nitrogen fixation is catalyzed by the molybdenum nitrogenase enzyme. The molybdenum nitrogenase is composed of two proteins, MoFe protein (NifDK) and Fe protein (NifH). The MoFe protein is an αβ heterotetramer that contains the iron–molybdenum cofactors (FeMo-co) and P clusters. The FeMo-co is a [Mo–7Fe–9S–C-homocitrate] cluster which serves as the active site of nitrogen binding and reduction. The P-cluster is a [8Fe–7S] cluster which shuttles electrons to the FeMo-co. The Fe protein is a γ homodimer bridged by an intersubunit [4Fe–4S] cluster that serves as the obligate electron donor to the MoFe protein [–]. nifBnifHnifDnifKnifEnifNnifXhesAnifV Schematic representation of the  gene cluster compared with syntenic  clusters of  M5a1. 
 sp. WLY78. 
 M5a1 Although the biochemical properties and structure of molybdenum nitrogenases are remarkably similar when purified from diverse bacteria and archaea, the organization and numbers of  genes required for the synthesis and assembly of the enzyme varies greatly among these nitrogen-fixing species [–]. For example, in  (previously called as ), 20  genes, , organized in 7 transcriptional units are co-located within a 24 kb cluster , while  sp. WLY78 possesses a minimal and compact  gene cluster consisting of 9 genes () (Fig. ) [, ]. This variability in  genes content is undoubtedly determined by the environmental lifestyle of each diazotroph on one hand, the minimal  gene sets are probably complemented by housekeeping counterparts located elsewhere in the genome on the other hand. Genetic and biochemical studies on the two model diazotrophs  and .  revealed that 16  genes (,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,) products are probably essential for efficient biosynthesis of nitrogenase . It has been demonstrated that ,  and  genes encodes the structural subunits, the , , , , , ,  and  contribute to the synthesis and insertion of FeMo-co into nitrogenase, ,  and  play an important role in synthesis of metalloclusters and  is required for proper folder of nitrogenase Fe protein [–]. However, mutations in some of these genes (notably , , , , , , ,  and ) do not completely eliminate nitrogenase activity, and there is evidence that homologues elsewhere on the genome may at least partially substitute for their function . Nitrogen fixation plays an important role in agriculture, and there has been a goal to engineer nitrogen fixation into cereals crops to reduce the use of chemically derived fertilizer. The complex nature of the FeMo-co assembly pathway and the large number of genes required for nitrogenase biosynthesis and maintenance of its activity represent a daunting engineering task, even in the age of systems biology. So far, the  gene cluster from  and  sp. WLY78 has been successfully transferred into the prokaryotic model  [, –]. Initially, the recombinant  carrying a refactored  cluster composed of a series of synthetic operons containing 16  genes of . , resulted in reduced activity (about 10 %) compared with the native system . Excitingly, 57 % of wild-type activity has been recovered through modifying the synthetic  genes cluster . nifB nifH nifD nifK nifE nifN nifX hesA nifV sp. WLY78 possesses a minimal and compact  gene cluster consisting of 9 genes () . The 9 genes are organized as an operon and possess a σ-dependent promoter located in front of  gene. Recently, our lab has transferred the  gene operon under the control of its own native σ-dependent promoter to  JM109 . The recombinant  78-7 synthesized catalytically active nitrogenase . However, the specific activity of the enzyme expressed in  was approximately 10 % of that observed in . The low activity will limit the potential use of the  cluster in engineering nitrogen fixation into non-N-fixing organisms. Thus, it is necessary to increase nitrogenase activity through synthetic biology. In this study, two cloning and expression vectors with  promoter and ribosome binding site are constructed for transferring foreign genes to the recombinant  78-7 which carrying the  gene operon. A total of 28 selected genes from  and  were placed under the control of  promoter in these vectors and then are transferred to  78-7. Our results demonstrate that Fe–S cluster assembly system and electron transport system from  or  can increase  nitrogenase activity mediated by the minimal  gene cluster composed of 9 genes (). But  and  which are required in synthesis and maturation of nitrogenase in  can not increase any activity. Here is the first time to demonstrate that the potential electron transport genes (,  and ) are involved in nitrogen fixation of . Also, it is the first time to demonstrate that  and  and  can significantly increase nitrogenase activity in  mediated by the  gene operon (). Our results will provide valuable information for the incoming hot research that engineer nitrogen fixation pathway into cereal crops. Design of combinatorial assembly of the  and -related genes Schematic diagram outlining the structure of the pHY300PLK-derived, pBluescript II SK (+)-derived and pCAMBIA1301-derived vectors.  A  gene operon () carried in vector pHY300PLK. ,  Vectors constructed in this study. MCS, multiple clone sites 78-7 is a recombinant strain carrying a  gene operon () in vector pHY300PLK [, ] (Fig. a). As described in methods, two vectors carrying  promoter, ribosome-binding site and the multiple cloning site (MCS) are constructed (Fig. b, c) for expressing other  or -related genes in  78-7. The two vectors can coexist in  cells with plasmid pHY300PLK. Then the two vectors carrying foreign genes from  sp. WLY78 or  were separately or combinationally transferred to  78-7 (Additional file : Table S1, Additional file : Table S2). Suf system can increase nitrogenase activity of the recombinant  78-7 Nitrogenase is a complex [Fe–S] enzyme. Many diazotrophs, such as  and , contain  and  whose products were involved in the assembly of [Fe–S] clusters of nitrogenase [–]. NifU and NifS separately provide the Fe and S required for nitrogenase maturation. The genome of  sp. WLY78 does not have , but contains iron-sulfur cluster assembly systems: a complete  ( operon and a partial  system (). Similarly, there are no  and  in , but  has two iron-sulfur cluster assembly systems: the  operon and the  system composed of , , , , , , , and  . The  gene operon from  sp. WLY78 could enable  to fix nitrogen, suggesting that the assembly of Fe–S clusters for the nitrogenase was provided by  iron-sulfur cluster assembly systems. Assembly and functional analysis of the  Fe–S cluster assembly system () in  78-7.  Linear view of the Fe–S cluster assembly gene region in pBluescriptII SK (+)-derived plasmid.  Relative nitrogenase activity of wild-type  sp. WLY78,  78-7 [pBluescriptIISK (+)] and  78-7 ().  78-7 [pBluescriptII SK (+)] was used as a control. Each experiment was repeated at least three times, and the  represent standard error In this study, the  ( operon and  system from  sp. WLY78 are placed under the control of  promoter, respectively, and then are separately transferred into the recombinant  78-7. As shown in Fig. , the  ( operon can increase nitrogenase activity of  78-7 from 10 to 20 %, while  system cannot increase any activity. The data suggest that the  ( operon plays an important role in Fe–S cluster assembly in nitrogenase synthesis of . can increase nitrogenase activity of the recombinant  78-7 Assembly and functional analysis of the  Fe–S cluster assembly systems ( and ) in .  Linear view of the Fe–S cluster assembly gene region in pBluescriptII SK (+)-derived plasmid.  Relative nitrogenase activity of wild-type  sp. WLY78,  78-7 [pBluescriptII SK (+)],  78-7 () and  78-7 ().  78-7 [pBluescriptII SK (+)] was used as a control. Each experiment was repeated at least three times, and the  represent standard error As described in methods,  gene cluster was placed under the control of  promoter and then was transferred to  78-7. As shown in Fig. ,  can increase activity of  78-7 from 10 to 19.5 %. Our data that  or  can increase nitrogenase activity of  78-7 is consistent with the fact that nitrogenase is a complex [Fe–S] enzyme which contains 38 Fe atoms, 40 S atoms and 2 Mo atoms. The potential electron transporters from  can increase nitrogenase activity of the recombinant  78-7 Nitrogen fixation is carried out by the enzyme nitrogenase, which transfers electrons originating from low-potential electron carriers, such as flavodoxin or ferredoxin molecules, to molecular N . In , the physiological electron flow to nitrogenase involves specifically the products of the  and  genes . The  gene product, a flavodoxin, mediates electron transfer from the  gene product, a pyruvate: flavodoxin oxidoreductase, to the Fe protein of nitrogenase [–]. Unlike a  gene cluster,  gene cluster dose not have  and . Genome sequence analysis revealed that there are several genes encoding ferredoxin, flavodoxin and flavodoxin oxidoreductase in the genome of  sp. WLY78. For example,  and  encode ferredoxin,  and  encode flavodoxin, and  encodes ferredoxin-NADP reductase,  encodes NAD(P)H-flavin oxidoreductase, and  separately encode pyruvate: ferredoxin oxidoreductase gamma subunit and alpha subunit. Of these genes,  and  shows 30 % identity with , and  exhibit 33 % identity with , but other genes do not show identity with Assembly and functional analysis of the potential  electron transport genes in  78-7.  Linear view of the potential  electron transport genes.  Relative nitrogenase activity of wild-type  sp. WLY78,  78-7 [pBluescriptII SK (+)] and  78-7 strains carrying  genes.  78-7 [pBluescriptII SK (+)] was used as a control. Each experiment was repeated at least three times, and the  represent standard error Furthermore, the , ,  and , the orthlogs of , were separately transferred into the recombinant  78-7. As shown in Fig. , each of  and  can increase nitrogenase of  78-7 from 10 to 20.1 %, while  and  cannot increase any activity. The data suggest that  (ferredoxin) and  (flavodoxin) might be an electron transporter of nitrogenase. Our data are consistent with the previous report that either flavodoxins or ferredoxins are the direct electron donor to nitrogenase in diazotrophic bacteria . Furthermore, ,  and , the orthlogs of , were separately transferred into the recombinant  78-7. As shown in Fig. ,  increase nitrogenase activity from 10 to 15 %, while  and  do not increase any activity. The data suggest that  play a role in nitrogen fixation. Notably, the nitrogenase activity of  78-7 is increased to 35.1 and 40.1 %, respectively, when  is combined with  gene (-) or  gene (-). We deduce that in ,  (pyruvate: ferredoxin oxidoreductase) might be involved in the pyruvate breakdown to yield electrons, and then  and  mediate electron to nitrogenase. and  can increase nitrogenase activity of the recombinant  78-7 Assembly and functional analysis of the  electron transport genes in  78-7.  Linear view of the  electron transport genes.  Relative nitrogenase activity of wild-type  sp. WLY78,  78-7 [pBluescriptII SK (+)] and  78-7 strains carrying  genes.  78-7 [pBluescriptII SK (+)] was used as a control. Each experiment was repeated at least three times, and the  represent standard error As shown in Fig. ,  and , whose products are electron transporters, can increase nitrogenase of  78-7 from 10 to 20.4 and 12,1 %, respectively. When  and  were carried in two different vectors and co-transferred into  78-7, the activity was increased from 10 to 32 %. However, nitrogenase activity could not be increased when  and  were assembled as an operon. Our results are consistent with the report that coordinated and balanced expression of  and  genes is important for nitrogenase activity in  carrying  clusters . Combination of Fe–S cluster synthesis system and electron transporters can significantly increase nitrogenase activity Assembly of Fe–S cluster synthesis system and electron transporters in  78-7.  Linear view of the genes.  Relative nitrogenase activity of wild-type  sp. WLY78,  78-7 [pBluescriptII SK (+) and pCAMBIA1301] and  78-7 strains carrying different genes.  78-7. [pBluescriptII SK (+) and pCAMBIA1301] was used as a control. Each experiment was repeated at least three times, and the  represent standard error As described above, the (potential) electron transporters and iron-sulfur cluster assembly systems from  sp. WLY78 or  can increase activity of  78-7. Here, combination of the (potential) electron transporters and iron-sulfur cluster assembly system was transferred to  78-7. Considering that  genes are much shorter and easier to operate in gene cloning than  system,  genes were used in this combined assembly with the (potential) electron transporters from  sp. WLY78 or  As shown in Fig. , the combined Kp-, WLY78-- Kp- and WLY78- -Kp- increase activity from 10 to 39.1, 45.1 and 50.1 %, respectively. The highest activity obtained by WLY78- -Kp- suggests that  are the electron transport of nitrogenase in and  can not increase nitrogenase activity It was reported that the  and  genes seem to be involved in MoFe protein maturation, while  is required for proper folding of nitrogenase Fe protein [, ].  mutants of  and  were unable to synthesise action Fe protein [–].Unlike in ,  has not the  genes. And  has also not the  genes. In this study, the  genes were transferred to  78-7, but the nitrogenase activity was not enhanced by these genes. The data suggest that the requirement of  genes on maturation of nitrogenase vary greatly among diazotrophs. Assembly and functional analysis of the 
 and  in  78-7.  Linear view of the  and  genes region in pBluescriptII SK (+)-derived plasmid.  Relative nitrogenase activity of wild-type  sp. WLY78,  78-7 [pBluescriptII SK (+)],  78-7 () and  78-7 ().  78-7 [pBluescriptII SK (+)] was used as a control. Each experiment was repeated at least three times, and the  represent standard error NifQ has been implicated in the processing of molybdenum specifically for the biosynthesis of FeMo-co [, ]. Unlike in ,  dose not have  gene. In this study, the  gene was transferred to  78-7, but the nitrogenase activity was not enhanced by  gene. The result indicates that  is not involved in the processing of molybdenum specifically for the biosynthesis of FeMo-co of nitrogenase encoded by  genes (Fig. ). Our recent studies have revealed that the genome of  sp. WLY78 contains a minimal  gene cluster composed of nine genes  and the  operon under the control of its own  promoter enabled  to synthesize the active nitrogenase . However, the specific activity of the enzyme expressed in  was approximately 10 % of that observed in . In this study, synthetic biology was used to determine whether 28 selected genes from  sp. WLY78 and  can increase nitrogenase activity of the recombinant  78-7. Compared with  clusters, one of the notable absences in the minimal  gene cluster is the two genes  and , which provide the nitrogen fixation-specific iron-sulfur cluster assembly. The genome of  sp. WLY78 does not have , but contains iron-sulfur cluster assembly systems: a complete  ( operon and a partial  system (). In this study, we demonstrate that  ( operon can increase the nitrogenase activity of the recombinant  78-7, and  also can increase activity. The results reveal that iron-sulfur cluster assembly system specific for Fe–S cluster of nitrogenase is very important to nitrogen fixation. The results also imply that although  iron-sulfur cluster assembly system can support the synthesis of active nitrogenase, it cannot fully support the requirement for synthesis of Fe–S cluster. It was reported that pyruvate is a major source of electrons in diazotrophic  and  (now called as ) . In a, the pyruvate oxidoreductase ( gene product) was responsible for the pyruvate breakdown to yield electrons, and then the flavodoxin (the  gene product) mediates electron transfer to the Fe protein of nitrogenase .The  sp. WLY78  gene operon does not contain homologs of  (encoding a flavodoxin) and  (pyruvate: flavodoxin oxidoreductase) which provide the electron transport chain to nitrogenase in some diazotrophs [, ]. In this study, we search and find that the  (ferredoxin),  (ferredoxin), flavodoxin),  (flavodoxin), ferredoxin-NADP reductase), NAD(P)H-flavin oxidoreductase) and  (pyruvate: ferredoxin oxidoreductase) are scared on  genomic regions outside of  genes cluster. When each of these genes is separately transferred to  78-7, only ,  and  can increase activity. Combinational assembly of  or  with  can significantly increase activity. We deduce that  gene product (pyruvate: ferredoxin oxidoreductase) might be involved in the pyruvate breakdown to yield electrons, and then  and  mediate electron to nitrogenase. Here is the first time to reveal that ,  and  genes are involved in nitrogen fixation mediated by  genes. Notably, PfoAB shows 33 % identity with  NifJ. But the  gene product is a single subunit, while  gene products are two subunits. Here, we show that both  and  can enhance nitrogenase activity, suggesting that the both genes can transfer electron to Fe protein also exists in  and  . Whether  is involved in transferring electron to Fe protein of nitrogenase in  is not known. In , FldA and Fpr (the NADPH-dependent flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) containing flavodoxin/ferredoxin reductase) are required for the activation of key enzymes in the synthesis of methionine, biotin, pyruvate and deoxyribonucleotides [–]. Remarkably, the Fpr-FldA redox system can effectively deliver electrons to non-physiological partners, which include a variety of P450 enzymes . Thus, we deduce that the Fpr-FldA redox system might be responsible for electron transport to nitrogenase in Also, we demonstrate that each of  and  genes can increase nitrogenase activity of  78-7. The higher activity is obtained when  and  genes were carried in different vectors. However, nitrogenase could not be increased when  and  were assembled as an operon. Our results are consistent with the report that coordinated and balanced expression of  and  genes is important for nitrogenase activity in  carrying  clusters. Furthermore, in order to increase nitrogenase activity of  78-7, we design to assemble electron transport genes from  or  with Fe–S cluster synthesis genes from  or . Considering  are much shorter and easier to operate in gene cloning than  operon,  are used in the combinational assembly with electron transport genes. The combinational assembly of - with , - with ,  and  with  was constructed. Our results demonstrated that these combinational assemblies can significantly increase activity. Especially, - with  can recover 50 % activity of wild-type . Our results provide valuable information for engineering nitrogen fixation pathway into cereal crops. The  and  genes seem to be involved in MoFe protein maturation [, ], while  is required for proper folding of nitrogenase Fe protein in  [–]. The  genes are not only absent in the  cluster, but also in the  clusters of the Gram-positive ,  and archaeal  . Also,  is absent in , such as ,  and  . Our current studies demonstrate that  can not increase nitrogenase activity of  78-7.These data support that the  genes are not required for nitrogen fixation in  sp. WLY78. Whether the functions of the  genes are replaced by other components scared in the genome of  sp. WLY78 and  is not known. It was reported that  encodes a cis–trans peptidyl prolyl isomerase and are involved in proper folding of nitrogenase Fe protein in  . When the conserved Pro258 located in the C-terminal region of Fe protein (NifH) of , which wraps around the other subunit in the NifH dimer, is replaced by serine, the correct folding of Fe protein (NifH) can acquire NifM independence [, ]. We compare the  NifH sequence with other NifH sequences and find that  contains the conserved proline residues identified in other NifH sequences that are considered to be potential substrates for NifM (Additional file : Figure S1). It is possible that other amino acid substitutions in NifH may enable assembly of Fe protein in the absence of NifM. It has been demonstrated that  is required for nitrogen fixation in  and . Recent results show that NifQ is an iron-sulfur protein with a redox-responsive [Fe–S] cluster and NifQ is also a molybdoprotein that serves as a direct molybdenum donor for FeMo-co synthesis, replacing molybdate in the in vitro FeMo-co synthesis assay . Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopic studies indicated that NifQ carries a [Mo-Fe3-S4] cluster, and that the presence of this metal cluster in NifQ correlates with its ability to support in vitro FeMo-co synthesis . However, there is no  in diazotrophic , ,  and  [, ]. This study demonstrates that  did not enhance the activity of  78-7. Interestingly, there is a  gene located within the  clusters of diazotrophic ,  and  [, ]. Our deletion analysis demonstrates that  is important for nitrogenase activity, but the function of  in nitrogen fixation has not so far been determined. HesA belongs to the ThiF-MoeB-HesA family which engages in an ATP-dependent process that activates the C-terminus of partner ubiquitin-like proteins by forming an acyladenylate complex that facilitates sulfur transfer [, ]. It is to speculate that HesA may perform a role in metallocluster biosynthesis. These data suggest that synthesis and maturation of nitrogenase exhibit some different features between  gene clusters of Gram-negative  and Gram-positive . A total of 28 selected genes from  sp. WLY78 and  are separately or combinationally transferred into the recombinant  78-7. Of these 28 genes, 8 genes (, , , , ,  and COG3411) encoding the potential electron transport and 2 gene clusters ( and ) encoding Fe–S cluster synthesis are from  sp. WLY78, and 8 genes (, , ,  and ) specific for electron transport, Fe–S cluster synthesis and maturation of nitrogenase are from . Our results demonstrate that  operon and the potential electron transporter genes (,  and ) can increase nitrogenase activity. Also,  and  can increase nitrogenase activity. Especially, combined assembly of the potential electron transporter genes () with  recovers 50.1 % of wild-type activity. Also, we demonstrate that  and  can not increase activity, suggest ing that the requirement of  and  genes on maturation of nitrogenase vary greatly among diazotrophs. This study will provide valuable insights for the enhancement of nitrogenase activity in heterogeneous host and will provide guidance for engineering cereal plants with minimal  genes. sp. WLY78, a nitrogen-fixer, was isolated by our lab . The recombinant  78-7 which carries an 11 kb  genes cluster from  sp. WLY78 was constructed by our lab .  sp. WLY78 and  strains were routinely grown in LB or LD medium (per liter contains: 2.5 g NaCl, 5 g yeast and 10 g tryptone) at 30℃ with shaking. When appropriate, antibiotics were added in the following concentrations: 50 m g/ml kanamycine, 100 m g/ml ampiciline, and 12.5 m g/ml tetracycline for maintenance of plasmids. Nitrogen-free and nitrogen-deficient media were used for assay of nitrogenase activity. Nitrogen-free medium contained (per liter) 10.4 g NaHPO, 3.4 g KHPO, 26 mg CaCl·2HO, 30 mg MgSO, 0.3 mg MnSO, 36 mg Ferric citrate, 7.6 mg NaMoO·2HO, 10 μg -aminobenzoic acid, 5 μg biotin and 4 g glucose as carbon source. Nitrogen-deficient medium contained 2 mM glutamate as nitrogen source in nitrogen-free medium . For nitrogenase activity assays,  sp.WLY78 and the recombinant  strains were grown in 5 ml of LD media (supplemented with antibiotics) in 50 ml flasks shaken at 250 rpm for 16 h at 30 °C. The cultures were collected by centrifugation, washed three times with sterilized water and then resuspended in nitrogen-deficient medium containing 2 mM glutamate as nitrogen source (supplemented with antibiotics for the engineered  strains when necessary) to a final OD600 of 0.2–0.4. Then, 1 ml of the culture was transferred to a 25-ml test tube and the test tube was sealed with robber stopper. The headspace in the tube was then evacuated and replaced with argon gas . After incubating the cultures for 6–8 h at 30℃ with shaking at 250 rpm, CH (10 % of the headspace volume) was injected into the test tubes. After incubating the cultures for a further 3 h, 100 ml of culture headspace was withdrawn through the rubber stopper with a gas tight syringe and manually injected into a HP6890 gas chromatograph to quantify ethylene production. All treatments were in three replicates and all the experiments were repeated three or more times. Construction of cloning and expression vectors Since  78-7 carries a  gene operon in vector pHY300PLK which is a shuttle vector with two replication origins:one is p15A which can be reproduced in  and the other is a pAMα1 replicon from a plasmid pAMα1 of  which can be reproduced in Gram-positive  . The p15A replicon allows itself to coexist in  cells with plasmids of the ColE1 compatibility group (e.g., pBR322, pUC19, pBluescript II SK (+)). Thus, two cloning and expression vectors carrying a  promoter and a ribosome binding site are here constructed in order to express foreign genes in the recombinant  78-7. The first vector (here called pBC) contains the backbone derived from pBluescript II SK (+), including the  origin ColE1, ampiciline resistance marker amp and the multiple cloning sites (MCS). A 307 bp  promoter region (carrying XhoI and HindIII restriction sites at both ends) from the genomic DNA of  sp. WLY78 and a 1.2 kb chloramphenicol resistance gene fragment (carrying KpnI restriction sites at both ends) from the plasmid pPR9TT were PCR amplified and then ligated to the ampicillin-resistant plasmid pBluescript II SK (+), resulting vector pBC. The second vector (here named as pCK) contains the  origin ColE1, kanamycine resistance marker kan and the multiple cloning site (MCS) from plasmid pCAMBIA1301 and a 307 bp  promoter region (carrying XhoI and HindIII restriction sites at both ends) from the genomic DNA of  sp. WLY78. Construction of recombinant plasmids and recombinant  strains Here, a total of fourteen DNA fragments including 28 genes were PCR amplified from  sp. WLY78 and . First, nine DNA fragments (488 bp, 246 bp, 899 bp, 553 bp, 345 bp, 827 bp, 1045 bp, 3306 bp, 6455 bp and 1345 bp) which contain , , , , , ,  genes,  and  genes cluster of  sp. WLY78, respectively, were PCR amplified. Five DNA fragments (564, 3543, 2090, 1534 and 533 bp) containing , , ,  and  genes, respectively, were PCR amplified from  M5a1. The , , , , ,  and  gene fragments carried BamHI and XbaI target sites flanking the coding region. The , ,  and  gene fragments carried HindIII and BamHI target sites flanking the coding region. The  and  cluster and  genes fragment carried XbaI and SacI target sites at both ends. Each of these gene or genes cluster was cloned to the plasmid pBC and was placed under the control of  promoter. The , , ,  genes were cloned into the vector pCK, respectively. Primers for PCR, recombinant plasmids and strains are listed in Additional file : Tables S1, Additional file : Table S2, Additional file : Table S3 and Additional file : Table S4..