Appropriately,
this book opens
with a discussion over the struggle to define synthetic biology. The
field itself is not represented by a single breakthrough but is rather
a culmination of approaches and knowledge that have made the engineering
and design of biological systems more tractable. As they highlight,
the  are not new, yet the standardization of
parts and techniques make this engineering faster, cheaper, and more
modular. The appeal for scientists and industrialists is evident,
but on the other side of that, it has also made manipulation of biology
more approachable and has gained the eye of DIYers as well as increasingly
younger students entering into the research field. The International
Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM) organization has harnessed synthetic
biology for the undergraduate population, encouraging the formation
of student teams to engineer and build their own biological devices,
competing with one another on a world stage. This book aims
to fill a current gap in synthetic biology: the
lack of a comprehensive laboratory manual for beginning synthetic
biologists. While this manual provides many of the startup procedures
and scientific protocols necessary for a new lab, it more heavily
focuses on the development of a synthetic biology lab course than
providing an all-encompassing encyclopedic resource. This book starts
from scratch, from laboratory setup and supplies to safety. It provides
an introductory workflow for common techniques and would be of definite
use to educators wanting to bring synthetic biology into the classroom
or for motivated undergraduate students with the desire to start their
own iGEM team. Moving into the second chapter, the manual cursorily
covers many
of the most relevant scientific concepts to synthetic biology, going
into detail on a choice few. The readers are introduced to working
with the bacterium  and its DNA, and then
methods to control gene output via transcriptional and translational
regulation. This includes a solid discussion of promoters and ribosome
binding sites, a particularly useful resource to new iGEM team members
since these elements comprise a large portion of the “parts”
stored in the DNA registry for teams to use. The use of chromoproteins
as reporter output is briefly mentioned, and small regulatory RNAs
(sRNAs) described as a way to repress gene expression. While all the
topics mentioned herein are conceptually useful, the chapter could
have benefitted from a more organized discussion of what “parts”
are available for synthetic biologists and how they may functionally
be assembled to achieve a target output for a system, something briefly
touched on at the start of Chapter 5. Chapters 3 and 4 address
the practicalities of setting up a lab
space for students. The equipment list for synthetic biology, thankfully,
is not a long one, and the manual includes photos illustrating the
key equipment. A couple tips for usage of some equipment are noted,
but the actual purposes or basic working components for some of these
machines are never described. This information may seem basic for
those who have been in a lab before, but for students and educators
new to the lab, this information is vital to the understanding of
the experimental setup and could be a nice addition. When working
in the lab, we must never ignore that safety is the
first priority. The manual addresses responses to fire, chemical spills,
ethidium bromide, biosafety disposal, and dangerous equipment including
gel electrophoresis setups and centrifuges. Biosafety regulations
are briefly mentioned, but importantly this lab manual covers biosafety
level 1 (BSL1) projects and explains the associated safety requirements.
All readers must remember that this is just an introduction—each
institution has its associated safety, biohazard, and chemical procedures,
and before beginning any activity all researchers should be trained
by certified personnel. The fifth chapter is the real focus
of this effort, describing
in-depth how a 5-week synthetic biology lab might be structured, clearly
tailored toward instructors rather than students. The authors provide
detailed lists of materials as well as explicit timelines in the appendices,
truly making the development of this course at new institutions very
achievable. This course is smartly designed, taking students from
no experience to hypothesis generation and testing. The first experiment
emphasizes the importance of making solutions and properly generating
reagents, an approachable first step for students who have never worked
in the lab. Next, the course guides students through a prescribed
activity in which they must clone a promoter in front of a chromoprotein
reporter. The motivation for, and construction of, the cloning scheme
is very well described and easy to understand. The students are led
through an entire cloning workflow over the course of this experiment,
providing training in many techniques important to synthetic biology
(PCR, gel electrophoresis, endonuclease digestion, ligation, transformation,
etc.). Even though the cloning steps here are designed by the instructors,
students are allowed creativity in generating assays for testing their
chromoprotein expression. Using the skills learned and developed
in the early part of the
course, students now become the engineers: how can you alter the expression
of your chromoproteins? Students must do independent research and
design their own changes to their original constructs, with the help
of some suggestions and teaching strategies provided in the manual.
To aid in construction, the lab manual provides protocols and instruction
for a few more advanced cloning techniques like PCR mutagenesis and
Gibson Assembly. For longer courses or particularly motivated students,
the final lab section, “Lab Section 4: Other Experiments”,
summarizes activities based on previous iGEM projects developed by
BioBuilder. Because materials for iGEM are all open source, they provide
an increasingly large library of projects and materials for educators
building synthetic biology courses. As a companion to the course
design, the next section of the manual
contains many common synthetic biology lab protocols for cloning and
use of . This is the most useful section for
readers on iGEM teams who are working in the lab, and it can function
independently from the rest of the lab manual as a resource for students.
Explaining  the experiments work is glossed over
in this section, however, so students and instructors might have to
look back to Chapter 5 or in external resources for mechanistic explanations
of the techniques. Some assay and more advanced technical methods
are introduced in the following chapter, though protocols are not
provided for these. The lab manual concludes with a section
devoted to starting an
iGEM team, cleverly comparing it to starting a PCR reaction. While
most of the logistical information is appropriately left out of the
manual—readers are directed to the iGEM Web site—the
practical advice derived from the writers’ experiences was
unique and useful, such as consulting previous iGEM members and interested
faculty, as well as picking a project. The authors come from a prize-winning
iGEM program at Uppsala University in Sweden, so their advice is based
on years of experience and success. Synthetic
Biology: A Lab Manual Overall,  is an
excellent introduction to genetic engineering and techniques, geared
toward instructors in setting up a lab course but functional for iGEM
teams and students starting out in the field. While the context of
the iGEM competition might not be applicable to general readership,
the importance of iGEM in the innovation and development of synthetic
biology is highlighted and demonstrates good examples of successful
design and engineering of biological devices..