Synthetic photobiology is a
discipline at the intersection of photobiology, bioengineering, and
synthetic biology. It relies on the mechanistic understanding of light-induced
changes in photoreceptor proteins to design (i) light-activated proteins
with new functions and (ii) gene circuits that can be controlled by
light in a predictable, and ideally, programmable manner. Synthetic
photobiology in many ways is synonymous with optogenetics. However,
historically, optogenetics has been associated with the use of native
or modified rhodopsin light-activated ion channels and pumps to control
neuronal activity. Synthetic photobiology is perhaps a more encompassing
term that emphasizes engineering aspect intrinsic to all synthetic
biology. Semantics aside, what is so unique about light that
it can claim
a slice of synthetic biology all to itself? After all, chemical inducers
are currently more commonly used than light, yet it would be absurd
to envision synthetic IPTG-biology or synthetic arabinose-biology.
The answer is in the unique properties of light that distinguish it
from all chemical stimuli—spatial and temporal precision. Spatially,
light can operate at subcellular resolution because it can be focused
onto a small region within a cell. Temporally, light can be turned
on and (importantly!) off instantaneously. Chemicals (drugs) do not
come close to such high spatiotemporal resolution, which is often
necessary to control cellular processes with physiologically relevant
parameters. To use light for bioengineering purposes, we rely
on the suite
of light-activated protein modules designed by Mother Nature. Various
organisms sense light to optimize their photosynthetic activity, to
avoid photooxidative damage, for vision, motility, and even to enhance
virulence. A treasure trove of photoreceptor proteins exists in plants,
animals, and especially in the enormous number of microorganisms.
Note that whereas sensing changes in the light environment is a common
biological phenomenon, sensing other wave stimuli (radio and electromagnetic
waves or ionizing radiation) simply is not that common, and that natural
receptors for these wave stimuli that would be amenable for engineering
are hard to come by. All protein photoreceptors contain light-absorbing
chromophores,
usually small molecules with conjugated double bonds. More rarely,
chromophores are formed by the amino acid residues of the photoreceptor
proteins. Seven photoreceptor types appear to have been most evolutionarily
successful. These include receptors of UV light (UVR); blue light
(sensors of blue light using FAD [BLUF]); light, oxygen, and voltage
sensors [LOV]; photoactive yellow proteins [PYP]; cryptochromes [CRY];
and receptors that can sense light in different spectral regions (rhodopsins
and phytochromes [PHY]). All natural photoreceptors have a modular
architecture, wherein photosensory modules can be linked to and control
diverse output activities. In the past decade and a half, the mechanisms
underlying photoreceptor operation have been deciphered for most photoreceptor
types. It is the growing understanding of these mechanisms that has
opened up the opportunities for engineering new light-activated proteins
and building light-controlled gene circuits. A collection of
articles in this Synthetic Photobiology Special
Issue of  is representative
of the current state of the field. These articles describe different
engineering approaches that were applied to photoreceptors of several
classes to gain photocontrol of diverse outputs. One line of inquiry
is exemplified by the study from the Möglich lab. The researchers
investigated how point mutations in the LOV photoreceptor module affect
signaling properties of a synthetic blue-light activated protein histidine
kinase. Modifying properties of the photoreceptor is important because
such manipulations allow researchers to adjust the photoreceptor performance
to the demands of specific applications. The study by the Hahn
lab also used a LOV domain photoreceptor,
however, for a different purpose. These researchers wanted to adapt
the LOV module to regulate mammalian Ser-Thr kinases. By relying on
the conserved light-inducible conformational change in the C-terminal
helix of the LOV domain, they engineered LOV domain fusions with peptide
inhibitors of two different mammalian kinases. Their study is a fine
example of how knowledge of light-induced conformational changes combined
with clever protein engineering can be used to control signaling pathways
in living cells, and through these pathways to control cell behavior. The articles
from the Tabor, Tucker, and Webber groups describe
optimization of existing and engineering of novel light-activated
gene expression circuits for bacterial (Tabor), yeast (Tucker), and
mammalian cells (Webber). These researchers focused on testing and
modifying pairs of proteins whose interactions are controlled by light
(light-dependent dimerizers). The goal of such optimization is to
increase the dynamic range of photoactivated circuits and to lower
unwanted background activity in the dark. These groups worked with
light-dependent dimerizers containing photoreceptors from the UVR,
LOV, CRY, and PHY families. Some of the unexpected findings that emerged
from these studies are that dynamic ranges for the same light-dependent
dimerizers may differ significantly depending on the cell type, and
that moderate light-dependent interactions can be drastically improved
by systematic optimization of a system’s genetic makeup. The
Tabor and Webber groups show how gene expression in the same cells
can be controlled by light of two and three different colors, respectively.
To identify parameters that would allow photoreceptors of three different
kinds (UVR, LOV, and PHY) to function orthogonally, Webber and colleagues
sought help in mathematical modeling. The multicolor gene regulatory
control systems described in these papers will allow fine-tuned regulation
of multiple cellular targets, which may be necessary for studying
complex cellular behavior. Finally, the study from my laboratory
proposes the use of second
messengers, in this case c-di-GMP, as new synthetic photobiology tools.
Second messengers are attractive (i) because they can convey the light
signal to different kinds of downstream receptors and (ii) because
they amplify the primary signal, which may be important when light
availability is limited. As proof of principle, we designed a bacterial
system for light-induced synthesis and degradation of c-di-GMP. Coupled
with the c-di-GMP-dependent transcription factors, this system creates
light-inducible, c-di-GMP-mediated gene regulatory circuits. When
transferred to organisms that lack c-di-GMP (e.g., mammalian and some
bacterial cells), these circuits are expected to operate orthogonally
to the native systems. Because mammals are the primary target for
such systems, c-di-GMP synthesis is controlled by the bacteriophytochrome
photoreceptor that senses far-red/near-infrared light. Such light
penetrates much deeper into mammalian tissues than visible light. Only time will tell whether or not bacteriophytochrome-based systems
can be successfully adapted to control cellular processes in live
mammals. The cyanobaterial or plant PHYs that absorb in the red/far-red
spectrum (explored in this issue by the Tucker, Tabor, and Webber
groups) may prove more robust, in spite of the complexity associated
with the chromophore synthesis for these photoreceptors. What is clear
is that moving into mammals remains a formidable challenge for the
field. By overcoming this challenge, we could greatly improve our
understanding of mammalian development and disease and likely contribute
to disease treatments. The spectacular success of optogenetics in
neurobiology is an example to emulate. Other frontiers in synthetic
photobiology include optimization and standardization of photosensory
modules to facilitate on-demand engineering of photoactive proteins
with desired functions. Standardization of the parts for light-responsive
gene circuits is another area of improvement. These and other challenges
are expected to continue attracting bright minds to synthetic photobiology
and ensure the bright future of this field..