The past
few years have witnessed
an increase in the number of microorganisms that can be metabolically
engineered within the conceptual frame of Systems Biology and the
molecular tools of contemporary Synthetic Biology. Longstanding platforms (, , , , and yeast) are increasingly accompanied by others (,  species) that, due to their indigenous
endurance to environmental stresses, have an improved ability to execute
harsh biochemical transformations. Whether
well-established or emerging, such platforms are empowered by a complex
central carbon metabolic network where heterologous pathways must
nest in any given host. Despite this fact, the majority of ongoing
Metabolic Engineering efforts are preoccupied with what one could
call ,, the elimination
of competing endogenous pathways, the fine-tuning of gene expression
and substrate transport, and the rerouting of small molecules at given
nodes of the network. In contrast, the biochemical  that fuels the microbial cell factory is generally taken for granted
and hardly ever touched; , few efforts have tried
to reshape central enzymatic processes in its entirety. Relevant examples
of this sort include auxotrophic CO fixation and CHOH assimilation by engineered strains of . Such efforts suffer from the difficulties of re-engineering some
of the most extremely interconnected and fine-tuned components of
any biological system as central metabolism is. Against this background, we wondered whether the most archetypal
metabolic pathway (, a linear glycolysis) could
be reshaped in a way that, while maintaining its biochemical role
and identity, could be freed of its native regulatory complexity and
made portable either as a whole or as a functional subset of portable
elements for specific Metabolic Engineering needs. In its simplest
definition,  is the
metabolic breakdown of glucose into pyruvate (Pyr). Thought to have
originated from simple chemical constraints in a prebiotic environment,
glycolysis is one of the most widespread and conserved metabolic blocks
in nature. Several biochemical sequences
lead to the formation of Pyr from hexoses. The most studied example
is the Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas (EMP) pathway, composed
by the sequential activity of ten individual enzymes. The first five
enzymes are involved in the so-called , which uses ATP to convert hexoses into trioses phosphate [, glucose → glyceraldehyde-3- (GA3P)]. The  comprises the second
half of the EMP enzymes, and it yields 2 NADH molecules and 2 ATP
molecules per each processed glucose molecule by converting trioses
phosphate into Pyr [, GA3P → Pyr]. Therefore,
the overall stoichiometry of the EMP pathway is glucose + 2NAD + 2ADP + 2Pi → 2Pyr + 2NADH + 2H + 2ATP.
Another glycolytic route is the Entner–Doudoroff (ED) pathway,
widely distributed in prokaryotes (even more so than the EMP route).
The overall stoichiometry of the ED pathway is glucose + NAD + NADP + ADP + Pi → 2Pyr + NADH + NADPH + 2H + ATP. Although this biochemical sequence yields half the
amount of ATP as compared to that of the EMP pathway, the ED route has been demonstrated to be a key source of
reducing power in many environmental microorganisms. Because of a lifestyle of constant exposure to physicochemical insults
often found in natural scenarios, such
bacteria have evolutionarily favored the formation of reducing power to counteract oxidative stress. This is in contrast with the generation of ATP and the
sheer buildup of biomass that appears to be the main metabolic driving
force in Enterobacteria. Besides these highly conserved biochemical
sequences, variants of carbohydrate breakdown processes are also present
on other prokaryotes. Archaea, for instance, are characterized by
the presence of unique, modified versions of the EMP and ED pathways
which often include nonphosphorylating enzymes. Standard European Vector Architecture The research below was prompted by our ongoing efforts to
establish
the soil-dweller microorganism  as a platform for hosting strong redox reactions. This bacterium lacks a 6-phosphofructo-1-kinase
(Pfk) activity, and therefore the EMP pathway is not functional. The
mere addition of Pfk to the biochemical network of  was not only insufficient to activate an EMP-based hexose catabolism,
but it also resulted in deleterious effects on growth and limited
resistance to oxidative stress. Thus,
the channeling of glucose toward Pyr in , while delivering enough NAD(P)H and yielding the highest possible
amount of ATP, demands a multitiered approach involving more glycolytic
genes or specific combinations thereof. To this end, in our present
contribution we describe the reformatting of the entire EMP route
of  in a layout that we have called , that allows complete or partial implantation
of the glycolytic route in a variety of Gram-negative bacteria including
(but not limited to) . This work finds
inspiration in the attempts to decompress the regulatory density of
the  T7 bacteriophage and the deconstruction/reconstruction of the whole N-fixation system of () in an easy-to-manipulate setup. This time, however,
the objective was the implantation of central metabolic functions
in different Gram-negative hosts by means of portable, standardized
modules assembled in promiscuous plasmids belonging to the SEVA () collection. The data discussed below not only demonstrates
the versatility of the thereby reported device in various bacterial
hosts, but it also expands the toolbox for deep engineering of central
biochemical tasks in a microbial cell factory. Functional
Elements, Layout, and Design of Glycolytic Modules
I and II The starting point of this research was to design
a streamlined set of genes to aid implanting (or increasing) glycolytic
capacities in the microbial cell. To this end, we first pinpointed
each of the ten enzymes carrying out the complete transformation of
glucose into Pyr through the EMP pathway in the extant metabolic network
of .  In its naturally occurring
configuration the corresponding genes are either scattered throughout
the genome or arranged in two operons (,  and ) under the transcriptional
control of at least five regulators (Cra, SoxS, Crp, Fur, and FnrS)
as well as a number of post-transcriptional control devices. Our first task was to exclusively capture the
enzymatic complement of the system while releasing the corresponding
genes (either separately or as a whole) from any host-specific regulatory
connection. Against this background, the basic organization of what
we call a GlucoBrick is sketched in . When more than one gene encoded a given
EMP reaction (, /, /, /, and /), the one bringing about the highest activity was selected
according to the information available in the literature. The structural
sequence of each glycolytic gene starts with a leading ATG and ends
up with a STOP codon. The corresponding DNA was edited to eliminate
restriction sites incompatible with the assembly standard discussed
below, and any internal transcriptional signal was erased. Such ORFs
are preceded by a standardized Shine-Dalgarno sequence and a DNA spacer,
and the whole segment is flanked upstream and downstream by restriction
sites that match given positions of the default multiple cloning site
of the SEVA format. SEVA vectors include a choice of plasmids with
four compatible broad-host range origins of replication (, RK2, pBBR1, pRO1600/ColE1, and RSF1010) and six independent antibiotic
markers [, ampicillin, kanamycin (Km), cloramphenicol,
streptomycin, tetracyclin, and gentamicin]. This standard allows for
the effective propagation and maintenance of up to four plasmids in
any given Gram-negative host, and it also enables the simultaneous
expression of several genes. Since each glycolytic gene was preceded
by a synthetic ribosome binding site (RBS), and bracketed by two directional
SEVA restriction enzymes (, following the standard
format –RBS–glycolytic
gene–), the assembly standard
allows to directly subclone or swap any gene combination by a simple
digestion and ligation step. Moreover, the order of insertion of each
of the ten GlucoBricks in the SEVA’s multiple cloning site
reflects the biochemical sequence of operation in the EMP pathway,
thereby allowing for whatever the combination of the parts within
the route at stake. Building on this concept, we designed
two DNA modules that encode
all the necessary enzymes for the activation of a flawless, linear
EMP-based glycolytic route. The EMP pathway was purposely split into
two catabolic blocks: the ,
termed , comprises the activities of the
preparatory phase; and the ,
dubbed , spans the activities of the pay-off
phase (a).
Module I thus encodes all the enzymes needed for glucose phosphorylation
and conversion into trioses phosphate, whereas activities originating
from Module II use GA3P, the final product of Module I, as the precursor
to form Pyr (b). A detailed map of the DNA architecture of this platform (a) indicates that
the two DNA blocks can be also combined sequentially in a single SEVA
vector if desired (and even in transposon vectors designed for chromosomal
integration of large DNA segments). Note that
adopting the SEVA standard also enables the user to express any group
of genes under the control of the large number of constitutive and
effector-responsive, broad-host-range transcriptional devices available
in the database. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00230/suppl_file/sb6b00230_si_001.pdf As a first step in the characterization of this tool in  strains, Modules I and II were separately cloned
in vector pSEVA224 (RK2, Km), giving rise to pS224·GBI
and pS224·GBII, respectively (Tables S1 and S2 in the ). The expression of the
glycolytic genes in these low-copy-number plasmids is under control
of the LacI/P expression
system, inducible by addition of isopropyl-β--1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG) to the culture medium. As an additional test of the structural
versatility of this plasmid-based GlucoBrick platform, a restriction
analysis of both pS224·GBI and pS224·GBII was carried out
(b). All the
glycolytic genes could be separately recovered upon digestion with
the appropriate pair of restriction enzymes–thereby facilitating
direct subcloning into suitable SEVA vectors whenever needed as indicated
above. Schematic representation of the GlucoBrick platform layout
and
the cognate glycolytic reactions. (a) The minimal set of genes from  K-12 needed for the activation of a functional
and linear Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas pathway were edited
according to the Standard European Architecture Vector rules and assembled
into two synthetic operons. The first operon, termed Module I, encodes
all the reactions within the upper catabolic block of the pathway
(, bioreactions of the preparatory phase of glycolysis).
The second operon, termed Module II, spans the reactions of the lower
catabolic block of the pathway (, bioreactions
of the pay-off phase of glycolysis). All the glycolytic reactions
are shown below the gene encoding them. Note that each gene is preceded
by a synthetic regulatory element, indicated by a purple circle, composed
of a ribosome binding site (sequence underlined) and a short spacer
sequence. (b) Linear glycolytic pathway encoded by the GlucoBrick
platform, transforming glucose into glyceraldehyde-3- (GA3P) by means of the activities of Module I; and GA3P into pyruvate
(Pyr) by means of the activities of Module II. The two sets of glycolytic
transformations are indicated with blue and red arrows, representing
the genes within Modules I and II, respectively. Other abbreviations
used in this outline are as follows: G6P, glucose-6-; F6P, fructose-6-; FBP, fructose-1,6-; DHAP, dihydroxyacetone-; BPG, glycerate-1,3-; 3PG, glycerate-3-; 2PG,
glycerate-2-; and PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate. Genetic architecture of the GlucoBrick platform. (a) Physical
map
of Modules I and II, indicating restriction enzymes bracketing individual
glycolytic genes. The enzyme targets are colored in the sequence of
the multiple cloning site of all the plasmids belonging to the Standard
European Architecture Vector to identify the DNA block they belong
to (, blue, Module I; and red, Module II). Other
restriction targets that could be used to add different regulatory
or structural elements and thereby expand the usability of this platform
are shown in gray. The abbreviations used in this outline are GA3P,
glyceraldehyde-3-; and Pyr, pyruvate. (b) Restriction
analysis of Module I and II. Plasmids pS224·GBI (upper panel)
and pS224·GBII (lower panel) were digested with the appropriate
enzymes as indicated and the products were separated by electrophoresis
in a 0.7% (w/v) agarose gel. Plasmid pS224·GBI was digested with II-HI (i, releases the whole Module
I segment); II-RI (ii, releases ); RI-I (iii,
releases ); I-I (iv, releases ); I-I (v, releases ); and I-HI (vi, releases ). Plasmid
pS224·GBII was digested with HI-dIII (i, releases the whole Module II segment); HI-I (ii, releases ); I-I (iii, releases ); I-I (iv, releases ); I-I (v, releases ); and I-dIII
(vi, releases ). The Activities Encoded in the GlucoBricks Restore or Enhance
the Growth of Glycolytic  Mutants The functional characterization of the GlucoBrick system was carried
out by assessing their phenotypic impact when the corresponding plasmids
were introduced in glycolytic  mutants
lacking either single or several combined activities of the EMP pathway
().  BW25113, a wild-type K-12 strain, was used as a positive control in all these
growth experiments, in which the final cell density and the specific
growth rate was recorded for each strain in cultures containing both
Km and IPTG. First, the initial steps in glucose processing were targeted
at the level of Glk (, glucokinase) and PtsI
[, the EI component of the phosphoenolpyruvate
(PEP):carbohydrate phosphotransferase (PTS) system]. No glucose phosphorylation
is possible in such mutant as Glk and the PTS-dependent transport
of the hexose coupled to phosphorylation are both blocked. Note, however, that glucose transport should
not be significantly affected, since alternative transporters (, the low-affinity galactose:H GalP symporter
and the ATP-dependent MglABC system) internalize the nonphosphorylated
hexose when the PTS system is not active. Accordingly, the Δ Δ strain grew in M9GCM semisynthetic medium (formulated in such a
way that all the glycolytic mutants tested could grow, albeit some
of them did so poorly) but not in M9 minimal medium with glucose as
the only carbon source. The presence of Module I, however, restored
the growth of the double mutant on the hexose back to the levels observed
in the semisynthetic medium. When the reaction catalyzed by Pfk (which
mediates the glycolytic formation of fructose-1,6- from fructose-6-) was eliminated by
deleting both  and , the
growth of the resulting strain was severely compromised even in M9GCM
medium—and no growth at all was observed in minimal medium
with glucose. The Pfk activity brought about by Module I was, however,
enough to restore this growth deficiency in both culture media, and
it also lead to a 2.3-fold increase in the specific growth rate of
the recombinant in M9GCM medium. Another critical step of the EMP
pathways is TpiA (, triose phosphate isomerase),
which plays a central role not only in downward glycolysis but also
in gluconeogenesis. Expectedly, the growth
of a Δ mutant was impaired among all the
culture conditions tested, probably because of the buildup of methylglyoxal
as a toxic intermediate. Expression of  within Module I alleviated this metabolic situation,
even restoring the growth of the mutant from glucose and significantly
enhancing it in the semisynthetic medium. The capability of Module II to mediate EMP activities
in the pay-off
phase was analyzed in another set of  glycolytic mutants. The conversion of GA3P into PEP (and, consequently,
Pyr) was targeted to test Module II. Note that the mere elimination
of GA3P dehydrogenase in  (represented
by GapA, and possibly the GapB isozyme) does not block Pyr formation, as this metabolite could be also
produced by the PTS system from PEP. Most of the PEP pool comes from
the EMP pathway, yet anaplerotic reactions could also generate this
intermediate. Considering this complex metabolic scenario (and in
order to ensure that there is no Pyr formation), a triple  mutant was constructed by eliminating  (encoding a NAD-dependent GA3P dehydrogenase,
and also the major GA3P dehydrogenase prevalent in Enterobacteria),  (also known as , encoding a NAD–erythrose-4- dehydrogenase), and
also . Glucose-dependent growth was completely
abolished in this mutant, and M9GCM medium cultures only attained
a modest cell density. Once again, the presence of Module II enhanced
or even restored the growth of the triple mutant by means of the GapA
activity encoded therein. Interestingly, the specific growth rate
of the recombinant cells in semisynthetic medium increased >6-fold
when Module II was transformed in the Δ Δ Δ mutant—the
highest among the conditions and strains analyzed in this study. Finally,
the Δ and Δ mutants
had a similar qualitative behavior: they grew very poorly in semisynthetic
medium and could not grow at all in M9 minimal medium with glucose.
The corresponding activities encoded in Module II sufficed to restore
the growth of the corresponding recombinants on the hexose, while
the specific growth rate in M9GCM medium increased by . 3-fold in either case (). Note that, besides the functional complementation
of individual enzyme activities missing in the single or multiple
mutant strains studied herein, the GlucoBrick blocks can also amplify
glycolytic activities that are already in place in , thus boosting the channeling of hexoses through the linear EMP
pathway. In all the cases studied here, the final cell densities attained
by the recombinants carrying GlucoBricks in M9 minimal medium with
glucose was comparable to that of wild-type  BW25113. In order to evaluate if these growth phenotypes correlate
with
higher specific activities of some of the enzymes involved in glucose
processing, some key steps in the EMP pathway were evaluated in cell-free
extracts . The activity of Glk in the glucose-grown
Δ Δ mutant expressing
Module I was 1,370 ± 120 nmol min mg protein upon induction of gene expression with IPTG, representing
a . 23- and 10-fold increase as compared with the
same strain carrying the empty vector and wild-type BW25113 carrying
the empty vector, respectively (note that some residual Glk activity
was observed in the knockout strain, possibly arising from some other
nonspecific hexose kinases). Similarly,
introduction and induction of the genes in Module I in the Δ Δ strain resulted in 10-fold
increase in the Pfk activity (1,080 ± 70 nmol min mg protein) as compared with the same strain
carrying the empty pSEVA224 vector. In contrast, the Pfk activity
in wild-type BW25113 was 751 ± 36 nmol min mg protein. The residual  phosphofructokinase activity observed in the  Δ Δ mutant
(<100 nmol min mg protein) could arise from a side activity of an enzyme belonging to the
PfkB family of phosphosugar kinases, which form a subset of the large
ribokinase superfamily. Possibly, ribokinase
(or another enzyme belonging to this family) phosphorylates fructose-6- to fructose-1,6-, which in turn may be due to the dilution of an
allosteric inhibitor in the assay as previously described by Chin
and Cirino. Taken together, these
results indicate that the efficiency of either
Glk or Pfk in  can be appropriately complemented
by means of the activities borne by the GlucoBrick platform. The evidence
gathered so far highlight the versatility of the GlucoBrick system
in bestowing or even enhancing glycolytic activities in  mutants—the next relevant question being whether this tool
can also be used in other, unrelated bacterial species. Functional
Validation of Module I
and II in Glycolytic Mutants of  BW25113 M9 minimal
medium +20 mM glucose http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00230/suppl_file/sb6b00230_si_001.pdf The detailed genotype of the strains
is given in Table S1 in the . Plasmid pSEVA224 was
used as the
control vector; plasmids pS224·GBI and pS224·GBII are pSEVA224
derivatives carrying either Module I or II, respectively. IPTG was
added to all cultures at 1 mM at the onset of the cultivation. M9GCM semisynthetic medium contains
the same salts as M9 minimal medium, casein hydrolyzate, glycerol,
and sodium malate. CDW, cell dry weight after 48 h of aerobic incubation
at 37 °C. N.G.,  (defined as a change
in the CDW < 0.05 g L). The  is the ratio between the specific growth rate
of a strain carrying either Module I or II and the specific growth
rate of the same strain carrying pSEVA224; the cases in which the
mutant did not grow (and hence, the growth coefficient could not be
calculated) are indicated as G.R., . Results represent the mean value ± standard deviation from
triplicate measurements in at least two independent experiments. All
the differences in growth coefficients for the strains grown in M9GCM
semisynthetic medium were significant ( < 0.05,
as evaluated by means of the Student’s  test)
in the pairwise comparison of a given recombinant to the control strain
carrying the empty pSEVA224 vector. The Activities
Encoded by GlucoBricks Are Instrumental for Engineering
Glycolysis in Two  Species Pseudomonads
are a wide group of aerobic Gram-negative γ-proteobacteria characterized
by their remarkable metabolic versatility and ubiquitous presence
in many environmental niches. and  are representative members
of the genus, which prevalently use the ED pathway for hexoses breakdown. KT2440, a current platform for Synthetic
Biology and Metabolic Engineering, uses a cyclic
combination of enzymes of the EMP pathway, the ED pathway, and the
pentose phosphate pathway to catabolize glucose  a metabolic array termed as () (a)—probably operative in other members of the  group as well, such as . The intrinsic metabolic complexity of glycolysis in these bacteria
makes the targeted Metabolic Engineering of primary metabolism particularly
difficult, and we thus decided to adopt both  KT2440 and  PAO1 as the heterologous
hosts for testing the GlucoBrick platform by assessing physiological
and growth parameters as well as the  activity
of key glycolytic enzymes. Since the expression of the glycolytic modules
is expected to boost
the activity of the extant EMP pathway enzymes in  and to provide, at the same time, the missing step catalyzed by
Pfk, we evaluated the overall glucose consumption in recombinant  and  strains
carrying either an empty pSEVA224 vector or the pS224·GBI plasmid,
bearing Module I (b). In both cases, the overall rate of glucose consumption
was boosted by expressing the genes of Module I (, 2.5- and 1.5-fold in  KT2440 and  PAO1, respectively, as compared to the
strains bearing the pSEVA224 vector). Interestingly, no major growth
deficiencies (both in terms of final biomass densities and specific
growth rates) were observed in the strains carrying Module I (c).  PAO1 had a slight reduction in the specific growth rate when expressing
Module I, but the difference in this parameter as compared to that
in the same strain carrying an empty vector was not significant. In
any case, this result is somewhat in contrast with the observed deleterious
effect of separately overexpressing  from  in  KT2440. It is plausible that the differences arise from
expressing the kinase gene alone  introducing
the whole upper metabolic block from  in . thereby enabling
circulation of carbon from glucose down to GA3P by connecting the
corresponding reactions. The consequences of blocking this situation,
broadly known as , have been
recently described in a Δ mutant of . The authors indicate
that intermediates of the EMP pathway are passed from one enzyme to
the next one without equilibration within the cellular medium. As
such, all the enzymes in the biochemical sequence are needed to reach
an efficient traffic through the whole pathway—a finding that
helps explaining why the concerted expression of all the EMP genes
in  KT2440 does not impact the cell
physiology significantly. If the hypothesis of metabolic channeling
advanced above holds
true, one might expect that an increase in the activities of the whole
EMP pathway is a  for activating
a linear glycolysis in  species. We therefore
decided to evaluate if the glycolytic activities implanted could actually
account for a functional EMP pathway by evaluating the  activities of enzymes of the preparatory phase of this
pathway in different  recombinants. The activity of Glk was first assayed in strains KT2440 and PAO1
carrying pS224·GBI (Module I) and growing on glucose as the sole
carbon source, and added with Km and IPTG as needed (a). Unlike ,  species do not have a devoted PTS
system for glucose uptake, and direct phosphorylation of the hexose
is catalyzed by Glk (, PP_1011 in  and PA_3193 in ) in the cytoplasm.
The native Glk activity in both  species
ranged from . 89 to 184 nmol min mg protein in  PAO1 and  KT2440, respectively, and
this kinase activity was boosted by expression of .  from plasmid pS224·GBI (, a 1.4-fold increase in strain KT2440 and a remarkable
6.2-fold increase in strain PAO1). A  Δ strain was also constructed, in which
the  Glk activity resulted negligible. Transformation
of this  mutant strain with plasmid pS224·GBI
and induction of gene expression by IPTG addition augmented the kinase
activity up to 45 nmol min mg protein (, a 100-fold increase in Glk activity). As mentioned before,
a Pfk activity is altogether missing in several  species, strains KT2440 and PAO1 being prime
examples of the absence of such glycolytic step. Thus, the introduction
of Module I in these strains would fill the gap between fructose-6- and fructose-1,6- by grafting
the PfkA activity from . This  kinase activity was analyzed on both  species transformed with plasmid pSEVA224·GBI and grown in
M9 minimal medium containing glucose, Km, and IPTG (b). Expectedly, almost no Pfk
activity was detected neither in  nor
in . Expression of the genes borne
by plasmid pS224·GBI resulted in increased levels of Pfk activity,
which were similarly high in both  KT2440
and  PAO1 (, . 272 and 550 nmol min mg
protein, respectively). The change in the kinase
activity brought about by heterologous expression of  in  Δ was
somewhat low, but it still represents a 23-fold increase as compared
to the control strain transformed with an empty vector. The differences
in the activities detected in the wild-type strain and its Δ derivative likely arise from alterations in the intracellular
metabolite pools, which may determine a different pattern of regulation
on the PfkA enzyme. The three remaining activities within the
preparatory phase (, aldolase, phosphoglucose
isomerase, and triose phosphate
isomerase) of the EMP pathway were also evaluated  in glucose-grown  KT2440 carrying
either pSEVA224 or pS224·GBI (c). All three enzyme activities had a significant
increase in the recombinant carrying Module I as compared to the same
strain transformed with the empty pSEVA224 vector. In particular,
the total aldolase and triose phosphate isomerase activities had a
3- and 5-fold increase, respectively, in  KT2440 expressing Module I, whereas the activity of triose phosphate
isomerase augmented a surprising 43-fold. Taken together, these  results indicate that all the enzymes within the
preparatory phase of the EMP pathway are active upon introduction
of Module I in , thereby accounting
for a complete linear glycolysis. Yet, if this is the case, one would
also expect an impact of these manipulations on the intracellular
metabolome in the engineered strain–an issue that was investigated
as disclosed below. Characterization of physiological parameters
in recombinant  and  strains carrying Module I. (a) Schematic representation of central
carbon metabolism in  species. Glucose
catabolism occurs mainly through the activity of the Entner–Doudoroff
(ED) pathway, but part of the trioses- thereby generated
are recycled back to hexoses- by means of the EDEMP
cycle, that also encompasses activities from the Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas
(EMP) and the pentose phosphate (PP) pathways. Note that a set of
peripheral reactions can also oxidize glucose to gluconate and/or
2-ketogluconate (2KG) before any phosphorylation of the intermediates
occurs. Each metabolic block is indicated with a different color along
with the relevant enzymes catalyzing each step, and the EDEMP cycle
is shaded in blue in this diagram. Note that the 6-phosphofructo-1-kinase
activity, missing in most  species, is
highlighted with a dashed gray arrow. The abbreviations used for the
metabolic intermediates are as indicated in the legend to ; other abbreviations
are as follows: 6PG, 6-phosphogluconate; KDPG, 2-keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate;
acetyl-CoA, acetyl-coenzyme A; 2KG, 2-ketogluconate; and 2K6PG, 2-keto-6-phosphogluconate.
(b) Glucose consumption profile and (c) growth curves of  KT2440, its Δ derivative, and  PAO1, carrying either the control vector
(pSEVA224) or pS224·GBI (Module I). Glucose consumption is reported
as the mean value ± standard deviation from duplicate measurements
in at least three independent experiments. CDW, cell dry weight. Significant
differences ( < 0.05, as evaluated by means of
the Student’s  test) in the pairwise comparison
of a given recombinant to the control strain, carrying the empty pSEVA224
vector, are indicated by an asterisk. In the growth curves, each data
point represents the mean value of the optical density measured at
600 nm (OD) of quadruplicate measurements from at least
three independent experiments. The specific growth rates were calculated
from these data during exponential growth, and the inset shows the
mean values ± standard deviations for each strain. Biochemical
characterization of native and implanted enzyme activities
in  species. (a)  quantification of the specific (Sp) glucokinase (Glk) activity,
which phosphorylates glucose to glucose-6- (G6P)
in wild-type (WT)  KT2440 and its Δ derivative (left panel), and WT  PAO1 (right panel) carrying either the empty pSEVA224 vector or
Module I. (b)  quantification of the specific
(Sp) 6-phosphofructo-1-kinase (PfkA) activity, which converts fructose-6- (F6P) into fructose-1,6- (FBP) in WT  KT2440 and its Δ derivative (left panel), and WT  PAO1 (right panel) carrying either the empty pSEVA224 vector or
Module I. (c)  quantification of the specific
(Sp) activities of aldolase, phosphoglucoisomerase, and triose phosphate
isomerase in  KT2440 carrying either
the empty pSEVA224 vector or Module I. These three activities, combined
with Glk and PfkA, constitute the preparatory phase of the Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas
pathway (, from glucose to glyceraldehyde-3-). All the strains tested were grown on M9 minimal medium
added with glucose at 20 mM and cells were harvested in midexponential
phase for these  enzymatic assays. Each bar
represents the mean value of the corresponding enzymatic activity
± standard deviation of quadruplicate measurements from at least
two independent experiments. Significant differences ( < 0.05, as evaluated by means of the Student’s  test) in the pairwise comparison of a given recombinant
to the control strain, carrying the empty pSEVA224 vector, are indicated
by an asterisk. Impact of the GlucoBrick Platform in the
Intracellular Metabolome
of  KT2440 The next step was
to evaluate the intracellular concentration of some critical metabolic
intermediates in  KT2440 carrying either
pSEVA224 or pS224·GBI. The first intermediate after glucose phosphorylation
(, glucose-6-), and the end
product of the preparatory phase of the EMP pathway (, GA3P) were targeted and their concentration was measured by means
of liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (). Both glycolytic building
blocks had an increased abundance in the strain expressing the genes
of Module I (, 1.7-fold in the case of the hexose- and 3.2-fold in the case of the triose-), a further experimental indication that the EMP pathway is active
in this recombinant strain. Moreover, if glucose gets channeled into
a linear EMP route instead of the native EDEMP cycle, a reduction
in the NADPH availability (that would be otherwise generated through
the activity of Zwf, see a) is to be expected. The direct measurement of this
redox cofactor confirms that is actually the case: the  KT2440 derivative expressing Module I showed a 26% reduction in
the intracellular content of NADPH (). Taken together, these targeted metabolomic
determinations (along with the measurement of EMP enzyme activities)
indicate that glucose is channeled into a linear glycolysis of sorts
in  KT2440 when expressing the genes
within Module I. The results of the two preceding
sections highlight the versatility
of the GlucoBrick platform to boost existing glycolytic activities
or to introduce new metabolic steps that are alien to the biochemical
network of , thereby facilitating the
engineering of primary metabolism not only in  but also in unrelated bacterial species. Against this background,
the next step was the functional evaluation of this Synthetic Biology
tool in the context of the ongoing efforts aimed at manipulating the
production of added-value metabolites. Metabolomic Determinations in Glucose-Grown  KT2440 Carrying Glycolytic Genes Borne by Module I intracellular
content (nmol mg CDW) of Cells were grown
aerobically in
M9 minimal medium added with glucose at 20 mM, harvested during exponential
growth, and rapidly quenched with liquid N. The intracellular
metabolites were extracted and their concentration determined by means
of liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. Each parameter
is reported as the mean value ± standard deviation from duplicate
measurements in at least two independent experiments. Enhancing Heterologous
PHB Production by Boosting Glycolytic
Activity in Recombinant Polyhydroxyalkanoates
are a complex family of bacterial biopolymers. PHB is an isotactic
polyester composed by 3-hydroxybutyrate units. The PHB synthesis pathway in  (formerly known as ) comprises
three enzymes (a). PhaA, a 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase, condenses two acetyl-CoA moieties,
yielding 3-acetoacetyl-CoA. This intermediate is the substrate for
PhaB, a NADPH-dependent 3-acetoacetyl-CoA reductase (encoded by ). In the final step of this biosynthetic pathway,
()-(−)-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA units are polymerized
to PHB by PhaC, a PHA synthase (encoded by ).
The idea of a thermoplastic and biocompatible material which is also
readily biodegraded by a number of bacteria has become very attractive
in an era of increasing environmental concern and shortage of oil
supply. A number of different recombinant  strains have been constructed thus far by outsourcing
structural and regulatory  genes from several
bacterial species, given that  does not possess the metabolic machinery needed
for the synthesis or the degradation of polyhydroxyalkanoates. A problem
recursively encountered when attempting to improve the yield and productivity
of biopolymer in recombinant  strains
is that the PHB biosynthetic pathway is nested in the core biochemical
network of this bacterium, not only drawing
acetyl-CoA coming from the EMP pathway, but also using NADPH as a
cofactor and competing with the native
fermentation pathways, , acetate formation from
acetyl-CoA (a). Therefore, the availability of biosynthetic
precursors constitutes a potential bottleneck compromising not only
PHB accumulation but also bacterial growth. A recombinant, PHB-producing  strain
was constructed by transforming plasmid pAeT41 (carrying the  gene cluster from ) into wild-type  BW25113. Plasmids
pSEVA224 (Km, empty vector), pS438·GBI (Sm, carrying Module I), and/or pS224·GBII (Km, carrying
Module II) were introduced in this strain, and growth, polymer accumulation,
and acetate excretion were evaluated in LB medium cultures added with
glucose and the corresponding antibiotics and inducers after 24 h
of aerobic growth ( and b and c). The separate introduction of Module I and Module II stimulated
both glucose consumption and polymer accumulation with respect to
the control strain. Glucose consumption significantly increased by
4- and 3-fold upon induction of the genes encoded by Module I and
II, respectively (b). Furthermore, the simultaneous introduction of the two
GlucoBrick clusters resulted in a 6-fold increment of the specific
glucose consumption with respect to the control strain, indicating
a synergistic effect of each of them on the uptake of the carbon substrate.
The increase in the total glucose consumption in this strain, accompanied
by a decrease in residual biomass formation, indicates that the metabolic
intermediates generated through the EMP pathway are channeled into
PHB accumulation (rather than biomass formation). Interestingly, and while the overexpression of either  or ·· did not affect the specific growth rate of the recombinants
significantly, Modules I and II reduced this parameter by . 30%, perhaps indicating some sort of metabolic burden
due to plasmid maintenance. Overflow
metabolism was also evaluated by measuring the specific rate of acetate
formation (),
since this metabolite is known to be the main byproduct of aerobic
glucose catabolism. BW25113 carrying pSEVA224 excreted acetate at a rate of 4.8 ±
0.2 mmol g CDW h when cultured
in LB medium containing glucose. All the strains expressing the  gene cluster had a reduced rate of acetate formation
(, the strain transformed with both Module I
and II had a 73% reduction in this parameter); a finding in line with
previous observations indicating that the synthesis of PHB overcomes
acetate formation in recombinant . When the intracellular concentration of acetyl-CoA
was determined in these strains (), a correlation between the concentration of this
metabolite and PHB formation was clearly observed. The expression
of the glycolytic genes borne by Module I or Module II significantly
boosted the availability of this metabolic precursor of 1.7- and 1.4-fold,
respectively, as compared to  BW25113/pAeT41
+ pSEVA224 ( < 0.05, as evaluated by means of
the Student’s  test). Considering that acetyl-CoA
is the substrate for the PHB synthesis pathway, it was postulated
that polymer accumulation should also increase as the availability
of this precursor increases. This was actually the case: PHB accumulation
in the control strain reached 25.6 ± 3.7% of the cell dry weight
(CDW), while the same strain transformed with either Module I or Module
II attained 53.9 ± 3.1% and 62.9 ± 1.3% of the CDW, respectively
(c). The residual
CDW of either strain under PHB accumulation conditions was similar
(), indicating
that neither Module I nor II affected biomass formation. Expectedly,
the simultaneous expression of all GlucoBricks from two independent
plasmids further boosted polymer accumulation up to 72.5 ± 9.8%
of the CDW—thus representing an increase of . 3-fold as compared to  BW25113/pAeT41
+ pSEVA224. Interestingly, the overexpression of the glycolytic modules
did not lead to an increase in overflow metabolism since acetyl-CoA
was rerouted into PHB accumulation rather than acetate formation.
This result further illustrates how the availability of key precursors
in central metabolism can be channeled into the formation of an added-value
product while minimally affecting the physiology of the bacterial
host. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00230/suppl_file/sb6b00230_si_001.pdf In an attempt to determine which glycolytic steps were
determinant
in increasing PHB accumulation by these recombinants, two different
SEVA plasmids were constructed, in which individual GlucoBricks belonging
to either Module I or II are expressed under the transcriptional control
of an LacI/ regulatory element. Plasmids pS424· and pS224·GPG, carrying , , and  (Table S2 in the ) were separately introduced into  BW25113/pAeT41, and growth, glucose consumption,
and PHB accumulation were tested under the same culture conditions
indicated above. While an increase in the traffic through GA3P dehydrogenase
(, GapA) did not result in a significant increase
of either glucose consumption or polymer synthesis, the expression
of the ·· cluster from plasmid pS224·GPG significantly enhanced
both parameters with respect to the control strain (b and c). PHB accumulation
in this recombinant peaked at 66.4 ± 3.7% of the CDW (although
there was no differences in the actual PHB concentration, see ). Yet, boosting the
glycolytic traffic by means of Glk, Pfk and GapA alone was not enough
to reach the highest accumulation of PHB, as observed in the strain
bearing both Modules I and II. This result may in turn suggest that
an appropriate channeling of metabolic intermediates from glucose
all the way down to acetyl-CoA is only possible if an adequate balance
of all the individual enzymatic activities involved is met. Such scenario
also supports the notion that all the EMP enzymes are need in a  strain lacking Pfk in order to activate a linear
glycolysis. Enhanced poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)
synthesis in recombinant  carrying
Modules I and II. (a) Three enzymes
are necessary for  synthesis of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)
(PHB). In , from which the cognate
genes were harnessed, PHB accumulation depends on the sequential activity
of a 3-ketoacyl-coenzyme A (CoA) thiolase (PhaA), a NADPH-dependent
3-acetoacetyl-CoA reductase (PhaB1), and a PHB synthase (PhaC1). PhaA
and PhaB1 catalyze the condensation of two molecules of acetyl-CoA
to 3-acetoacetyl-CoA and the reduction of this intermediate to -(−)-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA (3-HB-CoA), respectively.
PhaC1 polymerizes 3-HB-CoA monomers to PHB by releasing one CoA-SH
molecule per monomer added. Note that acetyl-CoA can also be used
in the major fermentation pathway of , that produces acetate. The main metabolic blocks within the biochemical
network are identified with different colors in the outline: the Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas
(EMP) pathway, red; the pentose phosphate (PP) pathway, purple; and
the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and gluconeogenesis, green. Abbreviations
of metabolic intermediates are as shown in the caption to ; other abbreviations
are as follows: 6PG, 6-phosphogluconate; acetyl-CoA, acetyl-coenzyme
A; OAA, oxaloacetate; and 2-OX, 2-oxoglutarate. (b) Glucose consumption
profile and (c) PHB accumulation by  BW25113
carrying plasmid pAeT41 (, constitutively expressing
the  gene cluster from ) transformed with plasmids carrying the genes or modules indicated
(see  for further
details). Cells were grown aerobically in LB medium added with glucose
at 10 g L for 24 h. Each parameter is reported
as the mean value ± standard deviation from duplicate measurements
in at least three independent experiments. CDW, cell dry weight. Significant
differences ( < 0.05, as evaluated by means of
the Student’s  test) in the pairwise comparison
of a given recombinant to the control strain, carrying the empty pSEVA224
vector, are indicated by an asterisk. Growth Parameters and Polymer Synthesis
of a PHB-Accumulating  BW25113 Strain Carrying Different Combinations of Glycolytic
Genes specific rate of acetate formation (mmol g CDW h) acetyl-coenzyme A content (nmol mg CDW) BW25113
carrying plasmid pAeT41 (, constitutively expressing
the  gene cluster from ) was transformed with the plasmids indicated, and grown aerobically
in LB medium added with glucose at 10 g L for
24 h. Each parameter is reported as the mean value ± standard
deviation from duplicate measurements in at least three independent
experiments. N.D., not determined. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00230/suppl_file/sb6b00230_si_001.pdf The full description of each plasmid
can be found in Table S2 in the . The residual cell dry
weight (CDW) was calculated as the difference
between
the total CDW and the PHB concentration. The work above shows
that the ten genes that shape the EMP route
in  can be excised from its native context
and still deliver their biochemical input in a fashion that equals
(and, in some cases, improves) the natural physiology and metabolic
wiring of the microbial cells. This enhancement happens despite the
scattered genomic organization, the regulatory complexity, and the
high biochemical centrality and connectivity of the extant EMP pathway
in Enterobacteria. Such situation is in contrast with previous efforts
to decompress the regulatory complexity of the lytic bacteriophage
T7 (resulting in a decrease of . 20% of infectivity
with respect to the wild-type virus),
or the  genes of  (resulting in . 57% of N fixation
as compared to the naturally occurring system). In our case, the versatility of the refactored EMP genes enables
rational rerouting of the overall glycolytic carbon to meet specific
demands for given metabolic precursors. To meet this end, tuning primary
metabolism is in principle an effective strategy to foster availability
of key carbon intermediates. Yet, the only attempts for, , increase the glycolytic activities of  have thus far focused on individual genes. For instance, Solomon  designed a recombinant  improved for gluconate production by endowing
it with different (and adjustable) levels of Glk activity. However, the biological activities of the synthetic
EMP route presented here demonstrate the portability and efficiency
of some block metabolic pathways (or subsets of them) formerly thought
to be short of untouchable and/or difficult to handle as a multienzyme
whole. Besides validating the autonomy of the implanted EMP
route, the
data above show the utility of a flexible toolbox for boosting the
efficiency of carbon consumption and distribution in a variety of
cell factories of biotechnological interest. Some of the engineered
modules were able to recover glucose-dependent growth of  mutants (deficient in either individual or several glycolytic steps)
to an extent beyond the wild-type situation. Increasing glycolytic
activities in PHB-accumulating recombinant  resulted in polymer contents (up to . 73% of
the CDW) that rank among the highest reported in the literature for
batch cultures using glucose as the carbon source. From a different perspective, and owing to the broad-host-range
vectors and expression systems available, the enzymatic activities
endowed by the platform could be promiscuously transferred to other
species (, , as illustrated
in the present study) or even to complete microbial communities (a
development of the platform currently under development in our laboratory).
Finally, the modular arrangement of the GlucoBricks and the possibility
to assemble them as promoter-less gene arrays in SEVA-compatible transposon
vectors allows exploration of the right level of expression that makes
them more effective when knocked-in in different heterologous hosts (which would also reduce any possible metabolic
burden related to plasmid maintenance and/or addition of inducers).
Further improvements are expected as long as the expression of the
genes within each module is appropriately adjusted, and a minimal
subset of glycolytic genes, promoting an efficient EMP-based catabolism,
is identified. The specific impact of the GlucoBricks on the metabolic
networks of different recipients is likely to differ depending on
the bacterial species, an issue that can be addressed wherever necessary
by measuring fluxes with C-labeled substrates. In sum,
we believe that the GlucoBricks concept herein presented provide a
valuable example of how rationally formatting biological constituents
eases the engineering of new-to-nature properties with a reasonable
degree of efficiency and predictability. Bacterial
Strains, Plasmids, and Culture Conditions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00230/suppl_file/sb6b00230_si_001.pdf The bacterial strains
and plasmids used in this study are listed
in Table S1 and Table S2, respectively, in the .  and  were grown at 37 °C;  cultures were incubated at 30 °C. For regular growth and for
the propagation and construction of plasmids,  strains CC118 and DH5α λ were cultured
in LB medium. For physiology experiments and
in order to obtain cell-free extracts for enzyme assays, bacterial
cells were grown with rotary agitation at 170 r.p.m. in 250-mL Erlenmeyer
flasks filled with 50 mL of M9 minimal medium, containing 6 g L NaHPO, 3 g L KHPO, 1.4 g L (NH)SO, 0.5 g L NaCl,
0.2 g L MgSO·7HO,
and 2.5 mL l of a trace elements solution. When culturing  strains in minimal media, CaCl was added at 0.1 mM and
vitamin B1 was added at 0.05% (w/v). Unless indicated otherwise, minimal
medium cultures were added with glucose at 20 mM and IPTG at 1 mM
as explained in the text. The growth of some glycolytic mutants of  is known to be impaired even in rich LB medium; these mutants were grown in M9GCM semisynthetic
medium. This culture medium contains the same salts as M9 minimal
medium, but also 0.75% (w/v) amino acids from casein hydrolyzate (Becton-Dickinson
Diagnostics Co., Sparks, MD, USA), 10 mM glucose, 20 mM glycerol,
15 mM sodium malate, and 0.05% (w/v) vitamin B1. In the case of  Δ Δ and Δ Δ Δ mutants (, deficient
in the -encoded erythrose-4- dehydrogenase), pyridoxine hydrochloride was added to the culture
medium at 5 μM. For the purpose
of adapting the cells to growth on glucose from rich LB medium, preinocula,
prepared with a few isolated colonies from LB medium plates, were
grown overnight in 10 mL of M9 minimal medium with glucose or M9GCM
semisynthetic medium with the corresponding antibiotics in 100-mL
Erlenmeyer flasks. Solid media used to streak cells contained 15 g
L agar. The antibiotics employed for selection
were added to the media when needed at the following final concentrations:
ampicillin, 150 μg mL for  strains or 500 μg mL for  strains; and Km, 50 μg mL with the exception
of , for which 300 μg mL Km was needed to select colonies after transformation
of plasmids by electroporation. For the construction of  mutants, 3-methylbenzoate (3-B) was used at 15
mM to induce the XylS-dependent  promoter. Experiments
for PHB accumulation were carried out in LB medium added with glucose
at 10 g L and the antibiotics and inducers described
in the text (in these experiments, 3-B was used
at 0.5 mM to induce the expression of the genes in Module I). DNA Manipulation
and Sequencing, and Construction of Mutant
Strains http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00230/suppl_file/sb6b00230_si_001.pdf DNA manipulations followed routine laboratory techniques. Plasmid DNA was obtained with the QIAprep Spin
Miniprep kit (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Oligonucleotides were ordered from Sigma-Aldrich Co.
(St. Louis, MO, USA). Restriction and DNA modification enzymes were
purchased from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA, USA). Isolated colonies
from fresh LB medium plates were used as the starting material in
colony PCR amplifications for checking gene deletions or the presence
of plasmids. PCR products were purified with the NucleoSpin Extract
II kit (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany). Agarose gel visualization
was carried out using a Molecular Imager VersaDoc apparatus (Bio-Rad
Corp., Hercules, CA, USA). Electroporation of plasmid DNA in  and  was
carried out as indicated by Choi , and in  as described
by Datsenko and Wanner. The accuracy
of all the DNA constructs was confirmed by Sanger sequencing (Secugen
SL, Madrid, Spain). A clean  knockout
mutant was obtained following the protocol described by Martínez-García
and de Lorenzo. The detailed protocol
for the construction of this Δ mutant is
described in the . Mutations in glycolytic genes were accumulated in  derivatives  sequential transduction of individual
alleles with bacteriophage P1 using individual mutants
from the KEIO collection as donors, followed
by elimination of the antibiotic resistance marker using plasmid pCP20. Design and Assembly of the GlucoBrick Modules http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00230/suppl_file/sb6b00230_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00230/suppl_file/sb6b00230_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00230/suppl_file/sb6b00230_si_001.pdf DNA sequences
of the glycolytic genes of  strain K-12
substrain MG1655 were obtained from the web-based EcoCyc database
collection (GenBank accession number U00096.2). The genes were assembled
in two blocks, the first of them, termed , spanning  (),  (),  (),  (),
and  (); and the second
one, termed , comprising  (),  (),  (),  (), and  (). Each gene was preceded by a synthetic RBS (5′-AGG
AGG AAA AAC AT-3′), and the structural coding sequences were
manually edited to erase targets for restriction enzymes present in
SEVA plasmids (, II, RI, I, I, I, HI, I, I, I, I, and dIII) while conserving the amino acid sequence of the
encoded polypeptides. The two blocks were synthesized  by GeneCust Europe (GeneCust Laboratoire de Biotechnologie du Luxembourg
S.A.; Dudelange, Luxembourg), and checked for accuracy by Sanger sequencing.
The two DNA modules were subcloned in pSEVA vectors to obtain the
plasmids indicated in Table S2 in the . Rapid screening of recombinants carrying Module
I was carried out by colony PCR using oligonucleotides ·-Check-F and ·-Check-R (Table S3 in the ). In the case of Module II, oligonucleotides ·-Check-F and ·-Check-R were used (Table S3 in the ). Preparation of Cell-Free
Extracts and  Enzymatic Assays http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00230/suppl_file/sb6b00230_si_001.pdf Cell-free
extracts of , , and  were obtained by following
published protocols. A detailed description of the procedure and the specific methods
used for  assays of Glk, Pfk, and GA3P dehydrogenase
are given in the . The limit of detection for all the enzymatic assays was consistently
below 2–5 nmol min mg protein. PHB quantification was carried
out by flow cytometry after staining the cells with Nile Red as indicated
by Martínez-García , and by means of gas chromatography as described
elsewhere. Acetate concentration in culture
supernatants of selected samples was determined by using a commercially
available enzymatic kit essentially as indicated by Nikel () with the modifications
described by Nikel and de Lorenzo. The
intracellular concentration of acetyl-CoA was determined as described
by Pflüger-Grau , with the adjustments specified by Martínez-García () An adapted protocol
based on the glucose assay kit of Sigma-Aldrich Co. was used to quantify
residual glucose in culture supernatants in 96-well microtiter plates
(NunclonΔurface; Nunc A/S, Roskilde, Denmark).
The assay reagent was prepared as indicated in the technical bulletin;
the final mix per well contained 80 μL of the assay reagent,
40 μL of the sample (diluted with water to approximately 20–80
μg glucose mL), and 80 μL of 12 N
HSO. The amount of the final pink-colored
product (oxidized -dianisidine) was quantified at
540 nm using a SpectraMax M2e plate reader (Molecular Devices, LLC.,
Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The supernatants for these determinations were
obtained by centrifugation of 50 mL cultures (grown for 24 h) at 4000
r.p.m. for 15 min at 4 °C. Determination of Intracellular
Metabolite Concentrations cultures carrying either the empty
vector pSEVA224 or pS224·GBI were grown in M9 minimal medium
containing glucose at 20 mM as explained above until they reached
the midexponential phase (, optical density measured
at 600 nm of . 0.5), at which point the biomass
corresponding to 0.5–0.6 mg of CDW was collected in duplicates
by fast centrifugation (13 000 r.p.m., 30 s, −4 °C).
Bacterial pellets were immediately frozen by immersing the cell sediment
in liquid N. Samples were then extracted three times with
0.5 mL of 60% (v/v) ethanol buffered with 10 mM ammonium acetate (pH
= 7.2) at 78 °C for 1 min. After each extraction step, the biomass
was separated by centrifugation at 13 000 r.p.m. for 1 min.
The three liquid extracts were pooled in a new tube and dried at 120
μbar, and finally stored at −80 °C. Samples were
resuspended in 20 μL of Milli-Q water and injected into a Waters
Acquity UPLC system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) with a Waters
Acquity T3 column (150 mm × 2.1 mm × 1.8 μm, Waters
Corp.) coupled to a Thermo TSQ Quantum Ultra triple quadrupole instrument
(Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) with electrospray
ionization. The quantitative analysis of raw metabolomic data and
the normalization procedure were conducted as explained by Nikel () and van der Werf () All the experiments reported were
independently repeated at least twice (as indicated in the corresponding
figure or table legend), and the mean value of the corresponding parameter
± standard deviation is presented. In some cases, the level of
significance of the differences when comparing results was evaluated
by means of the Student’s  test with α
= 0.05. Nucleotide Sequence Accession Numbers The sequences
of the GlucoBrick modules were deposited in the GenBank database with
the GenBank accession numbers KU886714 (GlucoBrick Module I) and KU886715
(GlucoBrick Module II)..