Genetic reprogramming
is the
conversion of one cell type to another via the activation of gene
networks that control a particular cell phenotype. Conventional methods of genetic reprogramming involve the
overexpression of master regulatory transcription factors that control
the gene networks corresponding to the desired cell phenotypes. This
strategy has been used to induce somatic cells to pluripotency and to directly convert one somatic cell type
to another, such as the conversion of fibroblasts to myoblasts, cardiomyocytes, neurons, or hepatocytes. These new cell types can then
be used for patient-specific disease modeling, drug screening, or
regenerative medicine. One significant
challenge to genetic reprogramming is achieving sufficiently robust
activation of gene networks to induce the new cell phenotype. For
example, the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)
often produces many incompletely reprogrammed cells, with residual
epigenetic memory of the starting cell type. The rate of reprogramming is slow, often taking several weeks or
months. The overall efficiencies of genetic reprogramming
are low and can be highly variable depending on the methods, cell
types, and reprogramming factors used. The efficiency of reprogramming
is known to correspond to the magnitude and duration of expression
of the exogenous transcription factors. Although these
issues are most well-characterized for iPSCs, these challenges are
general across all types of reprogramming. We hypothesized that genetic reprogramming may be improved by enhancing
the transactivation potential of reprogramming factors through protein
engineering. The engineering of transcription factors to control
mammalian cell
processes has a wide variety of applications in biotechnology, including
synthetic biology and gene and cell therapy. The most common methods for engineering synthetic
transcription factors have been based on the programmable DNA-binding
domains of zinc finger proteins, Transcription
activator-like effectors (TALEs), and most recently the CRISPR/Cas9 system. These transcription factor platforms consist of the DNA-binding
domain fused to potent transcriptional activation domains, most commonly
the tetramer of the minimal transactivation domain of the VP16 protein
from herpes simplex virus, referred to
as VP64. In some cases, the activation domain of
the human NF-κB RelA transcription factor p65 is used, particularly for therapeutic applications in which
it is desirable to avoid nonhuman protein components, although it
is generally not as potent as VP64. These
modular transcription factors have been useful for targeted activation
of specific genes for genetic screens, gene therapy, and creating gene circuits and synthetic gene regulation systems. Although these applications are well-suited for the targeted activation
of a single gene, genetic reprogramming requires the coordinated regulation
of many nodes of natural gene networks as is typically performed by
naturally occurring reprogramming factors. Thus, we sought to combine principles from each of these approaches
by attaching potent transcriptional activation domains to a natural
reprogramming factor to increase the efficiency and/or rate of cell
fate conversion. Fusion to the VP16 activation domain or its
oligomers to enhance
the activity of natural transcription factors has been useful for
a variety of applications. In the most well-known example, VP16 was
fused to the tetracycline-dependent repressor to create the widely
used tetracycline-regulated gene expression system. VP64 has also been used to direct chromatin remodeling. HIF-1α is a transcription factor that
responds to hypoxia to coordinate a network of genes involved in angiogenesis
and wound healing. To remove its oxygen-dependence for gene therapy
applications, the oxygen-sensing domain was removed and the truncated
protein was fused to the VP16 transactivation domain. Several variants of this chimeric transcription factor
potently induced angiogenesis in multiple animal models and one variant was later used in gene therapy
clinical trials to treat ischemia. In
the context of genetic reprogramming, VP16 has been fused to transcription
factors to enhance the efficiency of reprogramming mouse and human
fibroblasts to iPSCs and also to convert
liver to pancreas in a  model. In addition to the viral VP16 domain, the transfer
of transactivation domains between mammalian transcription factors
has also increased their potency for some reprogramming applications. Collectively, these successes suggest that there is considerable
opportunity to enhance natural transcription factors through protein
engineering to guide the coordination of gene networks. In this
study, we evaluated the effects of fusing potent activation
domains to the transcription factor MyoD, the master regulator of
the skeletal myoblast lineage. In certain
nonmyogenic lineages, MyoD overexpression causes upregulation of the
myogenic gene network and conversion to a myoblast phenotype including
cell fusion into multinucleated myotubes. Myogenic
reprogramming induced by MyoD overexpression has been widely explored
as a means for cell-based gene therapy for skeletal muscle disorders
such as muscular dystrophy. Compared to wild-type MyoD, the enhanced MyoD variants induced greater
levels of specific myogenic markers, greater levels of cell fusion,
and greater overall reprogramming of global gene expression in both
primary human dermal fibroblasts and adipose-derived stem cells. Collectively,
these results support the paradigm of enhancing natural transcription
factors through protein engineering and specifically provide a potential
mechanism for autologous cell therapies for musculoskeletal disorders. To construct enhanced MyoD variants, potent
activation domains
were genetically fused to the N-terminus of wild-type (WT) mouse MyoD
(MyoD) to construct MyoD, MyoD, and MyoD. VP16, VP64, and p65 are modular transcriptional
activation domains (Figure ). The mouse MyoD
cDNA was used to distinguish exogenous MyoD expression from endogenous
human MyoD expression. VP16 is the activation domain from a natural
transcription factor originally isolated from the herpes simplex virus
and is widely used in transcription factor engineering. VP64 is a tetramer of the minimal VP16 domain
required for transcriptional activation. p65 is the activation domain
of the human NF-κB RelA transcription factor. Since overexpression of MyoD causes cells to exit the cell
cycle and terminally differentiate, an inducible tetracycline-regulated
(Tet-On) lentiviral delivery vector was used to
control the timing and magnitude of expression of the engineered transcription
factors. We tested the reprogramming capacity
of our engineered MyoD variants
in two human cell types: primary adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs)
and primary dermal fibroblasts. ADSCs are adult stem cells isolated
from adipose tissue. Human dermal fibroblasts
are a terminally differentiated cell type that can be obtained from
a minimally invasive skin biopsy. Both of these cell types are attractive
starting material for disease modeling, drug screening, and patient-specific
cellular therapies, as they are relatively easy to obtain and can
be expanded in culture. Both the ADSCs and fibroblasts were transduced
with lentivirus containing each tetracycline-inducible MyoD expression
cassette, selected with puromycin to obtain a pure cell population,
and subsequently treated with doxycycline for 10 days to induce transgene
expression. Supporting Information Figure 1 After 10 days of induction, the engineered variants
upregulated
myogenic markers in ADSCs and fibroblasts to a greater degree than MyoD (Figure A, B). The three engineered
variants behaved similarly in ADSCs, whereas MyoD was
significantly more robust in the dermal fibroblasts, perhaps because
of greater plasticity of the multipotent ADSCs. Notably, MyoD was expressed at much higher levels than the engineered transcription
factors at both the mRNA (Figure A, B) and
protein levels (Figure C–E). To assess
the dose-dependence of MyoD and its engineered variants on myogenic
gene induction, we measured marker expression at various doses of
MyoD by manipulating the concentration of doxycycline (Figure ). As expected, MyoD and MyoD both upregulate the myogenic gene network in a dose-dependent
manner, but interestingly, MyoD is more potent than MyoD despite its lower expression level. To ensure that the
enhanced transcription factor activity was not specific to mouse MyoD,
we constructed human MyoD. Of the eight myogenesis-associated
genes analyzed, there were no significant differences in gene expression
induced by human versus mouse MyoD (). Supporting Information
Figure 2 Myogenic differentiation is characterized by a
phenotypic change
from mononuclear cells to fusion into multinucleated muscle fibers.
Through immunofluorescence staining we observed that the engineered
MyoD variants promote increased cell fusion and elevated levels of
myosin heavy chain expression  when compared
with MyoD after 10 days of expression (Figure ). Similar to the effects on gene expression (Figure ), the multipotent ADSCs responded more robustly
to the reprogramming factors than the dermal fibroblasts. Similar
effects were also observed when overexpressing human MyoD or MyoD (). Supporting Information Figure 3 To measure cell fusion, we developed a modified version of
a previously
reported quantitative assay that is based on a conditional luciferase
expression scheme. In this system, two
lentiviral vectors were constructed: one vector that constitutively
expresses Cre recombinase (LV-Cre) and a second vector encoding a
luciferase expression cassette containing a 1 kb stuffer sequence
flanked by loxP sites (LV-Floxed Luc). The stuffer sequence interrupts
the luciferase coding sequence after the start codon such that luciferase
expression is reconstituted only in response to Cre-mediated recombination
(Figure A). One cell population was transduced
with LV-Cre and the other cell population with LV-Floxed Luc (Figure B). When the cells from the two populations fuse
to form a multinucleated myotube, Cre recombinase expressed from one
nucleus enters neighboring nuclei harboring the lentivirally integrated
Floxed Luc cassette and removes the stuffer sequence, thereby creating
a functional luciferase gene (Figure C). To
conduct this assay, cells were first transduced with the tet-responsive
vector carrying the MyoD variant of interest and selected in puromycin
to obtain a pure population. This cell population was divided and
transduced with either LV-Cre or LV-Floxed Luc. The cells were remixed,
plated, and induced with doxycycline. After 10 days of induction,
cells were assayed for the relative levels of luciferase activity
(Figure B). Further corroborating the immunofluorescence
staining, the engineered MyoD variants induce enhanced cell fusion
compared to MyoD in both cell types (Figure D-E). Once again, the effects were similar for each
variant in the ADSCs, whereas MyoD had the greatest
effect in the dermal fibroblasts. Additionally, human MyoD showed
similar enhancements with the addition of VP64 (). Next we evaluated the relative effects of MyoD
and MyoD on gene expression across the transcriptome.
We performed
RNA-seq analysis on human dermal fibroblasts in which MyoD or MyoD was induced for 10 days. Genome-wide
gene expression levels were compared to untreated control cells. Of
the 30 053 transcripts included in the analysis, 4763 were
significantly altered by MyoD overexpression (false discovery
rate (FDR) < 10). Of these, 3135 (∼66%)
were also significantly changed by MyoD (FDR < 10), although MyoD overexpression led
to changes in an additional 3559 genes that were not significantly
affected by MyoD (FDR < 10), further
demonstrating the enhanced activity of the engineered transcription
factor in global reprogramming of cellular gene networks (Figure A). The majority of differentially expressed genes
were upregulated, consistent with the role of MyoD as a transcriptional
activator (Figure B). The downregulated genes
are likely secondary effects of global reprogramming and transdifferentiation
from the fibroblastic lineage. Of the genes that were differentially
expressed in both MyoD- and MyoD-treated
samples compared to untreated controls, we observed that MyoD generally induced a greater effect as indicated by a best fit
line with a slope greater than one (Figure B). MyoD had about a 2-fold greater effect than MyoD (Figure C). The RNA-seq analysis
also showed that specific myogenic markers were induced to a greater
extent by MyoD compared to MyoD (Figure D), confirming the qRT-PCR results (Figure ). To characterize the roles
of each of group of differentially expressed
genes, we performed functional annotation clustering using the Database
for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery tool (DAVID). We found that the top four gene clusters differentially expressed
by both MyoD and MyoD were involved in
key processes important for myogenesis including cell cycle regulation,
extracellular matrix proteins, contractile proteins, and cytoskeletal
proteins (). The top functional clusters found differentially expressed only
in MyoD-treated cells were genes involved in translation,
vascularization, cell adhesion, and extracellular matrix production
(). The top
functional clusters found differentially expressed only in MyoD treated cells were nucleotide binding proteins, pleckstrin proteins,
and metabolic proteins involved in degradation processes (). Additional studies
are necessary to elucidate the differential regulation of these gene
groups. Proteins containing pleckstrin homology domains associate
with transmembrane proteins such as G proteins and phosphatidylinositol.
These proteins recruit factors to the cellular membrane and facilitate
signal transduction pathways. Therefore,
this cluster of proteins may be involved with cell signaling pathways
important for cell fusion and differentiation. Ubiquitination of the VP16 monomer of VP64 is necessary
for transcriptional activation and also
serves as a mechanism to prime transcription factors and promote transcriptional
elongation. This is consistent with our
observations that MyoD stimulates expression of gene
clusters associated with proteolysis and is expressed at lower levels
compared to MyoD. Supporting Information
Figures 4 and 5 Our results demonstrate that MyoD orchestrates myogenic
differentiation  more effectively than the
wild-type protein. Time course experiments suggest that the elevated
levels of myogenic gene expression induced by MyoD
promotes a faster rate of myogenic reprogramming compared to cells
treated with MyoD (). This is an important finding for drug screening, disease modeling, muscle tissue engineering, and regenerative
medicine as genetic reprogramming with MyoD may provide new avenues for generating sources of
myogenic cells. This study complements previous work in engineering
Oct4 and MyoD variants with potent transcriptional activation domains
to enhance cell reprogramming efficiencies. Therefore, the addition of potent activation
domains to wild-type transcription factors is a generalizable approach
for increasing transcriptional activity. Supporting Information Figures 4 and 5 Currently, most reprogramming
protocols require extended transcription
factor expression. The most effective method for extended transgene
expression is lentiviral transduction, but there are concerns regarding
the stable integration of expression factor cassettes in the cellular
genome. For this reason, reprogramming cells with nonintegrating transient
expression methods such as plasmid DNA transfection, mRNA transfection, or the delivery
of cell-permeable proteins are being
widely explored. However, the resulting reprogramming efficiencies
are much lower and these methods are technically challenging requiring
repeated dosing over extended time periods. As our results demonstrate
upregulation of the myogenic gene network in only 10 days to levels
requiring 30 days of MyoD expression (), the use of engineered
transcription factors in conjunction with transient delivery methods
such as DNA and RNA transfection may prove advantageous. Therefore,
synthetic transcription factors that induce fast and efficient remodeling
of gene networks may enable widespread applications of genetic reprogramming
in many areas of biotechnology. MyoD lentiviral delivery system. MyoD, MyoD, MyoD, and MyoD were cloned into
a Tet-ON lentiviral vector. This vector constitutively expresses the
reverse tetracycline transactivator (rtTA2-M2) and the
puromycin resistance gene (Puro) from the human phosphoglycerate
kinase (hPGK) promoter. The rtTA2-M2 and Puro are coexpressed from the same mRNA via an internal ribosomal entry
site (IRES). The MyoD-T2A-dsRed Express2 expression cassette is downstream
of the tetracycline response element (TRE) promoter. The rtTA2-M2 binds to the TRE and activates expression of the downstream
genes in the presence of doxycycline. The T2A ribosomal skipping peptide
results in the expression of two separate proteins from a single mRNA.
The peptide sequence of each transcriptional activation domain is
shown. The minimal activation domain of VP16 is shown in red. PKKKRKV
is the SV40 nuclear localization signal and p65 contains the native
nuclear localization signals KRKR and LGALL (underlined). VP64 also
contains an HA epitope tag (YPYDVPDYA) that was not utilized in this
study (underlined). All fusion proteins contain a flexible serine/glycine
linker GGSGGGS (bold) between the activation domain and MyoD. Upregulation of myogenic
markers in ADSCs and dermal fibroblasts.
Cells were transduced with lentivirus that expresses each MyoD variant
or a mock control consisting of the lentiviral vector without a transgene.
After 10 days of expression induced by 3 μg/mL doxycycline,
ADSCs (A) and dermal fibroblasts (B) were assessed for the relative
expression levels of a variety of myogenic genes by qRT-PCR. Expression
levels were normalized to MyoD and the β-actin
house-keeping gene.  = 3 independent experiments.
All -values are compared to MyoD (* < 0.05). In both the ADSCs (D) and fibroblasts (E),
expression of each MyoD fusion was determined by Western blot, which
demonstrated efficient translational skipping by the T2A peptide.
Expected protein sizes are provided in part C. Dose-dependence of myogenic gene expression on levels of MyoD and MyoD. ADSCs and dermal fibroblasts were transduced
with lentivirus that expresses either MyoD or MyoD, selected with puromycin, and then treated with the indicated
dose of doxycycline. After 10 days of induction, ADSCs (A) and fibroblasts
(B) were assessed for MyoD and myogenin expression by qRT-PCR. Expression
levels were normalized to untransduced fibroblasts and the β-actin
house-keeping gene.  = 3 independent experiments.
The transduced ADSCs (C) and fibroblasts (D) were also assayed for
MyoD and myogenin protein expression by Western blot. Cell differentiation and fusion induced by MyoD-mediated
cell reprogramming.
Following 10 days of transgene expression, cell fusion and expression
of skeletal myosin heavy chain (MHC, green) was assessed by immunofluorescence
staining in ADSCs (A and B) and dermal fibroblasts (C and D). Nuclei
are shown in blue (DAPI) and dsRed2-Express indicates the relative
levels of MyoD transgene expression. Quantitative analysis
of cell fusion induced by MyoD-mediated cell
reprogramming. (A) Two lentiviral vectors were constructed that contain
a constitutive Cre recombinase expression cassette (LV-Cre) or a luciferase
cassette that is dependent on Cre recombinase activity for expression
(LV-Floxed Luc). (B) Cells transduced with each dox-inducible MyoD
variant were separately transduced with either LV-Floxed Luc or LV-Cre.
These two cell populations were mixed at a ratio of 1:10 LV-Cre/LV-Floxed
Luc. (C) As the two cell populations fuse to form a multinucleated
myotubes, Cre recombinase expressed from one nucleus enters neighboring
nuclei harboring the Floxed Luc cassette. Cre removes the stuffer
sequence and induces expression of a functional luciferase gene. (D)
ADSCs and (E) dermal fibroblasts were induced to express the MyoD
variant and were assayed for relative luciferase activity on Day 10.  = 3 or 4 independent experiments. All p values are compared
to WT MyoD (* < 0.05). Genome-wide gene expression following reprogramming of
dermal fibroblasts
by MyoD or MyoD. RNA-seq was performed
on untreated control fibroblasts and fibroblasts expressing either MyoD or MyoD for 10 days ( = 2). Fold changes in expression of each gene were calculated relative
to the untreated control samples. The genes shown are those different
than control with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 10. (A and B) Many genes were differentially regulated by both MyoD and MyoD compared to control (purple),
while other genes were exclusively regulated by only MyoD (red) or only MyoD (yellow). Of the genes that
were differentially expressed in samples treated with MyoD or MyoD, MyoD generally induced
a greater overall effect as indicated by a best-fit line with a slope
greater than one. (C) For the transcripts differentially expressed
by both MyoD and MyoD compared to control
(purple data points in B), the effect of MyoD was generally
greater. (D) The RNA-seq analysis also confirms the qRT-PCR results
(Figure B). Specific myogenic genes assayed
by qRT-PCR are indicated in red and show greater activation by MyoD than MyoD (line indicates  = ). This analysis also confirmed lower levels
of MyoD transgene in the MyoD samples compared to MyoD. HEK293T cells were obtained from the American
Tissue Collection Center (ATCC, Manassas, VA) through the Duke University
Cell Culture Facility and were maintained in DMEM supplemented with
10% FBS and 1% penicillin streptomycin. Primary human dermal fibroblasts
(Catalog ID: GM03348) were obtained from Coriell Institute (Camden,
New Jersey) and were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS
and 1% penicillin streptomycin. Primary human adipose derived stem
cells (ADSCs) were isolated as described previously and were cultured in growth media of DMEM/F12 supplemented
with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin streptomycin, 5 ng/mL human epidermal
growth factor, 1 ng/mL human basic fibroblast growth factor, and 0.25
ng/mL human transforming growth factor-β. All cells were cultured
at 37 °C with 5% CO. Viral Production and Transduction All lentiviral vectors
used in this study are second generation. A lentivirus production
protocol was adapted from methods previously described. Briefly, 3.5 million HEK293T cells were plated
per 10 cm dish. The following day, cells were transfected with 20
μg of transfer vector, 6 μg of pMD2G, and 10 μg
psPAX2 using a calcium phosphate transfection. The media was changed
12–14 h post-transfection. The viral supernatant was collected
24 and 48 h after this media change, pooled, and passed through a
0.45 μm filter. For transduction, the cell medium was replaced
with viral supernatant supplemented with 4 μg/mL Polybrene.
The viral supernatant was changed 24–48 h later. MyoD-Directed
Genetic Reprogramming The transcriptional
activation domains VP16, VP64, and p65 were genetically fused to the
N-terminus of either the mouse or human wild-type (WT) MyoD via a
short flexible serine glycine linker. The VP16 sequence was isolated
from Addgene plasmid 11351. VP64 is a fusion of four copies of the
minimal VP16 domain. p65 was isolated from Addgene plasmid 21966.
Amino acid sequences of all the activation domains are in Figure . The MyoD variants were subcloned into a Tet-ON
lentiviral vector. In this vector, each MyoD variant
is coexpressed with dsRed-Express2, via a T2A ribosomal skipping peptide. All the Tet inducible lentiviral vectors are
available on Addgene (Addgene plasmids 60623–60629). Human dermal fibroblasts and human ADSCs were transduced with the
Tet-ON LV carrying each MyoD variant. Cells were selected in 1 μg/mL
puromycin to obtain a pure population of transduced cells. Cells were
expanded in standard growth medium supplemented with puromycin. Selected
cells were grown to confluence and MyoD transgene expression was induced
by supplementing the medium with 3 μg/mL, doxycycline unless
indicated otherwise. Cells were given fresh media supplemented with
doxycycline every 2 days. All differentiation studies for the fibroblasts
were conducted in standard growth medium (DMEM supplemented with 10%
FBS and 1% penicillin streptomycin). For the ADSCs, cells were seeded
in plates coated with 1:10 poly--lysine and all differentiation
studies were conducted in standard growth media without the growth
factors (DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin streptomycin).
Control ADSC samples were grown in standard growth media because withdrawing
the growth factors without inducing differentiation causes cell death. Quantitative Reverse Transcription PCR Supporting Information
Figure 6 RNA was isolated
using the RNeasy Plus RNA isolation kit (Qiagen). cDNA synthesis was
performed using the SuperScript VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit (Invitrogen).
Real-time PCR using SsoFast EvaGreen Supermix (Bio-Rad) was performed
with the CFX96 Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad). Oligonucleotide
primers and PCR conditions are reported in . Primer specificity was confirmed by agarose
gel electrophoresis and melting curve analysis. Reaction efficiencies
over the appropriate dynamic range were calculated to ensure linearity
of the standard curve (). The results are expressed as fold-increase mRNA
expression normalized to β-actin expression using the ΔΔCt
method. Reported values are the mean and SEM from two or three independent
experiments performed on different days ( = 2 or
3) where technical replicates were averaged within each experiment. Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (Sigma)
supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Protein concentration
was measured using BCA protein assay reagent (Thermo Scientific) and
BioTek Synergy 2 Multi-Mode Microplate Reader. Lysates were mixed
with loading buffer and boiled for 5 min; equal amounts of protein
were run in NuPage 10% Bis-Tris Gel polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad)
and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Nonspecific antibody
binding was blocked with TBST (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl and 0.1% Tween-20)
with 5% nonfat milk for 1 h at room temperature. The membranes were
incubated with the following primary antibodies: anti-MyoD (1:250
dilution, Santa Cruz, Sc-32758) in 5% BSA in TBST overnight at 4 °C;
anti-Myogenin (1:250 dilution, Santa Cruz, Sc-12732) in 5% BSA in
TBST, overnight at 4 °C; anti-GAPDH (1:5,000 dilution, Cell Signaling,
clone 14C10) in 5% milk in TBST 30 min at room temperature. The membranes
were washed with TBST for 15 min and incubated for 30 min with anti-rabbit
HRP-conjugated antibody (1:5000 dilution, Sigma, A6154) or anti-mouse
HRP-conjugated antibody (1:5000 dilution, Santa Cruz, SC-2005) in
5% milk in TBST and subsequently washed with TBST for 15 min. Membranes
were visualized using the ImmunStar WesternC Chemiluminescence Kit
(Bio-Rad) and images were captured using a ChemiDoc XRS+ System and
processed using ImageLab software (Bio-Rad). Cells transduced with Tet-On
LV expressing each MyoD variant were plated on autoclaved glass coverslips
(1 mm, Thermo Scientific). Fibroblasts were plated directly on coverslips
while the ADSCs were seeded on coverslips coated with 1:10 poly--lysine. Following 0, 10, 20, or 30 days of transgene expression,
cells were fixed in 4% PFA and prepared for immunofluorescence staining.
Samples were permeabilized in blocking buffer (PBS supplemented with
5% BSA, 0.2% Triton X-100, and 2% goat serum) for 1 h at room temperature.
Samples were incubated with MF20 supernatant primary antibody (1:200
dilution, Hybridoma Bank) in blocking buffer overnight at 4 °C,
and rinsed for 15 min in PBS. Samples were incubated with anti-mouse
fluorescein-conjugated antibody (1:200, Invitrogen A10683) for 1 h
at room temperature. Cells were incubated with DAPI diluted 1:5000
in PBS for 5 min and washed with PBS for 15 min. Coverslips were mounted
with ProLong Gold Antifade Reagent (Invitrogen) and imaged using a
Leica SP5 inverted confocal microscope. To conduct the fusion
assay, either the fibroblasts or ADSCs were transduced with the respective
Tet-ON MyoD lentivirus and selected using puromycin. Each pure cell
population was subsequently divided and transduced with either LV-Cre
(Addgene plasmid 30205) or LV-Floxed
Luc (Addgene plasmid 60622). Following transduction, these cell populations
were mixed and plated in a ratio of one part LV-Cre transduced cells
to ten parts LV-Floxed Luc cells in 24 well plates. Once grown to
confluence, the cells were induced to express the MyoD variant with
3 μg/mL doxycycline. Medium containing fresh doxycycline was
replenished every 2 days. Cells were harvested after 10 days of MyoD
expression and assayed for luciferase expression. Cells were pelleted
and washed with PBS. Pellets were resuspended in 100 μL of lysis
buffer (100 mM KHPO + 0.2% Triton-X, pH 7.8)
and incubated at room temperature for 10 min. The cell debris was
pelleted and 30 μL of the supernatant from each sample was transferred
to an opaque 96-well plate. Each sample was mixed with 30 μL
of Bright-Glo reagent (Bright-Glo Luciferase Assay System, Promega).
Luminescence was measured by a BioTek Synergy 2 Multi-Mode Microplate
Reader with 1-s scan time. Each MyoD variant had a matched set of
samples that only received the LV-Floxed Luc vector to serve as control.
All luciferase data is presented as a fold increase over background
from the matched Luc only samples. Reported values are the mean and
SEM from three or four independent experiments performed on different
days ( = 3 or 4) where technical replicates were
averaged within each experiment. RNA-seq
libraries were constructed as previously
described. Briefly, first-strand cDNA
was synthesized from oligo(dT) Dynabead-captured mRNA using SuperScript
VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit (Invitrogen). Second-strand cDNA was synthesized
using DNA polymerase I (New England Biolabs). cDNA was purified using
Agencourt AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter). Nextera transposase (Illumina;
5 min at 55 °C) was used to simultaneously fragment and insert
sequencing primers into the double-stranded cDNA. Transposition reactions
were halted using QG buffer (Qiagen) and fragmented cDNA was purified
on AMPure XP beads. Indexed sequencing libraries were generated by
six cycles of PCR. Libraries were sequenced using 50-bp paired-end
reads on one lane of an Illumina HiSeq 2000 instrument at the Duke
Genome Sequencing and Analysis Core Resource. Reads were aligned to
human RefSeq transcripts using Bowtie. The significance of differential expression of MyoD
and MyoD treated samples compared to untreated control
samples, including correction for multiple hypothesis testing, was
calculated using DESeq. Sequencing data
has been deposited to the Gene Expression Omnibus, Accession code:
GSE62448. At least two independent experiments
were compiled as means and standard errors of the mean. Effects
were evaluated with multivariate ANOVA and Dunnett’s post hoc
test using JMP 10 Pro..