A timely goal in drug discovery
is to have the ability to design new analogs that will stimulate or
inhibit a receptor involved in a particular disease process. Several
approaches spanning different molecular-weight scales exist to do
this. Namely the discovery of small molecules, peptides, peptidomimetics,
and high molecular weight antibody therapeutics are all means to create
new drugs to address a variety of disease targets. The discovery of
such molecules is challenging, with pharmaceutical companies spending
billions of dollars each year on the research, development, and optimization
of the affinity and bioavailability properties. Problems with pharmacokinetics
and bioavailability were estimated to be the cause of 40% of failures
in clinical trials, which is troublesome
considering the cost of getting a drug to market is approaching $1
billion. Protein design is increasingly
becoming a means to address some
of the challenges faced by small molecules. Over 200 peptides, proteins,
or antibodies have been marketed as of 2010, and it has been predicted that by 2020 we will see a larger number
of peptides as drugs. Protein/peptide
design faces its own difficulties though. These include passively
permeating the cell membrane, being soluble at biologically relevant
concentrations and pH values, and being subjected to proteolytic cleavage,
which quickly reduces the half-life. In fact, unmodified peptides
cannot circulate in the bloodstream for longer than a few minutes
due to proteolytic cleavage, which hinders
any potential therapeutic application of the most specific and highest
affinity binders that are designed against a target. Synthetic
biology can potentially address several of the limitations
of traditional peptide design through the introduction of post-translational
modifications (PTMs) and unnatural amino acids. These noncanonical
amino acids (NCAAs) are chemical and biological derivatives of the
20 canonical amino acids and upon their introduction can improve both
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of a peptide–drug
candidate while maintaining some of the core of the side-chain scaffold
to preserve key interactions. Additionally, backbone N-methylated
and -amino acids are a viable approach to block proteolytic
cleavage and improve metabolic stability. From a protein design standpoint, they offer the ability to diversify
the sequence space remarkably. A 10 amino acid peptide has a sequence
space of 20 = 1.02410. Considering the 20 amino acids and the over 400 PTMs that exist in nature, the sequence space of that same 10-amino acid peptide
becomes 420 = 1.7110, and that only accounts for the -amino acids. Thus, introduction
of modified amino acids as design choices substantially expands the
complexity of reaching the globally optimal design solution as was
pointed out in a recent review. It is not well understood how NCAAs affect protein structure. Unnatural
amino acids have been shown to have utility in rational design applications,
and thus, binding data exists of peptide analogues containing unnatural
amino acids and corresponding performance metrics including  and IC/EC50s. Modified amino
acids can change the local electrostatic and conformational environment
of a protein and may cause a variety of downstream biological responses. Although incorporation of NCAAs has been shown
to change the affinity and inhibitory/stimulatory potency of a peptide,
it is currently difficult to pursue rationalizations into the key
interactions contributing to that increase due to lack of forcefields
to model them. Experimentally, one can incorporate noncanonical
amino acids by
peptide synthesis, through bio-orthogonal
chemistry, or genetically. Evolution so far has been unable to address NCAA design naturally,
as the machinery to incorporate NCAAs does not exist in most organisms.
Even though most organisms have not evolved to incorporate NCAAs,
this does not imply that they are not beneficial; it means that there
are reasons for why they were not incorporated. These reasons include
the toxicity of some of the building blocks and precursors to the
noncanonical amino acid, the lack of a metabolic pathway in an organism
to create the building block, the inability of the NCAA to be incorporated
to permeate the cytoplasm, the lack of
a modified aminoacyl tRNA synthetase that can accept the modified
amino acid, the lack of an expanded genetic code in the organism,
or the lack of a tRNA to decode a modified genetic code. There have
been examples where each of these reasons has been successfully engineered. Despite organisms having limited ability to naturally incorporate
NCAAs, we have derived means to synthetically introduce them. Complicating the matter is that it is prohibitively expensive to
screen a large library of noncanonical amino acid designs. Even the
cost of incorporating a few modified amino acids is often an order
of magnitude higher than the same scaffold sequence with only natural
amino acids. The extreme cost is attributed to raw materials, synthesis,
and purification costs, which contribute their own unique difficulties
and require attention. These difficulties can be overcome with attention
to each modification’s characteristics but do not make the
screening of large libraries of modified amino acids on peptides or
proteins tractable. Nonetheless, there exist many examples where noncanonical
amino acids were experimentally incorporated into therapeutic peptides
targeting different disease and functional processes, as shown in
Table . A novel approach that can computationally
screen potential analogues and has agreement with experimental data
would offer a competitive advantage to its possessor. Several
groups have created methods to design proteins and peptides
containing natural amino acids computationally that have been experimentally
validated. RosettaDesign has been applied
to design a number of different peptides to bind to targets, as well as design enzymes for diverse applications. Citizen-scientists have applied algorithms available in the Rosetta
suite of tools to design a new enzyme for higher Diels-Alderase activity
using an online multiplayer game. An
iterative optimization approach has been created and applied to designing
chimeric variants of dihidrofolate reductase and to switch the cofactor preference of an enzyme. Until recently, methods for computational design only addressed
the natural amino acids. Kuhlman and co-workers have recently extended the Rosetta suite of tools to be able to handle several noncanonical amino acids,
constructed an extended rotamer library, and used the parameters with
Rosetta to perform design to derivatize peptides based on calpastatin
to calpain-1. Zagrovic and co-workers have created parameters and tools for a
library of modified amino acids compatible with the GROMACS simulation
engine. The Floudas
group had notable success designing peptides with natural
amino acids that have been validated experimentally on 6 protein targets,
producing inhibitors and agonists of proteins
that are linked to different diseases. These designs include entry inhibitors
of HIV gp41, agonists and antagonists
of the Complement component C3a receptor, inhibitors of Complement component C3c, and the redesign of
human β-defensin-2. We recently
developed Forcefield_PTM, a set of AMBER
parameters for 32 frequently occurring post-translational modifications.
Here, we present new forcefield charge parameters and a web interface
to allow for the introduction of 147 noncanonical amino acids into
peptides and proteins. The optimized charge parameters are validated
on their ability to discriminate between active and inactive analogs
of Compstatin for the inhibition of complement component C3c with
approximate binding affinity and binding free energy calculations.
Subsequently, the new forcefield parameters are used to understand
the precise interactions in the most potent Compstatin analog containing
a noncanonical amino acid compared with its unmodified counterpart
and the original native sequence. Thus, with this new parameter set,
we can understand how unnatural amino acids affect binding and other
structural properties through molecular simulations. Examples of Non-canonical Amino Acids
Incorporated into Therapeutic Peptide Agonists and Antagonists Targeting
Various Diseases biphenylalanine 2′-et-4′-ome-biphenylalanine 2-napthylalanine truncated
variant of GLP1-peptide inhibition of uterine motor activity prevention of uterine atony, induction,
and control of postpartum
bleeding or hemorrhage delaying the birth in case of premature birth 1-methyltryptophan, 5-methyltryptophan stroke, heart attack,
Alzheimer’s, asthma,
rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus New Forcefield
Charge Parameters for 147 Non-Canonical Amino
Acids http://selene.princeton.edu/FFNCAA http://selene.princeton.edu/FFNCAA Partial charges were calculated for every atom in the
library of 147 noncanonical amino acids listed in Table  in accordance with the ff03 methodology. The new parameters for each NCAA are presented in the  section “Forcefield
Parameters for Each Non-canonical Amino Acid Modification Grouped
by Scaffold Residue” and are freely available for download
and direct import into AMBER at . Conventions for atom and three-letter code naming were done mainly
in line with corresponding CIF files contained in the PDB when contained
there so the parameters can be used directly with corresponding input
PDB files. Images of each NCAA are also provided in the  with all atoms explicitly
labeled. With the determination of these parameters, we next
present the results of our efforts to test the parameters on experimental
binding data and subsequently to understand the key interactions involved
in the most potent Compstatin analog in Table  containing the unnatural amino acid 1-methyltryptophan relative
to its scaffold sequence. Predictive Ability of Approximate Binding
Affinity in Discriminating
Active and Inactive Analogs of Compstatin Independent molecular
dynamics simulations for all 63 Compstatin variants reported in Table  were carried out in complex with C3c and in isolation.
An independent simulation of the protein C3c without the peptide bound
was also carried out. The approximate binding affinity was calculated
as in eq  (see ). The analogs were rank ordered by * from highest
to lowest. Then, an ROC curve was constructed to assess the predictive
ability of the approximate binding affinity metric to discriminate
between active and inactive analogs. Two cutoffs were chosen for defining
whether an analog was active or inactive: 20 μM and 200 μM. Parts A and B of Figure  present the results
of the predictive ability of this metric for this system using the
forcefield parameters derived. The approximate binding affinity metric
can reasonably discriminate between active and inactive analogs with
areas under the ROC curve of 0.691 and 0.721 corresponding to a cutoff
for active analogs with IC < 20 μM and <200
μM, respectively. Only 1 false positive was observed in the
top 10 ranked analogs by *, and 6 false positives
by the 20 μM IC cutoff were observed in the top
20. This result is encouraging, since * has previously
been used as the final discriminating metric in our  protein design framework using only natural amino acids. This suggests that * can be used to reasonably discriminate between active/inactive
analogs for new designs of Compstatin with the AMBER energy function
and molecular dynamics simulations. Table of Modified Amino Acids for
Which Charge Parameters Are Presented in This Work Grouped by Scaffold
Amino Acid (R)-α-methyl-phenylalanine
(MPH) 2-ethyl-4-O-methyl-biphenylalanine
(TEF) (2s,4s)-2,5-diamino-4-hydroxy-5-oxopentanoic acid
(GHG) 2-amino-propanedioic acid (FGL) 3-O-methyl-biphenylalanine (TOM) 2-amino-6-oxopimelic acid (26P) carboxymethylated cysteine (CCS) 2-methyl-4-O-methyl-biphenylalanine (MFO) s-(2-hydroxyethyl)-cysteine
(OCY) (2s)-amino(3,5-dihydroxyphenyl)-ethanoic
acid (3FG) 4-tert-butyl-phenylalanine (TP4) 4-carbamimidoyl-phenylalanine (0BN) 4-hydroxymethyl-phenylalanine (4HP) 3,4-dimethylphenylalanine (D34) 3-(8-hydroxyquinolin-3-yl)-alanine (HQA) 3-amino-6-hydroxy-tyrosine (TYQ) 2-amino-5-hydroxypentanoic acid (LDO) (R)-2-(2′-propenyl)-alanine (PRP) 2,3-diaminopropanoic acid (DPP) (R)-2-(4′-pentenyl)-alanine (PEN) (R)-2-(7′-octenyl)-alanine (OCT) (3r)-3-methyl-glutamic acid (LME) (2s)-2,8-diaminooctanoic acid (HHK) (3s)-3-methyl-glutamic acid
(MEG) Corresponding three-letter codes
are listed in parentheses following each amino acid. Predictive Ability of Binding
Free Energy Calculations in Discriminating
Active and Inactive Analogs of Compstatin An independent
molecular dynamics simulation of the complex with each of the 63 variants
of Compstatin and C3c was carried out. Snapshots from the simulations
were used to perform MM-GBSA calculations to evaluate the binding
free energies of each analog. Parts C and D of Figure  present the results of the ability for MM-GBSA to discriminate
between active and inactive analogs. Binding free energy calculations
performed using the forcefield parameters and MM-GBSA yielded the
greatest discriminatory ability with areas under the ROC curve of
0.808 and 0.936 corresponding to a cutoff for active analogs with
IC < 20 μM and <200 μM, respectively.
This suggests that using the forcefield parameters with MM-GBSA can
accurately discriminate between active and inactive analogs of Compstatin.
In fact, in the top 10 sequences’ calculated Δ, there was only 1 false positive for either of the
IC cutoffs (in the seventh position), and 6 false positives
in the top 20 sequences. Removing the sequences corresponding to deletions
of Compstatin in order to compare only equal sequence-length analogs
yields an area under the curve of 0.702 and 0.869 for a cutoff IC of <20 μM and <200 μM, respectively. We next asked whether there exists
a correlation observed between
experimental IC and calculated binding free energy as
IC values were found to be strongly correlated ( = 0.887) with  values in the work of Magotti and co-workers. IC data was used over  due to the much larger number of experimental data points
available for this system, important for achieving statistical significance
in the results. Ideally, a larger number of  values would be available to perform similar assessments.
We observed a weak correlation between IC and binding
free energy in Figure . The existence of a
correlation is in agreement with data presented by Magotti. It is interesting that the binding free energy metric performed
better than the approximate binding affinity (*),
since the approximate binding affinity of each analog compared to
the template sequence has been used as the final discriminator of
which analogs to send for experimental testing in our  design framework, and has been successfully
applied to designing inhibitors of HIV entry and inhibitors of Complement activation previously. This suggests that we should use the calculated binding
free energy if possible instead of the approximate binding affinity
when designing new Compstatin variants. Despite these results, the
approximate binding affinity calculation will still be useful to assess
the docking of complexes when the binding mode is unknown. Additional
testing with different sets of protein/peptide complexes beyond C3c/Compstatin
should be evaluated in the future to provide further evidence supporting
the use of these binding evaluation metrics. Similarly, future testing
with different systems having more experimental  data can be performed. Receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curves constructed from
rank-ordered lists of Compstatin variants’ binding metrics.
ROC curve for rank ordered list by * corresponding
to an active IC cutoff of <20 μM (A) and 200
μM (B). ROC curve for rank ordered list by Δ to an active IC cutoff of <20 M (C) and 200 μM
(D). Correlation between IC and calculated binding
free
energies using MM-GBSA for 63 Compstatin analogs. The blue bands correspond
to the 95% confidence interval for the regression line. The red bands
correspond to the 95% confidence interval for a new value to lie in
the prediction band. Error bars are ±1 standard deviation from
the mean binding free energy calculated. Discriminating Differences
in Interactions in Compstatin Analogs
with Natural and Modified Amino Acids Due to the new forcefield
parameters derived in this work, we have the capability to discriminate
interfacial interactions involving noncanonical amino acids at atomistic
detail. The most potent analog of Compstatin in Table  contains the noncanonical amino acid 1-methyltryptophan in
position 4. We aimed to gain insight as to why this substitution is
more potent than the analog W4A9 and native Compstatin based on strengths
of residue–residue interactions. Therefore, for multiple independent
simulation trajectories of analogs W4(OMW)A9, W4A9, and native Compstatin
(Sequence 11: Ac-ICV(OMW)QDWGAHRCT-NH2, Sequence 23: Ac-ICVWQDWGAHRCT-NH2,
and Sequence 53: ICVVQDWGHHRCT in Table ),
we decomposed the polar and nonpolar interaction free energy contributions
and present the results of the average interaction free energies as
two-dimensional density maps in Figure . Here,
we focus on differences in interactions due to 1-methyltryptophan
relative to tryptophan or valine present in other Compstatin sequences.
A full detailed analysis of all pairwise interactions is presented
in  section “Use
of FF_NCAA to Discriminate Specific Contributing Interactions to Antagonistic
Activity for Unnaturally Modified Analog Compared to Native and Variant
E1 Compstatin.” The substitutions of Val4 to Trp4 and
from Trp4 to W4(OMW) result in an increase of the overall nonpolar
interactions between residue 4 and C3c residues Gly345, Met346, Asn390,
Thr391, His392, Pro393, and Arg456; the increase is more pronounced
in the 390–393 C3c residue moiety, as was previously proposed
through molecular modeling by Magotti and co-workers. During the simulations of analog W4(OMW)A9, the methyl
group of Trp4 is frequently found to lay upon the Cys2-Cys12 disulfide
bridge, and this leads to increased intramolecular nonpolar interactions
between Trp4 and Cys2-Cys12. Similar behavior was observed in recently
published MD computational studies investigating
two novel analogs, R1W4(OMW)A9 and R-1S0W4(OMW)A9, which also contain
1-methyltryptophan in position 4 and using the CHARMM forcefield. W4(OMW) forms increased intra- and intermolecular
interactions compared with the less potent analogs containing Trp4
and Val4. In all systems, the backbone N in Val/Trp4 is hydrogen bonded
to C3c Gly345 O, and the backbone O in Val/Trp4 is hydrogen bonded
to the charged amide group of C3c Arg456; the former hydrogen bond-related
polar interaction is stronger in the parent Compstatin, whereas the
latter is stronger in W4(OMW)A9. The full set of intermolecular interactions
formed between the Compstatin analogs and C3c residues in Figure  are in agreement with the X-ray structure of W4A9
in complex with C3c and with all previous
MD simulation studies in explicit water solvent using the CHARMM forcefield. Despite the
specific differences between the analogs, overall, the strengths of
the residue pairwise interaction free energies of the three systems
were similar. http://selene.princeton.edu/FFNCAA http://selene.princeton.edu/FFNCAA To disseminate
the ability to
use FF_NCAA to the broader academic community, we have also created
a web interface , as
shown in Figure . The interface allows one
to upload a PDB structure to be modified by single or multiple noncanonical
amino acids and/or simultaneously mutated. Additionally, the interface
allows a user to download the forcefield parameters calculated and
derived for FF_NCAA, as well as read instructions for use with AMBER
directly. After user submission, the interface performs the
requested modifications and minimizes the structure to remove any
clashes that have been formed by introducing the noncanonical amino
acid to the nearest local minimum. This step utilizes the parameters
from FF_NCAA for the noncanonical amino acids coupled with the parameters
in ff03. After completion, the user will
receive an e-mail indicating the structure’s successful modification
with a unique link to download their results. The user can visualize
the modified and input structure using a Jmol applet integrated into
the web interface. Additionally, the interface provides links to relevant
information tabulated about the structures including the TMScore and and RMSD between the structures, and the molecular-mechanics
calculated energy of the structure. In addition, the topology and
parameter files are generated for AMBER and are provided so that one
can directly use them as input for further molecular dynamics simulation
on the user’s local computing systems. Disulfide bridges in
the input structure are automatically detected and introduced by the
web interface. The web interface will be useful to researchers aiming
to interactively make site-specific noncanonical amino acid substitutions
on a protein structure/complex and to perform subsequent binding calculations
in AMBER locally. (A) Nonpolar and (B) polar interaction maps for analog
W4(OMW)A9.
(C) Nonpolar and (D) polar interaction maps for analog W4A9. (E) Nonpolar
and (F) polar interaction maps for native Compstatin. The color bar
represents the interaction free energy between the corresponding residue–residue
pairs in kcal/mol. The color bar was scaled to be the same for the
nonpolar and polar interaction free energy contributions so that the
different analogues’ energetic contributions can be directly
compared. Web interface for the dissemination of Forcefield_NCAA.
The web
interface has static links to download and use Forcefield_NCAA in
AMBER locally, as well as an interactive interface to make noncanonical
amino acid substitutions and mutations to an input PDB structure.
Screenshot taken April 25, 2013. Procedure for Calculation and Derivation
of Forcefield Parameters
in Forcefield_NCAA Quantum calculations to derive partial
charges compatible with AMBER ff03 were performed consistent with
the procedure of Duan and co-workers for
the 20 natural amino acids. The ff03 methodology was chosen due to
the noncanonical amino acids having multiple R-groups attached to
the  or substitutions such as
methylation on the backbone nitrogen. Therefore, the consensus fixed-backbone
charges in other AMBER fixed-charge forcefields would not be applicable. The choices for NCAAs chosen to be parametrized
were based on those found in the literature to enhance the binding
affinity of a peptide to a receptor protein, α,α-disubstituted
modified amino acids, N-methylated amino acids, and β-amino
acids. The procedure used is shown in Figure  and is adapted from the procedure we developed to derive parameters
in Forcefield_PTM for parametrizing frequently
occurring post-translational modifications. In the first step,
structures of each unnatural amino acid dipeptide were built using
the MarvinSketch program. Dipeptides
are constructed to mimic the peptide backbone with a core amino acid
with a preceding and subsequent amino acid. An acetyl group precedes
the amino acid to be parametrized, with an N-methyl group following
it in the form ACE-X-NME, where X is the amino acid to be parametrized. -Amino acids were constructed, unless otherwise noted by designations
of (R) or (S) for the disubstituted amino acids. In the second step,
the distance geometry () module in TINKER 5.1 is used to construct α-helix (ϕ
= −60, ψ = −40) and β-strand (ϕ =
−120, ψ = −140) conformers. In Step 3, through
TINKER, utilizing the AMBER ff94 parameter
set, and using restraints on the main-chain torsion angles, each conformer
was subjected to 25 simulated annealing calculations (using the  routine with default parameters).  and  were 1000 K and 0
K in the annealing. 2000 steps of cooling are done in each simulation,
employing a linear cooling protocol and a 1 fs time step. This procedure
was performed to find suitable feasible points for subsequent detailed
optimization at the quantum mechanical level. For both the helix and
strand conformer, the lowest energy structure for each was minimized
to the nearest local minima using the  routine,
with a RMS gradient cutoff of 0.01. () was used to optimize (Step 5) each conformer
at the HF/6-31G** level of theory, with restraints on the ϕ
and ψ angles to preserve the backbone secondary structure. Single
point energy calculations are next performed on the dipeptide structures
using the density functional theory method and the B3LYP exchange
and correlation functionals and the cc-pVTZ basis set. An ether-like organic solvent environment (ε
= 4) was mimicked by applying the IEFPCM implicit solvent model, as suggested by Duan. The electrostatic
potential (ESP) was calculated at a set of gridpoints defining the
molecular surface in the solvent-accessible region around each optimized
conformation at 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, and 2.0 times the vdw radii using the
program DMS at a density of 0.5, yielding 2.5–2.8 points/Å. The ESP values calculated from
each conformation were next used as input to a two-stage RESP fit
of the partial atomic charges using Antechamber in AmberTools 1.4. In the RESP model, atoms are reasonably approximated
as spherical points having fixed charges rather than as nuclei with
shared electrons. Bond, angle, and dihedral force constants were perceived
by matching atom types contained in the General Amber Forcefield (GAFF) using Antechamber. GAFF torsion parameters, when applied to post-translational modifications,
were shown previously to be highly correlated with and reproduce the
locations of local maxima/minima on the quantum mechanically calculated
potential energy surface of key torsion angles, although their amplitudes
needed refinement. Subsequent refinement
of key bonded parameters may be warranted but are not developed in
this work due to the extreme computational cost involved and since
the parameters developed herein are intended to be used mainly in
a design context. This procedure was completed for a total of 147
diverse noncanonical amino acids spanning all amino acids except Proline.
No new atom types were needed in the matching of force constants and
equilibrium values. Further, in 99 of the 147 molecules parametrized,
no parameters were utilized from GAFF since AMBER already had defined
the parameters for all of the atom types for those noncanonical amino
acids. The method described is similar to that described by Khoury
et al. with the changes being able to
handle α,α-disubstituted and backbone modified amino acids.
The parameters for noncanonical amino acids were next tested using
binding calculations. Automated framework for AMBER partial charge parametrization
for
noncanonical, α,α-disubstituted, β- and N-methylated
amino acids. Adapted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2013, American
Chemical Society. Testing the Parameters
Using Approximate Binding Affinity and
Binding Free Energy Calculations of 63 Compstatin Analogs Selection
of System for Testing and Extraction of Data from
the Literature We aimed to create charge parameters for noncanonical
amino acids that would be compatible with the existing AMBER ff03
forcefield parameters for natural amino acids. We focused on assessing
whether the derived parameters can discriminate between active/inactive
analogs of an inhibitor, since we expect the charge parameters derived
to be used mainly in a protein design context. This approach is viable
since there are sets of binding data available in the literature where
others have experimentally incorporated noncanonical amino acids for
various therapeutic applications. The availability of (i) an
experimentally solved structure for Compstatin variant E1 (the ligand)
bound to human Complement component C3c (the receptor) and (ii) an abundance of experimental binding and
IC data available, and the observation that (iii) the
ligand peptide is relatively rigid because of a disulfide bond that
cyclizes it which limits the entropic contribution to the binding
free energy, led us to focus our testing efforts on the Complement/Compstatin
system. There are three pathways in the Complement system: the classical
pathway, the lectin pathway, and the alternative pathway. All three pathways converge on a single step
where the key protein, C3 binds to C3 convertase and causes it to
become cleaved into C3a and C3b (which contains C3c), which allows
downstream events to occur leading to the membrane attack complex
that can cleave cells. Compstatin binds to C3 and the C3 convertase,
which blocks them from coming together and becoming cleaved. Inhibiting their ability to bind together and
cleave inhibits the activation of C3 and disrupts the formation of
the membrane attack complex downstream. This is important as its improper
activation has been linked to over 10 autoimmune, inflammation, and
neurological disorders. Figure  shows a schematic diagram
of Complement
component C3c with the coordinates of the ligand peptide Compstatin
variant E1 (Ac-ICVWQDWGAHRCT-NH2) bound. Since the region that Compstatin
binds to C3c is confined and localized in one site, utilizing the
entire C3c:Compstatin complex is not necessary. In addition, because
of unresolved/missing residues in the crystal structure, and because
of its large size (643 amino acids in the solved PDB structure), using
the full structure of C3c only serves to complicate subsequent calculation
complexities, extend simulation times, and potentially add unnecessary
noise. Therefore,
residues F335 (macroglobulin domain 4,MG4) to D535 (MG5) were extracted
from PDB: 2QKI and used in all subsequent calculations. Previous simulations to
study this complex have shown that using these regions were sufficient
for modeling the binding interface. All
experimental binding data (IC’s) on Compstatin
variants were tabulated from Magotti et al., Chiu et al., and Qu et al. These data sets are denoted by structurekinetic,
pharmacophore, and novel analogues, respectively, and are shown in
Table . The data set included 47 analogues
with IC < 200 μM, and 16 analogs with IC > 200 μM, as well as 31 analogues with IC < 20 μM and 32 analogs with IC > 20 μM.
In terms of diversity, the data set included 23 noncanonical amino
acid modifications, of which 11 were backbone N-methylations, 28 were
natural amino acid substitutions, and 12 were deletions. There was
no training done specific to this system in the derivation of the
parameters for the NCAAs used. All subsequent results are based only
on physical interactions derived from the physics governing the AMBER
forcefield. (A) Crystal structure of Compstatin Variant E1 bound to Complement
component C3c (PDB: 2QKI). Each macroglobulin domain (MG) is denoted by color. (B) The region
where modified amino acids are to be substituted in is shown in the
inset. This is the interface that is being designed when making natural
or noncanonical amino acid substitutions. A disulfide bridge cyclizes
Compstatin between residues 2 and 12. (C) This is the full region
all calculations will be performed on, beginning with F335 from MG4
to D535 on MG5 as labeled. The images are visualized in PyMOL. Screening Compstatin Analogs with Short Molecular Dynamics Simulations
and Binding Calculations The starting coordinates of variant
E1 of Compstatin bound to Complement component C3c were taken from
PDB: 2QKI. Each
variant was constructed using the program  by stripping
off the side-chains and substituting them with the new amino acid,
natural or modified. Deletions were constructed by deleting the amino
acids on the peptide chain. During the initial minimization the atoms
moved to adjust for the deletions. The cysteine residues in the Compstatin
variants were connected to form disulfide bridges in all simulations
using the  command in . Acetyl
and N-methyl blocking groups were added if they were present in the
experimental analog. The molecular dynamics and screening procedure
used was done identically for each variant with AMBER11. Partial charges compatible with AMBER ff03 derived in this work were used for all noncanonical
amino acids. All simulations were performed with the generalized Born
implicit solvent model of Onufriev with a 16
Å nonbonded interaction cutoff. The surface energy term was activated
and a salt concentration of 0.1 mol/L was used to account for charge
screening. Structures were minimized with 600 steps of steepest descent
followed by 400 steps of conjugate gradient minimization. The structures
were next heated by rescaling the velocities in 6 stages with increments
of 50 K from 0 K to 300 K over 30 ps and a 0.5 fs time step to heat
the structures. The collision frequency γ was 5 ps. Shake constraints were used to constrain all bonds between heavy
atoms and hydrogens and reduce the number of degrees of freedom. Next,
each C3c/Compstatin variant underwent a short 0.5 ns production simulation
using a 1 fs time step at 300 K. Short (<1 ns) MD simulations with
the ff03 charge model have previously been shown to give better performance
in ranking binding energies than longer simulations and gave the best overall ranking results in an assessment
of 5 AMBER forcefields (ff99, ff99SB, ff99SB-ILDN, ff03, and ff12SB)
and 46 small molecules targeting 5 protein receptors. No restraints were employed in any step of any simulation
to strictly assess the suitability of the parameters to discriminate
between active/inactive analogs of Compstatin. Data Set Used for Testing the Optimized
Charges Introduced in Forcefield_NCAA The noncanonical amino acids
studied are phosphotyrosine (PTR), O-methyltyrosine (OMY), N-methylthreonine
(NMT), 5-methyltryptophan (MTR), 1-methyltryptophan (OMW), α-aminoisobutyric
acid (AIB), N-methylcysteine (NMC), 1-pyrenylalanine (PAL), cyclohexylalanine
(ALC), N-methyltryptophan (NMW), 1-naphthylalanine (ALN), N-methylaspartic
acid (NMD), N-methylglycine (NMG), N-methylglutamine (NMQ), N-methyl-arginine
(NMR), N-methylhistidine (NMH), O-ethyltyrosine (OMY), N-methylalanine
(NMA), N-methyltyrosine (NMY). Several of these non-canonical amino
acids were substituted in different positions on the Compstatin sequence.
ACE and NH2 correspond to the N-terminal and C-terminal blocking groups
acetyl and amide to keep the termini neutrally charged. Approximate Binding Affinity Calculations Three independent
simulations as described above were performed for the complex, the
protein, and the peptide, respectively. One simulation of the protein
was utilized to assess the contributions of the protein and to remove
any variability from its contribution. Sixty three independent simulations
of each complex and 63 independent simulations of each peptide were
performed in isolation using the procedure described above. The derivation
of the Approximate Binding Affinity (*) from statistical
mechanics is described in the following. The equilibrium of
complex formation PL from a protein P and ligand L is defined asAssuming a dilute mixture, one can assume
ideal behavior. The Helmholtz free energy  can be
related to the total partition function,  in eq .  is in turn a function of the
individual partition functions , where  is PL, P, L. This assumes independence
of subsystems and that the particles are indistinguishable.The chemical
potential μ of species  is the partial derivative
of the Helmholtz Free Energy  with respect to , denoted in eq .Equality of chemical
potentials at equilibrium
is denoted in eq .Next, substituting eq  into eq  and rearranging yields. is a product of the translational (), rotational (), and vibrational () partition functions. Since  is only a function of the coordinates , , and , it integrates out to
a volume , leaving  =  * (). () is the rotational and vibrational partition functions, which is
what is approximated by evaluation of  during the snapshots sampled over the course of a molecular dynamics
trajectory. This is shown in eq .Next, the volume term can be taken out of
each partition function and therefore the ratio of the partition functions
equals the ratio of concentrations (since / is
a concentration). * =  when the intrapartition functions ( and ) are exactly calculated.Currently, it is not possible to compute exact
partition functions for a complex molecular species due to the inability
to integrate an exact energy function over the molecule’s entire
conformational space. Therefore, we approximate
the partition functions as the sampled space of a molecular dynamics
trajectory scored with the AMBER potential energy function. This derivation is based on an initial derivation by Lilien et
al. using rotamerically based ensembles
with modifications resulting from a personal communication between
Dr. Meghan Bellows Peterson and Professor Pablo G. Debenedetti. Using
the ratios of the partition function of the complex, peptide, and
protein, the Approximate Binding Affinity, * was
calculated and placed in a rank ordered list from highest to lowest,
which would correspond to the largest to smallest predicted association
affinity. The Jacobi logarithm was used to handle numerical overflows
that can be caused by summing exponential terms. Binding Free Energy Calculations Binding free energies
were calculated using the states produced over the time course of
each of the 63 molecular dynamics simulations of the complex. These
were calculated to test the forcefield parameters and also to compare
its predictive ability to the *. In the approximate
binding affinity, independent simulations of the peptide, protein,
and complex are performed. In the binding free energy calculation,
only one simulation of the complex is required. The binding free energy
is calculated as in eq , utilizing the thermodynamic
cycle denoted in Figure .Tamamis
et al., using the CHARMM suite of tools,
showed MM-GBSA was able to show
the difference in binding Compstatin in complex with human versus
rat C3c and mouse C3c. Tamamis et al. further showed MM-GBSA was helpful in discriminating
potential analogs for experimental testing. Based on these previous findings, it is clear that MM-GBSA can be
used to study the Compstatin/C3c system. Therefore, in this study,
binding free energies were calculated using the MM-GBSA module in AMBER11 complemented by the charge parameters
for the noncanonical amino acids introduced in this work. For this system, we assume that the entropic contribution
due to
the binding free energy is small since the ligand’s structure
is relatively rigid due to the disulfide bridges (the maximum  RMSD between analogs W4(OMW)A9, W4A9,
and native Compstatin was 1.38 at the end of the simulation). The
entropic contribution, which can be calculated through a normal-mode
analysis, can have a large uncertainty. Given that we expect the Compstatin analogs to have similar entropies
due to their cyclic nature and being bound to the same binding pocket
of C3c, and because of the expected large error, the entropic contribution
in the calculation was ignored. This “one-trajectory”
approximation where we assume similar structure in the bound and unbound
state is reasonable and has been applied elsewhere and also has been compared to the results of a “three-trajectory”
approximation for this system. Using
the “one-trajectory” approximation, all of the bonded
terms (bonds, angles, torsions) cancel out in the evaluation of the
binding free energies, leaving only nonbonded terms, of which the
electrostatic component is a significant contributor. Thermodynamic
cycle used to calculate the binding free energies.
Ideally one can calculate the binding free energy for the association
of [A] + [B] ⇌ [AB] directly in solvent. This calculation is
expensive and contains much noise due to the contribution of the solvent.
Therefore, a different approach was used exploiting a thermodynamic
cycle that can calculate the same difference by utilizing the solvation
free energies of the protein (receptor), peptide (ligand), and complex,
with the binding energy calculated . Construction
of Receiver Operating Characteristic Curves After the approximate
binding affinity and binding free energies
were calculated for each variant of Compstatin following the procedure
described above, the values were rank ordered from most favorable
to least favorable. For *, this was largest to smallest,
and for Δ, this was smallest to largest.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were constructed based
on the rank-ordered lists of the analogs. Two cutoff values of IC values defining active and inactive were chosen. The first
cutoff was 20 M, which corresponded to an even split between active
and inactive in the data set. That is, analogs with IC values < 20 μM were considered active. Similarly, a cutoff
of 200 μM was chosen to perform the analysis with a less stringent
cutoff of active/inactive. These values as cutoffs were determined
based on the fact that the most active Compstatin analog in Table  is Ac-ICV(OMW)QDWGAHRCT-NH2, which has an IC of 0.21 μM. The axes
on the ROC curve correspoμnd to the True Positive Rate (Sensitivity)
vs the False Positive Rate (1-Specificity). The ROC curve constructed
aimed to find how many of the most favorable analogs by calculated
approximate binding affinity or binding free energy were experimentally
active when rank-ordered. In a virtual screen, this is often one of
the first steps in design: to assess whether a particular ligand will
bind to its target favorably, and ranking the affinity of a ligand
to the targeted receptor. Sensitivity and specificity are defined
as.where TP, FP, TN, and FN stand for
true/false
positives/negatives, respectively. Additional Simulations
for Analysis of Interaction Free Energies
of Compstatin Derivatives and C3 Residue Pairs Three biologically
relevant complexes containing derivatives of Compstatin (Sequence
11: Ac-ICV(OMW)QDWGAHRCT-NH2, Sequence 23: Ac-ICVWQDWGAHRCT-NH2, and
Sequence 53: ICVVQDWGHHRCT in Table ) were
assessed for their interactions through multiple longer-time molecular
dynamics simulations. Four independent trajectories were performed
for each complex. Each of the four trajectories for each complex were
appended together for subsequent analysis. The starting complex structures
were constructed and minimized as described previously deriving from
PDB: 2QKI. The
complexes were heated stepwise from 0 to 300K over 30 ps using restraints
on all backbone atoms with a force constant of 10 kcal/(mol·Å). The complexes were carefully equilibrated in 3 stages;
each stage was run for 200 ps. In the first stage, all atoms were
restrained with a force constant of 5.0 kcal/(mol·Å) for 200 ps. In the second stage, all backbone atoms outside
of the binding pocket were constrained (residues 335–343, 350–387,
394–453, 463–487, 493–535), and all atoms in
the binding pocket were constrained with a force constant of 5.0 kcal/(mol·Å). In the final stage, all backbone atoms outside of the binding
pocket were constrained and all atoms in the binding pocket were constrained
with a force constant of 1.5 kcal/(mol·Å). After
equilibration, four independent 10 ns production simulations were
performed for each complex. These simulations were used to produce
maps of residue–residue polar and nonpolar interaction free
energies to identify key energetic interactions important for binding
through the simulation trajectories. GRAPHIC-d508e3221-autogenerated The interaction free energies
between two residues ( and ′)
were computed by the relation:for each of the 3 Compstatin
variants evaluated.
The first and second group of terms on the right-hand side of eq  describe polar and nonpolar interactions between  and ′. In the calculations,  corresponds to a residue on Compstatin and ′ corresponds to a residue on C3c. The details of the calculation
have been presented previously. For each complex, 4000 frames
over the 40 ns total simulation time were evaluated for their average
interaction free energies using a spacing of 10 ps per frame..