Synthetic
biology holds great
potential for cell engineering by introducing synthetic gene regulatory
circuits to the host chassis with the goal to generate predictable
behavior. Typically heterologous gene networks are designed and assumed
to be orthogonal (no direct genetic crosstalk interaction) to the
host cell genetic background. The hypothesis is largely based
on the fact that the heterologous components do not naturally exist
or have no homologues in the host chassis, and hence are less likely
to produce unintended regulatory interaction with the endogenous genetic
elements. Such orthogonality assumption is expected
to lead to no or minimal interference on the host cell gene expression
and physiology and thus allow to increase the functional predictability
and compatibility of the introduced circuits. On the other hand, wholly
orthogonal circuits would be unlikely to exist since the imported
circuits will use some shared cellular resources such as metabolites,
energy equivalents as well as replication, transcription and translation
machineries. However, the design of the circuits themselves may provide
some space to mitigate crosstalk and resource competition to minimize
their physiological interference on the host chassis. To date, a number of orthogonal genetic devices and circuits
have
been constructed to perform various functions and have demonstrated
the great potential of using orthogonal components to generate robust
host cell behavior. For example, a previously engineered orthogonal AND gate circuit
has been shown to work reliably among nearly all seven typically used  strains, whereas the same circuit using an
alternative endogenous promoter as one input (, P replaced by P) failed to function
in six out of seven these host strains. This reported circuit–host compatibility assay indicate that
the use of orthogonal gene elements for a circuit help to eliminate
potential unintended interactions between the circuit and the host
genetic programs. However, most of the presumed orthogonal components
and circuits have been designed based on prior literature knowledge
and bioinformatics analysis, and have not been experimentally tested
for their effects on the host cell genetic machinery. To a large extent,
this has been limited by the lack of routinely available yet widely
affordable methods to perform genomic wide profiling of gene expression.
Ideally, a genetic device should be as orthogonal as possible to their
host chassis to facilitate its reuse and reliability in different
cellular contexts, , having minimal interruption
on the host gene expression and imposing low metabolic load on the
host growth. Here we used RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) to quantify the entire transcriptome to study
the interactions between
a representative heterologous AND gate circuit and the host  under various conditions including different
circuit designs and plasmid copy numbers. We envision that such genome-wide
gene expression profiling will enable a quantitative measure of the
orthogonality and effect of the various imported circuits on their
host, which in turn could provide important insights and guidance
for future efforts to design more orthogonal and robust gene circuits
with minimal unwanted interaction and burden to their host. We show
that the heterologous circuits themselves have little effect on the
host gene expression profile, whereas the circuit plasmid copy number
matters more with medium copy number plasmid having more prominent
effect on the host transcriptome than its low copy number counterpart.
In contrast, the circuits have stronger influence on the host cell
growth with a metabolic load proportional to the circuit copy number.
Moreover, we show that variation of copy number, an increase from
low to medium copy, caused different types of change observed in the
behavior of components in the AND gate circuit leading to an unbalance
and distortion of the two gate-inputs and thus the attenuation of
the gate output. Taken together, we demonstrate that the circuit plasmid
copy number is a key factor that can dramatically affect the orthogonality,
load and functionality of the introduced heterologous gene circuits
in the host chassis, and that RNA-Seq is a powerful
method for characterizing and debugging circuits that goes beyond
the limitation of traditionally used fluorescent reporters. Orthogonal AND Gate Circuit Design and RNA-Seq Assays We first chose a previously reported modular and orthogonal AND gate
that has been built and characterized in , as the candidate heterologous gene
circuit to study its interaction with the host genetic machinery.
The AND gate circuit is designed to comprise an orthogonal σ-dependent / heteroregulation
module from the  (hypersensitive response and
pathogenicity) system of Type III secretion in . The AND gate (A) comprises two coactivating genes  and  and one σ-dependent  promoter, and can integrate two interchangeable signal
inputs to generate one output. The output  promoter
is activated only when both the codependent HrpR and HrpS enhancer-binding
proteins are expressed and form a heteromeric complex. The circuit core elements,  and , are imported from the . Using online BLAST software to align their genetic
sequences against the genomic sequences of  MG1655, no significant sequence similarity was found between them,
indicating low homology of these heterologous genetic elements to
the  host. Due to the requirement of
modularity, both the inputs and output of the AND gate were designed
to be promoters, enabling the inputs to be wired to any input promoters
and the output to be connected to any gene modules downstream to drive
various cellular responses. Here we used the exogenous aTc
inducible P and AHL inducible P promoters
as the two inputs. Both promoters and their cognate receptor genes  and  are exogenous to the  genome. Similarly, the BLAST results of the
two input promoter sequences also showed no significant similarity.
Hence, we assume these heterologous genetic elements do not tend to
interact with the endogenous ones in the host, , the rational for orthogonality. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf To compare conditions of
different circuit compositions, we also
built constructs that comprise only the two input promoters of the
AND gate with  reporters (A). Thus, with the condition of empty plasmid
alone as the control, we analyzed three types of gene circuits, namely
the AND-gate, Inputs- and empty plasmid. Since
the circuit copy number could be another influencing factor, we considered
two conditions of plasmid copy number here, ,
one medium copy number () and one low copy
number (). The copy number of a plasmid in
the host is determined by their origin of replication. The plasmid  with p15A ori produces medium copy number (∼15–20
copies per cell) of plasmids in host cells, while the plasmid  with pSC101 ori produces low copy numbers (∼5
copies per cell). Both plasmids have
the same kanamycin resistance () to minimize differences (). B shows
the dynamic output fluorescence response of the AND gate circuit under
four logic input inductions when hosted on the two plasmids with different
copy numbers. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf In total, we have 6 different conditional combinations
from the
above three genetic circuit compositions and two plasmid copy numbers.
Accordingly, we have generated 7 RNA-Seq samples in total (), among which Sample
1 and Sample 2 are biological replicates of the same condition, , the AND-gate in 3 (). This duplicate was used to validate
the high quality and repeatability of the RNA-Seq performed and at
the same time to control the total sequencing cost. The correlation
of gene expression () between
the two replicate samples (S1 and S2) is significantly high ( = 0.9788), indicating excellent reproducibility
of the RNA-Seq data. This is also reflected in the uniform mapped
sequencing read profiles of the plasmid hosted genes from the duplicate
samples ().  shows the different paired
comparisons between the 7 RNA-Seq samples. In total there are ten
paired comparisons among the seven samples: ,
C1 is for studying the RNA-Seq repeatability between biological replicates
(S1  S2); C2, C3, C4 are grouped for studying different
circuit loads in the medium copy plasmid (,
p15A ori) and C8, C9, C10 are grouped for studying different circuit
loads in the low copy number plasmid (, pSC101
ori); C5, C6, and C7 are grouped for studying the effect caused by
the change of copy number of the plasmid hosting the same circuit. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf summarizes
the RNA-Seq sequencing data set obtained and the mapping of the reads
to the  host genome and the cognate circuit
plasmids. It shows that around 70–90% total reads were successfully
mapped to the host genome and about 2–30% total reads were
mapped to the plasmid across all samples. To obtain the expression
level for each gene, we counted the number of reads mapped to each
gene according to their location in the chromosome or plasmid. The
reads were then normalized according to the gene length to obtain
the relative expression level for each gene (RPKM value). The distribution
of the expression levels of all host genes across all seven samples
follows an expected approximately normal distribution (). Experimental design for
studying the interactions between the heterologous
AND gate gene circuits and the  host
transcriptome. (A) Schematics showing the composition of the different
gene circuits and their potential interaction with the genetic background
of the host  K-12 MG1655 cell. The host
genome is shown on the left, whereas the different plasmids carrying
circuits are shown on the right and the bottom. In total three different
circuits are carried in two types of plasmid of different copy number, , one medium copy (, p15A ori)
and one low copy (, pSC101 ori). The composition
of each circuit is illustrated inside the cognate plasmid backbone.
(B) The dynamic output fluorescence responses of the AND gate circuit
under four input inductions. The red curves and data points are the
scenario when the circuit is on the medium copy plasmid (), whereas the black curves and data points are for circuits on the
low copy plasmid (). The four input inductions
used are 100 nM AHL plus 20 ng/mL aTc, 100 nM AHL only, 20 ng/mL aTc
only, and no inducers. Cells were grown in M9-glycerol media at 37
°C. Error bars, s.d. ( = 3). a.u., arbitrary
units. Summary of the RNA-Seq Samples in
This Study Summary of the RNA-Seq
Dataset with
Mapping to the  Host Genome and Circuit
Plasmid Circuit Metabolic Load
Increases with Its Copy Number in the
Host To probe the metabolic load of gene circuits imposed
on their hosts, we monitored cell growth by measuring cell density
periodically for all sample conditions. A shows the cell growth curves for each sample
culture. It can be seen that cells containing the empty plasmid alone
(Samples 4 and 7) have the fastest growth among all conditions, whereas
cells containing circuits on the low copy number plasmid () had faster growth rates than their counterparts
on the medium copy number plasmid (). This
indicates the imported gene circuits have affected the host cell growth
with a projected load increasing with their copy numbers in the host.
We view the observed metabolic load could be linked to the competitive
usage of shared cellular resources between the host endogenous machineries
and the inserted synthetic circuit as indicated previously. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf To obtain exact cell growth rate, we fit the cell
growth data to
the modified Gompertz model for cell growth.B lists the
fitted growth model parameter values for each sample condition with  displaying the model fitting performance.
It shows that the growth rate (μ) for each sample
ranks in the descending order as Sample 7 > Sample 4 > Sample
5 >
Sample 6 > Sample 2 > Sample 1 ⩾ Sample 3. Notably cells
with
gene circuits hosted on the low copy number plasmid have higher growth
rates than those with the same circuits hosted on the medium copy
number plasmid (C). We next calculated the metabolic load for each circuit
by measuring
the relative reduction in growth rate in comparison to a reference
condition. We used the fastest growing
sample (S7), , host carrying the low copy number
plasmid  alone, as the reference (zero load)
to obtain the metabolic load for all other sample constructs following
the equation detailed in the  section. D shows
that the metabolic load induced from the same gene circuit are significantly
lower when it was hosted on the low copy number plasmid, in particular
for the conditions with a complete AND gate circuit. The empty plasmid  showed a negligible load difference compared to the
reference empty , suggesting that plasmid replication
from low to medium number bears only a small fitness cost. The more
pronounced metabolic load associated with the AND gate and Inputs- circuits implies that the expression of circuit parts
represents a higher fitness penalty than plasmid replication. In addition,
the AND gate circuit imposed a lower load on the host compared to
the Inputs- circuit in both plasmids. This is
likely due to that the later circuit produced significantly higher
GFP proteins from its two  reporters which are
highly stable and hence readily accumulate compared to its counterpart
transcription factors in the AND gate circuit. Taken together, these
data demonstrate that the copy number of a gene circuit has a pivotal
role for its metabolic load imposed on the host, whereas its hosting
plasmid only has a minor impact. Typically the circuit metabolic load
is increasing with its copy number in the host cell. Host cell metabolic load imposed by gene
circuit of varying compositions.
(A) Cell growth curves of the seven samples used in this study. The
vertical dashed line indicates the snapshot time point when the cells
were sampled for RNA-Seq. Error bars, s.d. ( = 3).
(B) Fitted growth model parameter values of each sample. μ the growth rate of the cells at exponential growth phase;
λ, the lag time before cells entering exponential growth phase ; the maximum growth density achieved. (C) Sample growth
rates (μ derived from the fitted cell growth model
at log phase. The grow rate for AND-gate in  is the mean of that of Samples 1 and 2. (D) Metabolic load of the
circuit imposed on the host. The metabolic loads are calculated from
their cognate sample cell growth rates by setting the least affected
sample (, S7 carrying the low copy number plasmid  only), as the reference (zero load). Plasmid Copy
Number Outweighs Circuit Composition for Effect
on Host Gene Expression To explore genome-wide interaction
between gene circuit and the host, we applied hierarchical clustering
of host gene expression derived from the RNA-Seq data set for all
samples. The result () showed that the samples containing the same copy number
plasmids clustered together, despite the apparent lower metabolic
load associated with copy numbers , and indicating
the plasmid copy number outweighs the gene circuit composition. Overall
the host genes can be divided into 4 expression clusters. Clusters
1 and 2 comprise genes whose expression levels in the presence of
the low copy hosting plasmid are higher than those in the presence
of the medium copy number hosting plasmid, whereas Clusters 3 and
4 show the opposite. Notably host genes within Clusters 1 and 4 display
a more consistent expression pattern. We next identified differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) across
all compared comparisons of C1–C10 () using two statistical methods, , χ-test and edgeR, to cross-validate by minimizing potential
false positives.  summarizes identified DEGs including the overlapped DEGs cross-validated
by the aforementioned two methods. It shows that the three paired
comparisons of C5, C6 and C7 resulted in the highest numbers of identified
DEGs, highlighting the prominent effect corresponding to the variation
of plasmid copy number. The DEGs from C5–C7 tend to be located
in Clusters 1 and 4, which possess highly consistent gene expression
patterns ().
In contrast, paired comparisons of C2–C4 and C8–C10
for studying the effect of different circuit loads in the same type
of plasmids only produced moderate numbers of DEGs. Taken together,
these results indicate that the plasmid copy number outweighs circuit
composition among contributing factors that affect host gene expression,
although copy number only marginally affected the apparent metabolic
load and growth rates. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf To further investigate what host cellular processes may have been
affected by the heterologous gene circuits, we studied the change
of expression levels of genes required for protein biosynthesis and
regulation, including genes encoding for the transcription and translation
machineries, transcription regulation genes, housekeeping genes and
essential genes (). A shows that the
circuits have little effect on the host transcription process including
DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase, transcription termination factor and
various transcription-related genes across all samples. The circuits
affected the translation process mainly on tRNA related genes (C) but with little
effect on ribosome and ribosome related genes (B). There is minor effect on the host transcription
factor genes (D) though largely owing to the copy number increase of the circuit
plasmid (in C6 and C7). The circuits did not show any obvious interference
on the 39 host housekeep genes (E). F shows the C5–C7 paired comparisons contain the highest
numbers of DEGs across the 703 host essential genes, corroborating the aforementioned prominent effect caused
by copy number increase of the circuit plasmid. Overall, the results
demonstrate that the heterologous gene circuits only had minor effect
on cells biosynthesis machinery. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf Next, we performed functional enrichment analysis among the
identified
overlapped DEGs using the online tool DAVID. compares cellular processes
by the change of copy number of plasmid hosting otherwise same constructs,
broadly showing a wide range of similarly affected metabolic processes
and including those involved in the cell’s major biosynthesis
and energy production pathways (carbon metabolism, nitrogen metabolism,
respiration, transport). We conclude that the introduced plasmid copy
numbers affect the overall cellular expression profiles, but that
these changes  lead only to small growth differences
and indicating that cells can adapt well to costs associated with
replicating low and medium copy number plasmids. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf The significant
metabolic burden observed between the AND gate
and Inputs- circuit plasmids compared with empty
vectors suggested that the expressed circuit parts explain growth
penalties, either through their specific interference with host functionality
(crosstalk) or through costs associated with their expression (, , , , ; A).  shows
the functional annotations of DEGs in pairwise comparisons between
different circuit compositions with empty plasmids. The most predominant
differences in gene expression are associated with GO processes involved
in amino acid biosynthesis (general amino acid, tryptophan aromatic
amino acid and nitrogen compound biosynthesis) and specific KEGG pathways
required for alanine, aspartate and glutamate biosynthesis, as well
as numerous ABC transporters, including several amino acid transporters
for lysine/arginine/ornithine (), glutamine (), glutamate/aspartate (), arginine () and branched amino acids (). These findings strongly suggest that protein production
of the introduced synthetic components place an amino acid burden
on the host cell that could to a large degree account for the metabolic
burden observed. The higher copy number plasmids expressing circuit
parts clearly impose a high metabolic burden compared with the low
copy number versions, correlating with more DEGs involved in amino
acid synthesis, assuming that higher plasmid copy numbers result in
overall higher expression rates. This assumption is supported by the
higher transcription rates of the antibiotic resistance and origin
of replication control genes in  compared to  (). We
did not observe any striking or specific differences in expression
patterns between constructs harboring AND gate or Inputs- that could indicate any specific cross talk between host and synthetic
parts, lending support to the notion that the heterologous synthetic
circuits introduced no obvious genetic cross talk. Genome-wide host gene expression clustering
showing prominent effect
caused by changes in circuit plasmid copy number. The expression of
3084 host genes in the six sample conditions are hierarchically clustered
(the additional 1431 genes are excluded according to the clustering
criteria due to their atypical absolute gene expression values). The
result shows that the samples containing the plasmid of same copy
number clustered together (Samples 1–4 containing medium copy
number plasmid , Samples 5–7 containing
low copy number plasmid ). Overall the host
genes can be divided into four expression clusters. The DEGs from
the paired comparisons of C5, C6 and C7 tend to be located in the
Clusters 1 and 4, which are related to the impact caused by the change
in circuit plasmid copy number. S1/2 are the means of the gene expression
values of the two replicate Samples 1 and 2. The color bar indicates
the scale for gene expression (normalized across the seven samples
for each gene). Host gene expression profile comparison
across all RNA-Seq samples.
The blue curve represents the mean expression value of each gene in
the seven samples. The red curve represents the upper bound of 1.44
times the mean expression value, whereas the green curve represents
the lower bound of 1/1.44 times the mean value. Hence, if the gene
expression value is significantly outside the region between the red
and green curves, it is likely that the gene will be a candidate of
differentially expressed genes. The gene expression profiles of DNA
polymerases, RNA polymerases, transcriptional termination factors
and other transcription related genes (A), ribosomes and related genes
(B), tRNA and tRNA related genes (C), transcription factors (D), housekeeping
genes (E) and essential genes (F) are shown, respectively. The differentially
expressed genes resulted from each paired comparison are listed in
the upper right-hand corner of each figure panel. In all panels, genes
on the horizontal axis are ranked in ascending order by their mean
values of gene expression (RPKM). Ten Paired Comparisons
between RNA-Seq
Samples and Identified Number of DEGs This table shows
the number of DEGs
in each paired comparison highlighting the conditions (C5, C6, C7)
attributing to the effect of changes in circuit plasmid copy number.
S1/2 represents means of the gene expression values of the two replicate
Samples 1 and 2. Ten paired comparisons performed among the 7 samples:
C1 is for studying RNA-Seq repeatability between biological replicates
(S1  S2); C2, C3, C4 are grouped for studying different
circuit loads in the medium copy plasmid ();
and C8, C9, C10 are grouped for studying different circuit loads in
the low copy plasmid (); C5, C6, and C7 are
grouped for studying the effect caused by changes in plasmid copy
number of the same circuit. Copy Number
Variation Caused Contrary Changes in Circuit Components Notably
we found the AND gate circuit behaved differently in the
two plasmids of different copy numbers. B shows that the output fluorescence of AND
gate hosted in medium copy number plasmid  is
about half that when hosted in low copy number plasmid . This is counterintuitive since generally the expression level of
a gene is expected to proportional to its copy number in the host
cell. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf To investigate potential underlying cause, we examined
the mRNA levels of all genes in the two circuits (, AND-gate and Inputs-) from their transcription
profiles (gene transcription activity)
on the two types of hosting plasmids (). It reveals that the transcript levels
of the constitutively expressed  and  genes (A and B) are in proportion to their
plasmid copy number, which is also reflected by the expression levels
of the antibiotic resistance and origin of replication control genes
() in the two circuit plasmids.
However, we note the regulated  and  genes under the two inducible promoters expressed quite differently
on the two plasmids. Whereas both  and  were transcribed at similar levels when hosted in the
low copy number plasmid , the  transcription level is consistently much higher than that of  when hosted in the medium copy number plasmid  (A). This is also consistent with the significantly differential
expression levels of the two  reporter genes downstream
the two inducible promoters of P and P in the Inputs- circuit when hosted on the medium
copy number plasmid (B). Strikingly,  transcription was increased
significantly while  transcription was decreased
drastically when the circuit moved from the low copy number plasmid
to the medium copy number one. Because HrpR and HrpS need to form
a hetero hexamer to activate its target  output
promoter, the total activator complex available in the host would
be determined by the lower level of the two component molecules, , displaying the short-board-effect and explaining the
aforementioned counterintuitive output attenuation of the AND gate
circuit present in higher copy number. Cleary the data shows that an
increase in copy number has caused
contrary changes observed in the behavior of components in the AND
gate circuit leading to the unbalance and distortion of the two gate
inputs and thus the output attenuation. We view that such contrast
in behavior change is due to the difference in mode-of-action of the
two inducible promoters of which the P is activator
receptor (LuxR) regulated and P is repressor receptor
(TetR) regulated, and discuss this further in the  section. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf Transcription profiles
of the genes in the circuits hosted on the
two plasmids of different copy numbers. (A) The transcript read counts
of the genes in the AND gate circuit that are carried on the two plasmids
of different copy number (, medium copy  and low copy , S1/2 (mean)  S5). (B) The transcript read counts of the genes in the
Inputs- circuit that are carried on the two plasmids
of different copy number (, medium copy  and low copy , S3  S6). (C) The transcriptional profiles of the AND gate
circuit in S1, S2 () and S5 (). (D) The transcriptional profiles of the Inputs- circuit in S3 () and S6 (). Note that the read counts of the two  transcripts
can be distinguished by their different 5′ UTRs (RBSs) downstream
their inducible promoters (,  and ). See also . In
this study we applied RNA whole transcriptome sequencing to
probe the interactions between imported heterologous gene circuits
and the host  using various circuit compositions
and different copy number plasmids. The method provides genome-wide
gene expression profiling that enables a quantitative measure of the
orthogonality and effect of the imported circuits on their host. Though
the circuits have utilized many host resources including DNA polymerases,
RNA polymerases, transcription factors, ribosomes and other translation
related factors, it is striking that the circuits present in low copy
number did not significantly affect the gene expression of these resource
related factors and neither the transcription regulation in the host.
This provides evidence that the heterologous AND circuit studied is
highly “orthogonal” to their host genetic background,
and the orthogonality design between an imported circuit and the host
could be vital to help reduce any potential genome-wide interactions. However, we found that the circuit plasmid copy number significantly
impacts on the metabolic load, orthogonality
and functionality of the introduced heterologous
gene circuits in the host chassis. The gene circuits imposed notable
metabolic load on the host, whereas empty plasmids did not, resulting
in cell growth reduction that is generally in proportion to their
copy numbers in the host, suggesting that expression of the synthetic
genes are responsible. The analysis of the number of differentially
expressed genes in the host transcriptome and their clustering collectively
shows that an increase in the circuit plasmid copy number has led
to more prominent increase in the interference between the circuits
and the host genetic background in contrast to the change with circuit
compositions alone. Our results reveal that the plasmid copy number
that is concomitant with higher gene expression, outweighs circuit
composition for their effect on differential host gene expression.
Our data revealing a large number of genes involved in nitrogen metabolism,
amino acid biosynthesis and transport affected in the host when expressing
synthetic circuit parts from high copy number plasmids suggests resource
competition between host and synthetic circuit at the level of translation.
Thereby as a rule of thumb, we propose that it will be beneficial
to design and implement functional gene circuits in low copy number,
and predict low expressional levels to be similarly advantageous,
in the host if possible. In return this will help increase the orthogonality
and robustness of the underlying circuits with reduced or minimized
host physiological interference, in particular for large scale circuits
comprising many parts. That said, it
is recognized that low copy number of molecules may increase the noise
within a biological system. Hence, attention should
be paid to designing the exact copy number and the expression levels
of relevant genes within a circuit with an aim to achieve a desired
balanced system behavior. In some cases, it could be worthwhile and
necessary to use multiple compatible plasmids with different copy
numbers to address the resource allocation, robustness and modularity
requirements pertaining to the design of a particular circuit. In addition, the amounts of available host cellular resources (, proteases, ribosomes, amino acids, sigma factors)
may vary depending on the strains used which could have significant
impact on circuit behavior. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf We show that the change in circuit plasmid copy number could
cause
contrary changes to be observed in the behavior of different components
within the circuits, which can lead to the imbalance of the predesigned/tested
stoichiometry among the underlying circuit blocks. This has been evidenced
by the disproportionate transcription of the two input promoters and
the subsequent drastic output attenuation of the AND gate circuit
when the circuit migrating from a low copy number plasmid to a medium
copy number one. Our previous characterization of receptor-mediated
small molecule inducible promoters have revealed that a low concentration
of the repressor receptor (, TetR) in the cell
can significantly increase the sensitivity and dynamic range, whereas
a high activator receptor (, LuxR) concentration
will achieve the same outcome. A copy
number increase would be equivalent to the effect of an increased
concentration of both the constitutively expressed receptors (TetR
and LuxR) in the cytoplasm, leading to contrary changes of the output
behavior of the repressor and activator receptor-mediated promoters.
This is also echoed by the evidence that output fluorescence from
the GFP reporters under the two inducible promoters in the Inputs- circuit exhibited contrary change when migrating from
the low copy plasmid to the medium copy one (). Thus, we view such contrast in copy number-induced behavior
change are owing to the difference in mode-of-action of the two inducible
promoters of which the P is activator receptor (LuxR)
mediated, whereas the P is repressor receptor (TetR)
mediated. The study exemplifies that RNA-Seq represents a new
powerful method
for characterizing and debugging circuits that goes beyond the limitation
of traditionally used fluorescent reporters. RNA-Seq uses next-generation
sequencing to reveal the presence and quantity of all RNAs in a biological
sample at a given moment, including for genes of both the circuit
and host. Thereby it produces a global snapshot of the internal workings
of the intact gene circuits in real action, which provides unprecedented
detailed information to assist identifying any imbalanced or failed
circuit nodes or components such as the two disproportionate AND-gate
inputs disclosed in this work. That being said, the method presently
has its own limitation that it would only provide the mRNA levels
but not the protein levels at a given moment. We think that this may
be complemented by new emerging technology such as the genome-wide
ribosome profiling (Ribo-Seq) or selected
reaction monitoring-based mass spectrometry proteomics that could help quantify the relative levels
of translated proteins corresponding to all transcripts in a host.
Combining these methods can serve as powerful tools for more accurately
diagnosing gene circuits and probing their interactions with the host
genomic background. Moreover, the high cost of RNA-Seq could be reduced
with newly adapted versions in the field such as the RNAtag-Seq, which uses DNA barcodes to uniquely “tag” RNAs from
each sample, allowing multiple samples to be pooled early before RNA
library preparation in a single reaction and being sequenced together.
Such multiplexed approach simplifies library preparation and significantly
reduces library preparation costs, resulting in lower time and cost
per sample. https://www.addgene.org/Baojun_Wang/ https://www.addgene.org/Baojun_Wang/ http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf Plasmid
construction and
DNA manipulations were performed following standard molecular biology
techniques. The ,  genes,  promoter, the aTc (anhydrotetracycline, rbs30--B0015-P) and AHL (3OCHSL,
rbs30--B0015-P) inducible promoters
were synthesized by GENEART following the BioBrick standard (), by eliminating the four restriction sites (RI, XbaI, SpeI and I) for the BioBrick
standard  synonymous codon exchange and flanking
with prefix and suffix sequences containing the appropriate restriction
sites and RBS (ribosome binding site) sequences. The double terminator
BBa_B0015 () was used to terminate gene transcription in all cases.  (p15A ori, ) and  (pSC101, ) was used
to clone and characterize all the genetic constructs in this study.
The GFP (, BBa_E0840) reporter was from the
Registry of Standard Biological Parts (). The
various RBS sequences () for each
gene construct were introduced by PCR amplification (using PfuTurbo
DNA polymerase from Stratagene and an Eppendorf Mastercycler gradient
thermal cycler) with primers containing the corresponding RBS sequences
and appropriate restriction sites. The constitutive promoters used
were assembled from two annealed single stranded primers flanked with
appropriate restriction sites. All circuit constructs were assembled
following the BioBrick DNA assembly method and verified by DNA sequencing
(Beckman Coulter Genomics) prior to their use. Primers were synthesized
by Sigma-Aldrich. Further information can be found in  (plasmid maps) and  (part genetic sequences) describing the circuit
constructs used. All plasmids used are available upon request and
selected plasmids may be obtained from the Addgene repository (). Strains, Media and Growth Conditions Plasmid cloning
work was performed in  TOP10 strain,
whereas all circuit construct characterization were all performed
in  K-12 NCM3722 strain. Cells were cultured
in M9 minimal media (11.28 g/L M9 salts, 1 mM thiamine hydrochloride,
0.2% (w/v) casamino acids, 2 mM MgSO, 0.1 mM CaCl, 0.4% (v/v) glycerol). The kanamycin used was 25 μg/mL.
Cells inoculated from single colonies on freshly streaked LB plates
were grown overnight in 5 mL M9 in sterile 30 mL universal tubes at
37 °C with shaking (200 rpm). Overnight cultures were diluted
into prewarmed M9 media at OD = 0.02 for the day cultures
(100 mL in 500 mL flasks), which were all induced by 100 nM AHL plus
20 ng/mL aTc and grown for 4 h at 37 °C prior to be harvested
for RNA-Seq sample preparation. For fluorescence assay by fluorometry,
diluted cultures were also loaded into a 96-well microplate (Bio-Greiner,
chimney black, flat clear bottom) and induced with 5 μL (for
single input induction) or 10 μL (for double input induction)
inducers of varying concentrations to a final volume of 200 μL
per well by a multichannel pipet. The microplate was covered by a
UV transparent lid to counteract evaporation and incubated in the
fluorometer (BMG FLUOstar) with continuous shaking (200 rpm, linear
mode, 37 °C) between each cycle of repetitive measurements. Chemical
reagents and inducers used were analytical grade from Sigma-Aldrich.
For cell growth curve assay, diluted cultures were cultured separately
in 200 mL flasks at a volume of 50 mL and cell absorbance (OD) were measured by a spectrophotometer (Jenway Genova Plus)
around every 30 min by sampling half ml culture into 1 mL cuvettes
that have been preloaded half mL M9 media. Fluorescence levels of gene
expression were assayed by fluorometry at the cell population level.
Cells grown in 96-well plates were monitored and assayed using a BMG
FLUOstar fluorometer for repeated absorbance (OD) and
fluorescence (485 nm for excitation, 520 ± 10 nm for emission,
Gain = 1000) readings (20 min/cycle). The fluorometry data of gene
expression were first processed in BMG Omega Data Analysis Software
(v1.10) and were analyzed in Matlab after being exported. The medium
backgrounds of absorbance and fluorescence were determined from blank
wells loaded with M9 media and were subtracted from the readings of
other wells. The fluorescence/OD600 (Fluo./OD) at a
specific time for a sample culture was determined after subtracting
its triplicate-averaged counterpart of the negative control cultures
(GFP-free) at the same time. RNA-Seq Sample Preparation and Sequencing http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf http://dx.doi.org/10.7488/ds/2119 http://dx.doi.org/10.7488/ds/2119 NCM3722 cultures were grown and growth
stopped 4 h post day dilution
by adding 1/10 volume of 5% phenol 95% ethanol (v/v). Cells were harvested
by centrifugation (4500 for 30 min). Supernatants
were discarded and pellets drained by gravity flow for 5 min. Pellets
wet weights were measured by subtracting the weights of cognate empty
tubes. There are 7 samples in total containing 6 different plasmid
constructs in the  host. Samples 1 and
2 are biological replicates of the same construct (AND gate in ), Sample 3 (Inputs- in ), Sample 4 (empty ), Sample
5 (AND gate in ), Sample 6 (Inputs- in ), Sample 7 (empty ). The pellet cell samples were frozen at −80
°C before sent out on dry ice to vertis Biotechnologie AG for
RNA-Seq In brief, the cell pellets were incubated with lysozyme for
15 min at room temperature. The total RNA was then isolated using
the mirVana RNA isolation kit (Invitrogen) including DNase treatment.
Primary transcript enrichment was achieved by rRNA depletion and treatment
with Terminator exonuclease (Epicenter) to remove other processed
RNAs. RNA was fragmented using RNaseIII and cDNA libraries were built
including PCR amplification with barcoded sequencing adaptors. Samples
were pooled in approximately equimolar amounts to form one cDNA pool.
The cDNA pool was sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 machine. The
short sequence alignment software “Bowtie” was used to map RNA-Seq reads (about 20 million
each sample) on the  MG1655 annotated
genome (NCBI accession number NC_000913) and the cognate plasmid circuit
sequences of each sample. The number of mapped reads for each gene
was determined according to their annotated location features (NCBI
gff format). The expression levels of genes were subsequently determined
using the normalized measure of RPKM (Reads Per Kilobase of transcript
per Million mapped reads). Read mapping
were visualized using the Integrative Genomics Viewer tool (IGV). To increase accuracy, under the assumption of
normal distribution, we treated genes with the expression values that
are out of the typical range of μ ± 3σ as exceptions
and thus did not take them into account for subsequent statistical
comparison analysis. Here, we filtered out those genes () due to their expression levels are
either too high or too low following this criteria. The obtained RNA-Seq
data set can be openly accessed and downloaded from the Edinburgh
DataShare Repository with the DOI: . Cell Growth Rate Modeling and Metabolic Load Calculation http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00328/suppl_file/sb7b00328_si_001.pdf The cell growth curve for each sample, as described by the measured
cell density (OD), were fitted using the Gompertz model, an S-shaped function as shown below.where
μ stands for bacterial
growth rate at exponential growth phase;  is the
maximum cell density that the culture would be achieved; λ is
the lag time before cells entering exponential growth phase. The nonlinear
least-squares fitting function (cftool) in Matlab (MathWorks R2014a)
was applied to fit the experimental data of cell growth to parametrize
the growth model (B and ). Metabolic
load is calculated following the method defined previously,, the relative growth rate
reduction against a reference sample. Here we used the fastest growing
Sample 7, , host carrying the empty low copy
number plasmid pSB4K5, as the reference to calculate the metabolic
load for all other sample constructs following the equationwhere μ and μ are the cell growth rates of a sample and
the selected reference
sample, respectively. Gene Expression Clustering and Differential
Expression Analysis The hierarchical clustering function
(clustergram) in Matlab was
used to cluster gene expression levels in all sequenced transcriptomes
with the exception that the mean gene expression levels of the two
biological repeats (Samples 1 and 2) were treated as one condition.
Hierarchical clustering was performed twice, on both directions, row
(gene) wise and column (sample/condition) wise to obtain the heat
map with dendrograms as shown in . To minimize potential false positives,
two parallel methods were used to find differentially expressed genes
between compared conditions. The first method used is the combined
2-fold expression change detection and χ-test. Differentially
expressed genes were determined when both the expression levels between
compared conditions having more than 2-fold difference and the false
discovery rate-adjusted -value <0.005 from the
χ-test. For the second method, the software edgeR was used. Since duplicate is available for one
circuit condition, as suggested by edgeR, we used the duplicate samples
(S1 and S2) to calculate the dispersion value in the experiment (0.025)
which was subsequently adopted for all other paired comparison analysis
in this study. The -values and FDRs associated with
the DEGs were provided in the  of gene expression analysis. The online tool DAVID was used for the functional enrichment analysis among identified
differentially expressed genes. Gene functions were retrieved from
the Gene Ontology biological processes and KEGG pathway databases..