The self-organization
of spatial
patterns and structures is a fundamental problem in many fields, especially
in developmental biology. There are various forms of patterning required
for the development of an organism from a zygote, but a common type
of patterning requires regular periodicity, such as in making multiple
stripes or spots. The most influential model to explain periodic patterns
is the reaction–diffusion model proposed by Alan Turing in
the 1950s. Although first suggested by Rashevsky, it was Turing who actually demonstrated the periodic or
complex reaction–diffusion patterns that came to be known as
Turing patterns. Turing showed that a
coupling between diffusion and reaction can lead to instabilities
from initially homogeneous paired reagent systems, resulting in the
spontaneous emergence of regular patterns. Including seminal contributions
from Gierer and Meinhardt in the 1970s, a large body of literature subsequently developed the modeling of
self-organizing biological patterns, based on reaction–diffusion
theory (see refs (−)). Although other mechanisms of pattern
formation exist, in this article we will focus
on the Turing mechanism, which is
unique in terms of self-correction and economy of design, making it
a tantalizing engineering target in the emerging field of synthetic
biology. The Turing mechanism can be
thought of as a competition between self-activation by a slow-diffusing
chemical (or biological) activator and inhibition by a faster-diffusing
factor. This has been largely applied
to explain self-regulated repetitive pattern formation in developing
animal embryos. Over the last few decades, research in nonequilibrium chemical
systems has led to experimental confirmations of the spatial patterns
formed by Turing instabilities. However, the experimental verification of Turing-driven developmental
phenomena has been elusive in biological systems, while other patterning strategies have been more frequently found
in development. For example, the formation
of the characteristic periodic striped pattern of pair-rule gene expression
in (,) follows
a strategy based on a hierarchical regulatory gene network, embedded
in a morphogen gradient, rather than a Turing pattern. Even
though many biological patterns resemble Turing patterns in
appearance, this alone does not constitute a compelling proof of such
mechanisms actually operating in living systems. Alternatively, due to recent advances in biotechnology,
the synthetic generation of Turing patterns in cell culture should
be possible in the near future. This will increase
our fundamental understanding of these systems as well as provide
tools for biotechnology applications. To implement such engineered
biological systems, we need to know  the
requisite properties of the gene and protein building blocks. These
properties mediate the processes that support Turing patterning formation,
such as production (through specific regulatory functions), diffusion,
and degradation. We have been developing a scaffold for biological
network engineering with diffusing activators and inhibitors and decided to implement a computational model
to help guide the design of our artificial networks. The key aim,
therefore, was to develop a biologically interpretable model that
would show us the most flexible parameter relationships for making
patterns. Although Turing instabilities are almost ubiquitous
in studies
modeling highly repetitive patterns in developmental biology, the
regulatory functions used in the modeling are often selected by criteria
that simplify the equation analysis rather than being chosen on the
basis of their correlation with the actual biological response. These simplifications
give us phenomenological descriptions and can lead to model-induced
constraints over mathematical parameters, with these constraints being
mandatory for patterning to occur. These affected parameters encompass
several biophysical processes such as diffusion, regulation, and degradation,
all of which underly Turing pattern formation. Unfortunately, such
mathematical parameters are not independent of each other and, subsequently,
the imposed constraints conform poorly to the actual properties of
the available biological building blocks. Despite the extensive literature
on Turing patterns in biology, very few studies have considered sigmoidal
regulatory functions. In a recent study on hair follicle development,
Sick et al. showed that a sigmoidal function for noncompetitive inhibition
is also able to display Turing patterns. Despite being phenomenological, sigmoidal functions are much closer
to the real behaviors of gene expression systems and are thus more
relevant. In the present article, we study the parameter space
where Turing
instabilities can occur, in reaction–diffusion systems whose
reaction terms involve regulatory functions with greater biological
interpretability. To achieve this, we have performed a linear stability
analysis to find the constraints on parameters that allow pattern
formation. We believe that these findings can be used to guide the
engineering of biological systems able to form Turing patterns using
synthetic biological scaffolds. Importantly,
we find that the cooperativity associated with the regulatory function
is a key factor. Together with the differential diffusion of activator/inhibitor,
cooperativity determines the size of the parameter region associated
with successful patterning. This, in turn, can be be used to predict
which properties yield robustness and engineering flexibility. In general,
a biological
system able to present Turing instabilities can be modeled by coupled
reaction–diffusion equations of the formwhere  and  denote the spatial concentration
of the activator and the inhibitor
morphogens, respectively. The functions  and  correspond to the regulatory functions of the genes that
encode the morphogens  and . Such
functions describe how the expression (or production) rate depends
on the concentration of activator  and inhibitor  (see the sketch of the model in Figure A). The last term on the right-hand side of each equation
describes the degradation process that is assumed to be linear. In
our biological implementation, the activator corresponds to hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF), and the inhibitor is a truncated variant of HGF,
named NK4. Both the activator and inhibitor
are expressed and secreted into the extracellular medium from Madin–Darby
canine kidney (MDCK) cells, grown as cysts in 3D collagen cell culture. We will consider here
the case that both morphogens are under the
control of the same promoter, which corresponds to the matrix metalloproteinase
promoter-1 (MMP-1) in our synthetic system. Mathematically, this means that both regulatory functions  and  will be the same, so, hereafter,
the regulatory function will be denoted by . Additionally,
we consider that the regulatory functions have sigmoidal forms. In
particular, we consider that the regulatory function of the activator
obeys a Hill function in the absence of inhibitor. For the inhibitor,
there are two alternatives: First, the inhibitor competes with the
activator for the same regulatory site, decreasing the effective affinity
(see Figure B). Thus, the regulatory function
is well-described bywhere  is the
Hill exponent that describes the steepness of the response to the
activator, while  is related to the
inhibitor. As we are regarding the case that both morphogens are under
the control of the same promoter (to simplify downstream biological
engineering), we consequently consider that the steepnesses of the
responses to the activator and to the inhibitor are the same, i.e.,  = . Biologically,
this corresponds to HGF or NK4 binding competitively to the extracellular
cMet receptor and activating or repressing an intracellular signaling
cascade that controls expression of the MMP-1 promoter. The second
alternative is that the inhibitor blocks the activation pathway, decreasing
the effective production rates (see ). This type of noncompetitive inhibitor case was used recently for
modeling hair follicle development, and Turing patterns were reported
for  = 2,  = 0.005, and  = 0.2. Modeling
overview. (A) Schematic diagram of the biological system
at the cellular and molecular levels: activators (green particles;
HGF) and inhibitors (red particles; NK4) are products of genes controlled
by the same promoter (MMP-1). These molecules are released into the
extracellular medium. Activator and inhibitor molecules compete for
binding to membrane receptors (yellow; cMet). Activators bound to
membrane receptors regulate the production of morphogens through the
regulatory function . (B) The regulatory function
used in this article. The plots show  vs activator
concentration  for three different concentrations
of inhibitor : 0.01 (blue), 0.25 (red), and 1.0
(brown).  = 2,  =  = 0.1. Before determining under
which conditions the homogeneous steady state becomes unstable, leading
to inhomogeneous Turing patterns, it is convenient to define the following
new variables. Thus, the new variables of time , position , and the concentrations  and  can be written in
terms of the variables and parameters contained in eqs – aswhere  and  are related
to the effective dissociation constant for the activator and inhibitor,
respectively. Rewriting eqs  and  with these new variables, we getwhere we have introduced the abbreviations  = /, μ = μ/μ,  = ρ/μ, and  = ρ/(μ).  denotes the dimensionless form of the regulatory function eq  and can be written as . Hereafter, we will write
new variables , , and the function  without the hat in order
to simplify the notation. These reaction–diffusion equations,
with any of the specified
regulatory functions, have more parameters and more complex dependences
on morphogens than previous ones. Because it is very difficult to understand the dynamics of such
systems directly, a possible approach is to use a linear stability
analysis. For example, it is possible to derive a closed expression
for the wavenumber dependency with diffusion constants and the derivative
of the linear reaction terms. Of course,
we can approximate any real reaction terms to a linear one, but such
a compromise leaves a gap to bridge, which is essential for engineering
a real biological device. It is necessary to find the link between
the derivative and the actual biological parameters that fully characterize
the reaction term. These include morphogen degradation rates, production
rates, cooperativity, and dissociation constants; reconciling them
is not straightforward. Despite its complexity, our system is amenable
to the typical linear stability analysis, in an analytical fashion,
for some particular values of Hill coefficient . In order to determine the conditions
for the development of Turing patterns, we will consider the dimensionless
version of the two-morphogen system that evolves in a one-dimensional
domain of length . Given the reduced version of
the reaction–diffusion equations, the stationary homogeneous
solutions, denoted by (,), correspond to
the solution of the system in the absence of diffusionThe (, ) can achieve
Turing instabilities depending on the parameter values. Our main goal
is to obtain the region in the parameter space where the instability
occurs for the regulatory functions  (see eq ). As is usual, we perturb the solution slightly
according to  =  + δ and  =  + , where  = δ e and, similarly,  = δ e. The wavenumber  is the number
of complete waves per 2π units of distance, while the real part
of ω can be interpreted as the growth rate. Because morphogens
cannot diffuse beyond the boundaries  = 0 and  = , we need to impose a zero-flux boundary
condition, which implies that  takes discrete values  = π/, with  = 0, 1, 2, .... Next, we introduce  + δ and  + δ into eqs  and  and linearize the system around the point (,), which giveswhere  and  are derivatives
of the regulatory function  with respect to  and , respectively, evaluated in the
point (, ). The perturbation amplitudes
δ and δ can be different from zero if and only if the discriminant
of  is zero. Then,
the condition for a nontrivial
solution is given by ω + αω + β = 0. Thus, we obtain a function, known as dispersion
relation, which associates a growth rate ω to each  given
bywhere α and β are given by Because ω() is negative in the region of interest of the parameter
space,
we will analyze the dependency of the largest root ω() with the wavenumber . The stationary homogeneous
state becomes unstable when the real part of ω is positive
for some wavenumber . In the linear approximation, the value of the wavenumber associated
with the largest positive amplification rate dominates the evolution
of the instabilities; we will denote this wavenumber as .  is an important
feature of the resulting patterns because of its relation to their
size. The typical size of an emergent pattern is given by π/ such that higher  implies low wave sizes and thus smaller patterns. If the size of domain is much larger than the typical pattern size
(i.e.,  ≫ π/), then we can go one step further by considering the discrete
variable  as a continuous
variable . In this way, we can obtain an expression
for  by maximizing ωThus, in the framework of the linear stability
analysis, it is possible to determine a closed expression for  as a function of the parameters setwhere  and  can be
written in a closed expression in terms of the parameters μ, , and  for some values of . However, eq  alone does not allow
us to determine if the Turing pattern associated with  will be stable. As we will see later, transient Turing
patterns can also occur for some parameter values. The growth of Turing
patterns also depends on the size domain , which,
in any case, must be greater than the typical pattern size (i.e.,  > π/). This condition
imposes a critical length for the domain size ,
which implies a constraint by the organism size for Turing patterns
to develop. In the next section,
we will analyze some properties of the Turing
instabilities. Parameter Region for Turing Patterns For further steps
in the stability analysis, we need to specify the regulatory function
and the Hill coefficient. The system in the absence of diffusion (eqs  and ) has two fixed points
for  > 1; one of these fixed points
corresponds to a stable solution, and the other one, to an unstable
solution. For  ≤ 1, the unstable
solution disappears, and one cannot expect the occurrence of Turing
instabilities. We are able to find closed expressions for the fixed
points for  = /, /, 2, and 3. These closed expressions are
large and complicated algebraic expressions in most of cases, with
the exception of  = 2. Thus, we will
illustrate the complete analysis for this case, but the same steps
can be done for the above-mentioned Hill coefficient values. To look for an unstable state, we analyze the stability of all fixed
points by examining the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix. For the
case  = 2, we find that the solution
given byhas one positive and one negative eigenvalue,
corresponding to an unstable state known as a saddle point. From expressions  and , we can determine
the derivatives  and , which in turn feed the expression
of  (). The unstable state determined by eqs  and  allows Turing instabilities in a region of the
parameter space spanned by , μ, , and , which are terms related to combinations of diffusion
rates, degradation rates, and binding affinities. Because we are dealing
with four-dimensional space, we can illustrate only some projections
of this region on 3D space. In particular, we are interested in the
projections on the space spanned by parameters μ, , and  for some values of . In Figure , we depict the projection of the region of the
parameter space where  > 0, i.e.,
the region where Turing patterns can be developed, for two different
values of the ratio of diffusion of activator/inhibitor,  (0.01 and 0.1). Biologically, this corresponds to situations where
the inhibitor diffuses 100- and 10-fold faster than that of the activator,
respectively. As expected, the volume of this region decreases with , meaning that it is easier to find Turing patterns when
the inhibitor diffuses much faster than the activator (100-fold faster
is better than 10-fold faster; see also Table ). In Figure , we show
two cross-sections
of the volume displayed in Figure  ( = 0.01) with two different planes, where the heatmap is
related to  scale. In panel A, the
intersecting plane is  = 5, and panel B corresponds to  = 5. From this plot, we can conclude that the convex side
of the volume is related to higher values of  and consequently to patterns with smaller typical length.
Because μ is the ratio of the degradation rates of inhibitor
relative to activator, increasing inhibitor degradation or decreasing
activator degradation will increase the pattern size. Alternatively,
increasing the production of activator (or decreasing the production
of inhibitor) can also increase the pattern size. Figure  depicts the numerical solution of the eqs  and  for the parameter values
indicated by the white dots in Figure B, i.e.,  = 0.01,  = 5,  = 5, and three
different values of μ: 0.45, 1, and 1.5. We can see that the
size of the pattern increases with μ, as predicted. For μ = 1.5, the simulation shows that the system,
initially
in a slightly perturbed unstable homogeneous solution, reaches a stable
homogeneous solution after a transitory Turing-like pattern generation.
It seems that for small μ there does exist a stable periodic
pattern to which the system is attracted once the Turing bifurcation
occurs, whereas for larger μ, such a stable pattern does not
exist. Interestingly, transient Turing patterns have been observed
in chemical systems where the transiency is due to the depletion of
chemical species in a closed system. In Figure , we can see the growth rate
ω as a function of the  for different
values of μ. The position of local maximum  changes with μ (the ratio of the degradation
rates of inhibitor relative to the activator). From Figure , the maximum growth rate of patterns, denoted by
ω = ω(), seems to increase with μ for this particular set
of values. In general, the maximum growth rate of patterns depends
on the parameter set , μ, , and . Figure A,B depicts how
ω depends on these parameters for cross-sections
of the same volume represented in Figure  for  = 0.01. These plots show that smaller patterns grow more
slowly. This prediction is in agreement with the simulation shown
in Figure C, which depicts the temporal evolution
of the concentration of  at the position  = 25. Parameter region for Turing patterns. Region of the parameter space
where Turing instabilities develop (i.e., where  is positive) for  =
2 and  = 0.01 (A) or  = 0.1 (B).
The region of pattern-forming parameter space increases when  decreases (i.e., a 100-fold difference in inhibitor diffusion,
relative to slower activator diffusion, is more likely to yield Turing
patterns than is a 10-fold difference). Turing space also increases
with the steepness of the Hill function  (see Figures  and ). Size of Turing
patterns. Intersection of the volume of Figure A with plane  = 5.0
(A) and  = 5.0 (B);
the color scale depicts  values. For
a higher wavenumber , one expects
smaller patterns, due to the typical length  being
given by  = π/. Turing patterns for parameter values corresponding
to the white dots in panel B are shown in Figure . Turing patterns and morphogen degradation. Striped
patterns obtained
by numerical integration of eqs  and , using the same parameters as Figure B (white dots), for three different values of μ: 0.45
(A), 1.0 (B) and 1.5 (C). In all cases, the initial condition is a
small Gaussian perturbation of the unstable steady state at  = 25. In agreement with Figure B, the size of the pattern in the simulation increases with μ.
Because μ is the ratio of the degradation rates of inhibitor
relative to activator, increasing inhibitor degradation or decreasing
activator degradation will increase the pattern size. For μ
= 1.5 (C), the typical Turing pattern decays to the stable solution
after its initial formation, at  = 75, as a consequence
of a field size effect. Speed of pattern appearance versus pattern size. Behavior
of ω as a function of  for  = 2,  = 0.01,  = 2.5,  = 7.0,
and three different values of μ: 3.75 (green), 4.5 (red), and
6.5 (blue). ω presents only one maximum in , whose particular value depends on the parameter
set (, μ, , and ). For
this particular set of parameter values, we can see that speed of
pattern appearance, ω, increases with the typical
size of the pattern. Growth rates of patterning. (Top) Similar to that in Figure , we see the intersection of the volume of Figure A, with plane  = 0.5 (A) and with the plane  = 5 (B), but now the color scale depicts ω values instead of . ω quantifies the speed of pattern appearance; for higher
values, one expects faster-forming patterns. (C) Pattern formation
dynamics for the concentration of  at  = 25. Parameter values correspond to the white dots in panel B (D
= 0.01,  = 2,  = 5,  = 5, and with three different values of μ: 0.45 (green
line), 1.0 (red line), and 1.5 (blue line)). Summary of Parameter
Relationships
To Engineer Turing Patterns preferred
parameter value and range ideas to
engineer-implementation HGF fusion with collagen
binding domains or multimerization domains of any protein. differential degradation (μ = μ/μ) Having both HGF and cMET-receptor
in positive feedback, HGF sequestration on collagen. dimensionless
activator
prod. rate ( = ρ/μ) Greater production
of activator
(e.g., alternative promoter) for larger, more rapidly forming patterns dimensionless inhibitor
prod. rate ( = ρ/μ) NK4 variants with lower
activity for larger more rapidly forming patterns. Greater production
of inhibitor (e.g., alternative promoter) for smaller, slower forming
patterns Turing Patterns and Cooperativity To further analyze
the effects of the  diffusion term and μ,
we must also consider the role of cooperativity in the patterning
processes. Biological regulatory functions are usually sigmoidal responses
that arise by cooperative binding of transcription factors (TFs) or by molecular titration. The steepness of the sigmoidal stimulus–response
curve is modeled and controlled by the Hill coefficient . Unlike with the other parameters, it is not possible
to obtain closed expressions for the fixed points in terms of the
exponent . However, we obtained closed
expressions for some particular values of , which allows us to unveil the effects of this important type of
nonlinearity. In Figure , we depict projections of the region where the
system develops Turing instabilities for different values of the Hill
coefficient . Again, we are interested
in the projections on the space spanned by parameters μ, , and  for  = 0.01. We can see
that the projected volume increases when the cooperativity increases.
In particular, for the  = 3 case (panel
A), lower values of μ ensure a large domain in the (, ) plane, where Turing instabilities can develop.
By contrast, for the smaller  value
tested ( = /, panel B), we find that this region is very small, almost reduced
to μ < 5 and a narrow range of the parameter . Looking at Figures  and , we can see that the region of the parameter space
where
Turing instabilities are expected decreases or increases in size as
a function of  and . However, there is not much change in the overall position of the
region itself. This feature allows us to explore the behavior of the
system for higher  and similar diffusivity
for both morphogens, i.e., where  is closer to 1.
Figure  depicts
Turing patterns obtained for the case where the inhibitor diffuses
only slightly faster than activator  = 0.5 and 0.75,
using higher Hill coefficients. Figure A uses  = 0.5 and  = 5, whereas
in Figure B, we used  =
0.75 and  = 6 (see  for the code for simulations). Overall, steeper regulatory
functions lead to larger parameter
sets compatible with Turing patterns, which should facilitate design
decisions for synthetic gene network engineering. Importantly, even
situations with small differential diffusion between activator/inhibitor
can support Turing patterns in combination with high Hill coefficients
(Table ). Until now, all of our simulations
were done for dimensionless equations
(eqs  and ). To translate
the results to the spatial and temporal scales of a real biological
system, we can transform back to variables with units by multiplying
the dimensionless lengths by the factor (/μ) and dividing the dimensionless times by μ. Thus, the  typical size of a pattern
is given byAssuming that the diffusion
constants of inhibitor
is similar to our previous experimental estimation for HGF ( = 10 mm/min)
and the activator HGF half-life in the extracellular medium is around
21 h, we can predict that the typical
repeat size of the pattern is around 4–6 mm. Hence, the time
needed to reach fully developed Turing patterns on the domain we have
explored (≈50 dimensionless units in Figure ) is estimated to be around 100 h. These scales are compatible
with the system we have described, where MDCK cysts can be grown for
up to 2 weeks in glass-bottomed dishes measuring several centimeters
in diameter. A final question was whether altering the relative
effective production
rates of activator  and inhibitor  would
alter pattern formation. In Figure , numerical
simulations show patterns arising for the effective inhibitor production  = 5.0 and three different
values of effective activator production : 2.9 (A), 3.5 (B), and 4.2 (C). We can see that
increasing activator production  increases the pattern size and its speed of formation, in
agreement with Figures  and . This suggests that using different HGF-responsive promoters,
with a stronger response for the inhibitor, could tune the system
for smaller and slower-evolving patterns. In summary, we found a series of relationships that qualitatively
guide our design decision making for the downstream engineering of
Turing pattern systems, using our MDCK system. In the following discussion, we will explore the ways that some
of these properties could be engineered. The effect of cooperativity. Region of
the parameter space where  is positive
for  = 0.01:  = 3.0
(A) and  = 1.333 (B). This result suggests
that the presence of cooperativity
in the regulatory function will enhance the possible parameter space
where Turing patterns occur. Patterns with
low differential diffusion  by
using higher Hill coefficients: simulation results obtained for  = 0.5,  = 5, μ = 0.7,  = 5.5, and  = 6 (A) and for  =
0.75,  = 6, μ = 0.8,  = 6, and  = 6 (B). The  term reflects the
ratio of the diffusion constants of activator/inhibitor, and patterns
can be achieved with relatively small differences so long as the response
function is steep, i.e., cooperative. Note that different spatial
scales are used. Turing patterns with
parameters to increase potential Turing space
in the context of low cooperativity. Simulation results obtained for  = 0.01,  = 1.333, μ
= 0.5, and  = 5 and
with three different values of : 2.9 (A), 3.5 (B), and 4.2 (C). Alan
Turing’s hypothesis that an
inhibitor and activator can create regular patterns, emerging from
uniform but noisy initial conditions, was one of the first attempts
at a theoretical explanation of biological pattern formation. Importantly, his system employed faster diffusion
and decay of the inhibitor, relative to that of the activator. Today,
it is broadly accepted that two requirements, namely, local self-enhancement
and long-range inhibition, are essential features of this type of
pattern formation. The results presented
here suggest one more additional requirement, not so broadly present
or acknowledged in previous studies, which is for cooperativity in
the regulatory function response. Several studies have reported
Turing-like patterns in developmental biology, but, even now, it is
still not absolutely clear whether many real molecular systems employ
activators and inhibitors exactly in this way. Excitingly, a recent
paper elegantly demonstrated that Nodal/Lefty proteins have differential
diffusion properties that underpin a reaction–diffusion patterning
system in zebrafish embryogenesis. It
is interesting that, in this system, the relative protein half-lives
were only a minor contributor to the differences in the range of these
factors, with differential diffusivity contributing the most to patterning.
For a deeper understanding of these systems that enables bottom-up
engineering, it is important to define which properties of the network
components are the most critical and which are more forgiving of variation. In this article, we investigated how the regions of parameter space
where Turing instabilities occur are affected by specified parameters
that can be engineered biologically. We were motivated to explore
the simple diffusing activator and inhibitor system that we recently
developed. This system is genetically
encoded and is based on MDCK cells secreting an activator, hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF), and a truncated variant that acts as an inhibitor
(NK4). Both molecules then bind the same membrane receptor (c-Met)
extracellularly and thus activate or repress the same matrix metalloproteinase-1
gene promoter (MMP-1), via a signaling cascade, which in turn produces
more activator and inhibitor. Although these components have been
shown to function in cell culture, they
have not yet been connected to form a Turing-like feedback network. To work toward this goal, we were primarily
interested in developing a biologically interpretable model to explore
whether these components would be at all amenable for supporting Turing
pattern formation in a simple, single-promoter implementation. Furthermore,
we aimed to identify the parameter properties associated with the
largest pattern-forming parameter space, with respect to the other
parameters. We thus aimed to define the most robust regions of design
space for attempting to engineer artificial Turing patterns in cells. Our main findings can be summarized as follows (see also Table ): (1) We found that putting both morphogens
under the control of
the same promoter (easier to engineer) still allowed the formation
of Turing patterns in the context of our competitive activator–inhibitor
system. This could be achieved in principle by expressing both HGF
and NK4 with the MMP-1 promoter, resulting in a combined positive–negative
feedback system. It should be noted that a previous model also used a single promoter; however, that model
was within a framework of noncompetitive inhibition. (2) As
expected, the ratio of diffusion of inhibitor/activator
affects the size of the parameter regions associated with Turing patterns.
For example, 100-fold faster inhibitor diffusion relative to that
of the activator is more likely to achieve patterns than 10-fold faster.
We assume that the apparent diffusion constants of HGF and NK4 in
collagen are similar. Practically, there are several ways to increase
this ratio. First, truncated NK4 variants (NK1 and NK2) may diffuse
faster through collagen, although this benefit may be at the cost
of reduced cMet repression activity. Second,
fusing matrix-binding domains to HGF could retard its diffusion, as
was achieved recently with a number of growth factors that were engineered
to have superaffinity to extracellular matrix. Fusing multimerization domains could also reduce HGF diffusion,
in principle, and increase potential Turing space. (3) Steeper
regulatory function responses, potentially achieved
by greater cooperativity, lead to larger potential Turing space. Interestingly,
the MMP-1 promoter that we use can be
fitted with an apparent Hill coefficient of only  = 1.2. This is toward the lower end of the range that
supports Turing patterns, and the system may benefit from a search
for steeper induction responses, with respect to HGF morphogen concentration.
Practically, this would mean searching for promoters that respond
more steeply to HGF in a dose–response curve and then defining
the minimal promoter and enhancer region that captured this function
in a synthetic promoter construct. Not only do higher Hill coefficients
increase the likelihood of Turing space but also they reduce the requirement
for differential diffusion: with  =
6, we were able to use  = 0.75, which implies that
the activator need diffuse only / as fast
as the inhibitor. (4) Larger patterns (fewer complete waves
per spatial interval)
develop faster over time, in agreement with ref (). This can be tuned by
varying the relative ratios of inhibitor or activator production and
degradation, as follows: (4.1) Increasing the production or activity
of activator or decreasing the activity or production of inhibitor
can also increase the pattern size and rate of emergence of the patterns.
In practice, this might be achieved under the single promoter by adding
tandem copies of activator, HGF, linked by internal ribosome entry
sites (IRES) or the viral self-cleaving 2A peptide signal or by using
NK4 variants with lower activity (e.g., NK1 and NK2). (4.2) Increasing
inhibitor degradation or decreasing activator degradation will increase
the pattern size and, consequently, the patterns will develop more
rapidly. Assuming that NK4 has a similar half-life to that of HGF,
an artificially higher degradation function could be achieved by adding
site-specific tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease cleavage sites in
the linkers between Kringle domains in NK4. TEV protease could then
be added to the collagen gel matrix, where the cells are grown, in
order to tune this differential degradation function. It should be
noted, however, that to facilitate engineering differential degradation
is not an absolute requirement. (5) Using two different HGF-responsive
promoters could tune the
space and time scale of the system. For example, with a greater production
rate of the activator relative to that of the inhibitor, one would
achieve larger, more rapidly forming patterns. In practice, the TIMP1
promoter has a reported 200-fold induction
with HGF and might be used to drive further HGF production after suitable
characterization. By contrast, the MMP-1 promoter fragment we currently
use is induced only up to 4-fold with HGF. Assuming similar uninduced
production rates, reversing the order of promoter usage would produce
more NK4 and lead to smaller, slower-evolving patterns. Recently,
McKane et al. proved that the effect of intrinsic noise
translates, in the linear noise approximation scenario at least, into
an enlargement of the parameter region yielding Turing mechanisms
when compared to a deterministic analysis. This result gives noise a further role in Turing patterning, beyond
simply providing the essential initial perturbations that break the
homogeneity of the systems. Here, we reported other biological features
that could also be essential to support Turing instabilities in a
specified biological framework, based on an HGF/NK4 sender–receiver
system in Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. We believe that the use of a nonlinear regulatory
function that is more biologically interpretable, in combination with
stability analyses, offers new insights over the nature of this pattern
formation, especially in the context of synthetic biology. For the simulation of the dimensionless reaction–diffusion
equations ( and ), we
employed a Mathematica v9.0 script built in-house (see  for an example). In all
of these cases, the initial condition for the activator consists of
the unstable solution plus a small Gaussian perturbation (imperceptible
in the plots) in the middle of the spatial domain. The initial condition
for the inhibitor was the unperturbed unstable solution . To explore the effect of the boundary
condition, we used both a periodic boundary condition, i.e., (0) = () and (0) = (), as well as
the zero-flux boundary condition, i.e., (0) = () = 0 and (0) = (). No major differences
were observed by using these boundary conditions. For the numerical
integration procedure, we use an adaptative temporal step size so
that the estimated error in the solution is just within the specified
accuracy, 10..