A major aim
of synthetic biology
is the rational design and construction of DNAs composed of genetic
parts from various sources to achieve defined novel functions. Promoters,
regulatory proteins, operators, and translation initiation elements
from bacteria and bacteriophages have been combined to build transcription
networks or circuits encoding toggle switches, oscillators, logic, and simple computation in . While these studies demonstrate
the potential of the synthetic biology approach, the scope of designed
genetic systems remains limited due to lack of reliable data on the
behavior of genetic parts. There are usually many candidate parts
that could be used to build a given genetic network topology, and
the designer must select those likely to achieve the desired function.
As the number of available parts increases, exhaustive testing or
trial-and-error become infeasible, and quantitative modeling becomes
essential. Part characterization is then required to parametrize these
models in such a way that they are predictive of practical genetic
network operation. However, characterization of promoters is problematic
because their behavior can vary unpredictably in different contexts. This variation is partly due to dependence on the host cell. Genetic
parts and host strains are usually chosen to minimize specific regulatory
interactions between native and synthetic circuits, for example, by
avoiding CAP binding sites in promoters. However, broad utilization of host resources cannot be avoided.
For example, initiation of transcription from a promoter sequence
generally depends on the availability of the cell’s native
RNA polymerase (RNAP), associated sigma factors, and RNA nucleotides.
Translation of transcribed mRNAs into proteins, including fluorescent
reporters, requires host ribosomes, tRNAs, and amino acids. Empirical
correlations among chromosome and plasmid copy number, ribosome and
RNAP levels, and growth rate have been identified, which lead to fluctuation
in gene expression. DNA sequence local to genetic parts can also significantly
affect their behavior. In particular, the activity of promoters has
been shown to depend on the adjacent transcript sequence. The mechanistic details of these relationships
are not fully understood. For the goal of characterization, this means
that both the promoter of interest and any indirect (fluorescence,
luminescence, colorimetric) reporter measurements of its activity
are subject to unpredictable variation. Moreover, expression of a
reporter causes metabolic load that will likely affect the operation
of the promoter under study. Relative measurement is a common
approach to reducing variation
in measurements and has been applied to promoter characterization.
In higher organisms, our laboratory has applied relative measurement
of promoters to account for differences between cell types and the
accessibility of different tissues to measurement. In bacteria, Kelly et al. measured
the activity of a set of promoters in  growing under different conditions and hosted in different strains.
Each promoter was measured individually in separate experiments under
each growth condition and strain. One of these promoters was chosen
as a reference, and its mean activity was used to normalize the other
promoters in the set. The result was a relative measure of promoter
activity with lower variance than absolute promoter activity. More
recently, Keren et al. screened a library
of around 1800  promoters expressing
GFP in 10 different growth media. Supporting the results of Kelly
et al., they found that the activity of 70–90% of the promoters
was scaled by a constant factor when changing growth conditions. Furthermore,
they showed evidence that promoters deviating from this global scaling
were those specifically regulated by the change in conditions, e.g.,
metabolic operons affected by choice of carbon source. In summary,
several studies have suggested that variation in the
activity of constitutive promoters is largely due to global sources
that preserve their relative levels of activity and that specific
regulation of promoters is observed as a change in this relative activity. However, both Kelly et al. and Keren
et al. measured the activity of promoters
individually in separate experiments and computed relative activities
between experiments. Such measurements cannot capture global variation
due to the metabolic load of an introduced synthetic gene circuit,
slight differences in growth conditions, or the initial state of inoculated
cells. Previous work in our laboratory developed dual-reporter plasmids
to enable concurrent ratiometric measurement of promoter pairs and a computational analysis method that further reduced variance in measures of
promoter activity. Note that none of these approaches to characterization
explicitly addressed variation during the time period that a promoter
is active, but they considered only peak transcription. Hence, characterization
of promoters based on existing methods is subject to variation due
to extrinsic factors. Intrinsic Promoter Characteristics Characterization
is the process of estimating quantitative measures of part behavior,
which we call characteristics. Promoters drive transcription, so any
characteristic of its behavior must relate to transcription rate: : a quantitative measure of transcription
rate obtained from a given promoter sequence. However, transcription
rates are not intrinsic to promoters because
they are highly dependent on the context in which they are measured:
DNA molecule, host cell, and experimental conditions. Transcription
rates are also very difficult to measure directly and nondestructively , meaning that indirect reporters, such as fluorescent
proteins, are most often employed. These reporters depend on processes
that are subject to variation not specific to the promoter driving
transcription or necessarily correlated with transcription rate (). Both the context
of measurement and the measurement system itself, therefore, introduce
extrinsic variation to estimated promoter characteristics. In this
study, we seek a measure of promoter activity that is reliable in
spite of this extrinsic variation, that is, an intrinsic promoter
characteristic: Intrinsic Promoter Characteristic : a quantitative
measure of transcription that is specific to a given promoter and
consistent in a range of contexts. Here, we describe the systematic
development of a method for  characterization
of promoters based on dual-channel
measurement of fluorescent reporters. Using this method, we derived
a ratiometric promoter characteristic that reduced the fraction of
variance due to extrinsic factors to less than 4%, suggesting that
it is intrinsic to the promoter. Steps required for fluorescent reporter
synthesis. (Left–right)
Transcription is initiated at promoter sequences in each copy of a
reporter gene at rate , the resulting
mRNA is degraded at rate  and
diluted by cell growth (μ), and translation of mRNAs into immature
fluorescent proteins occurs at rate , followed by folding and maturation into active fluorescent reporters.
Proteins are also degraded ()
and diluted by cell growth (μ). Simultaneous Measurement of Two Promoters
in a Single Replicon Promoter activity is commonly measured
from fusions upstream of
a reporter gene. Fluorescent reporter genes are convenient because they encode a
single protein and do not require substrates or precursors to generate
a measurable signal. In this approach, the promoter sequence is placed
upstream of a ribosome binding site (RBS) and fluorescent protein
coding sequence (CDS), either in a plasmid or integrated into a genomic
locus. However, the specific sequence to which a promoter is fused
can significantly affect its activity and
will determine the translation rate of the reporter protein being
measured. Synthesis of mature fluorescent protein is required to generate
a measurable fluorescence signal. This is a multistep process () beginning with
transcription of mRNA, followed by translation, folding, and, finally,
maturation. At each step, degradation and dilution by cell growth
act to reduce cellular concentrations. Promoter activity itself and
the fluorescence measurements used to characterize it are, thus, dependent
on the context of local DNA sequence and host cell. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00116/suppl_file/sb5b00116_si_001.pdf We designed
promoter–reporter fusions to provide similar local DNA sequence
context by incorporating a common RBS (BBa_R0034) immediately adjacent to the transcription start site of
the promoter of interest. Six promoters of interest were chosen following
Kelly et al. These promoters are “synthetic”
derivatives of Lambda phage promoter PL (R0051, R0011, R0040) and  synthetic promoters (J23101, J23150, J23151) and
were taken from the Registry of Standard Biological Parts. To test the effect of fluorescent protein choice,
we measured the activity of these promoters upstream of GFPmut3, mCherry,
EYFP, and ECFP (Figure S1A, , and analysis method below). We found that EYFP, ECFP, and mCherry
preserved rank order and that EYFP and ECFP also preserved relative
magnitudes of promoter activities. GFPmut3 deviated from the other
reporters, especially for apparently strong promoters R0051 and R0011.
EYFP and ECFP are reported to be similar in maturation half-lives
(39 ± 7 and 49 ± 9 min, respectively), stability (half-lives > 24 h), and transcript sequence (19 nucleotide substitutions). Combined
with their good spectral separation (ex./em. 514/527 nm for EYFP and
434/477 nm for ECFP), these findings suggested that EYFP/ECFP would
make a good pair for comparative analysis. We assembled the
six constitutive promoters mentioned above into
dual-channel reporter plasmids (A). Each promoter of interest was fused to the EYFP
reporter and common RBS. Following Kelly et al., promoter J23101 was chosen as a reference and fused to
the ECFP reporter and common RBS in reverse orientation in the plasmid
backbone. Each reporter gene was transcriptionally isolated with a
bidirectional terminator (BBa_B0015). This plasmid design enabled
concurrent measurement of two promoter–reporter fusions with
the same gene dosage (plasmid copy) and very similar local DNA contexts
(RBS and CDS) for each promoter. We refer to these plasmids according
to the name of the promoter of interest as p<EYFP promoter>,
e.g.,
pR0051. In the following, we analyze measurements of  cultures carrying each of the six plasmids
under a range of growth conditions. Dual-channel concurrent measurement of
promoter activity. (A) Reporter
plasmid contains one of six promoters of interest and a reference
promoter (J23101). Each promoter is fused to a fluorescent protein
gene (EYFP/ECFP) containing a common ribosome binding sequence (purple
semicircle) and bidirectional terminator. (B) Absorbance at 600 nm
as a measure of culture biomass; black line shows fitted Gompertz
model, and the inset is growth rate. (C) Plate-reader fluorescence
intensity measurements from pJ23151, with the defined period of exponential
phase marked. (D) Plotting fluorescence intensity (()) against absorbance (()) shows a clear linear relation in exponential phase (green).
Log–log plot with dashed line indicating linear relation. Calculating Fluorescent
Protein Synthesis Rate from Time-Course
Data The dual-channel reporter plasmids described above allowed
us to measure concurrently both culture absorbance ((), B) and fluorescence channels (EYFP and ECFP, C) in a microplate fluorometer.
Here, we outline the derivation of estimates of the rate of synthesis
of fluorescent proteins based on these measurements. We show how this
rate is related to the transcription rate. At each step, we highlight
assumptions made in the analysis and techniques to avoid amplification
of errors in the required computations. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00116/suppl_file/sb5b00116_si_001.pdf As described in previous
studies, the multistep process
() of mature
fluorescent protein synthesis can be summarized by a time-varying
synthesis rate for each cell (). With a stable protein  (half-life
approximately 24 h for EYFP and ECFP), we may neglect degradation (δ = 0), resulting
in the following differential equationwhere the second term represents
dilution
by cell growth at average rate μ() = 1/() d/d, and () is culture density measured
by absorbance (B). Assuming that fluorescence is detected linearly, and that absorbance
is a good measure of cell number, then measured fluorescence intensity
(C) is given
byFrom this simple model, the usual
expression
for the protein synthesis rate of each cell can be derivedHowever, calculation of () presents several technical
problems.
Early in time-course experiments, culture density () is very low and thus subject to significant
background noise (see ), which is amplified in computing 1/(). Furthermore, fluorescence signal during this period is also low,
and computation of d/d amplifies measurement noise. This period of low culture density
corresponds to lag and exponential growth phases. σ promoters, such as those examined here, are known to be most active
during exponential growth, and characterization
of their behavior must focus on this time period. It is, therefore,
important to accurately identify the period of exponential growth
phase and to quantify promoter activity during this time. In
order to enable accurate calculation of (), we note that  can be rewritten using the chain rule aswhere μ() is the growth
rate of the culture. The form of  states an explicit dependence of gene expression on
growth rate, which has been indicated by several previous studies
in . The fluorescent protein synthesis rate () is often used as a proxy for transcription
rate, assuming that other processes occur at fixed rates, but as illustrated in , it also incorporates extrinsic variation
due to gene copy number and translation and maturation rates. Fluorescent
Protein Synthesis Rate Is Proportional to Growth
Rate in Exponential Phase The analysis above shows that the
relation between fluorescence intensity () and culture optical density () may in itself be informative of time variation in promoter
activity. For all plasmids used in this study, we found that the slopes
(d/d) and (d/d) remain approximately
constant until growth falls off during the transition to stationary
phase. In D,
we illustrate this relation by plotting measurements of fluorescence () (ECFP) and () (EYFP) against the corresponding () for one of the six plasmids. The shapes
of the curves () and () show that fluorescent
protein synthesis is proportional to growth rate during exponential
growth phase. The constant of proportionality is given by α = d/d, where
p indicates the fluorescent reporter EYFP or ECFP. This is the relative
rate of fluorescent protein synthesis to biomass synthesis as measured
by culture density. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00116/suppl_file/sb5b00116_si_001.pdf In order to quantify this relation, we needed
to identify the time period of exponential growth phase, which is
associated with the peak in culture growth rate μ(). Accurate estimation of growth rates suffers from the issues with
noise amplification described above, due to both differentiation of
and dividing by small noisy ()
measurements. We therefore fit a Gompertz model to measurements of () (B, black line). The
Gompertz model applied to bacterial culture growth is parametrized
by lag time (λ), peak growth rate (μ), and
carrying capacity (), and the time of peak growth
is given directly as  = / + λ (where  = exp(1)). To avoid problems with low signal during early culture
growth, we considered exponential growth phase as the period from
peak growth () extending for four doubling
periods (4 ln 2/μ). Exponential phase measurements
identified in this way are highlighted in green in . Despite large variation in
growth rate (e.g., see B, inset) during exponential phase, the slope of fluorescence
against optical density (α) remained constant. We
confirmed this relation for all experiments shown in  (see ) by linear regression, giving  = 0.97 ± 0.039 for both EYFP and ECFP. Hence,
the value of α quantifies fluorescent
protein synthesis in relation to growth rate, parametrizing a simple
linear model of fluorescent protein synthesis rate http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00116/suppl_file/sb5b00116_si_001.pdf Supporting Information Table S1 We computed the values of α and α for the six dual-reporter plasmids in cells
grown in M9 minimal
media with glycerol (A,B). For each experiment, plates were inoculated from two
separate colonies, each with three replicates ( =
6 in total). The coefficient of variation (CV) of alpha estimates
for each plasmid ranged from 4 to 20% for the promoter of interest
(EYFP) and 7 to 21% for the reference (ECFP) promoter (see ). Analysis of
covariance (ANCOVA) of the α and α values estimated by regression for each plasmid showed significant
differences between replicates ( < 0.05). This
means that variance was not solely due to the analysis method and
that this method could distinguish between replicates at the 5% significance
level. For a given growth condition, then, α was
characteristic of promoter activity despite large changes in fluorescent
protein synthesis over exponential growth phase. The relative
rate of fluorescent protein synthesis to growth thus
gives a promoter characteristic α that is consistent
over exponential phase and that eliminates growth rate as a source
of extrinsic variation. Fluorescent Protein Synthesis Rate Varies
Significantly under
Different Growth Conditions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00116/suppl_file/sb5b00116_si_001.pdf We showed above that we could
estimate promoter characteristics (α) for a given
growth condition (M9 with glycerol) with a CV of <22%. We next
considered the effect of different growth conditions. If growth rate
were the major source of extrinsic variation, then
we would expect the values of α and α to be similar under different conditions. This is because
they parametrize the linear relation between fluorescent protein synthesis
and growth () = αμ(). We repeated the estimation of
α and α for each plasmid in M9
media with glucose as the main carbon source and with the addition
of bacteriostatic drugs, rifampicin and chloramphenicol (C–H). These
growth conditions introduced extrinsic factors to reporter expression,
and use of our dual-channel plasmid allowed us to examine concurrently
their effect on the promoter of interest and reference promoter. We
found dramatic differences in promoter characteristics (both α and α) under these growth conditions (A–H) despite
maintenance of the linear relation () = αμ() (see  for regressions). Clearly, α is not an intrinsic characteristic
of a promoter even over the limited range of conditions we tested
in this study. Peak growth rates (μ) in each of
the four conditions we tested were significantly different (ANOVA,  < 10), but the estimated α and α tended to decrease under conditions
leading to faster growth (). This result is somewhat surprising given the literature
on correlations between growth rate and gene expression, and it highlights
the complexity of interactions among growth rate, gene/plasmid copy,
and transcription and translation rates. To quantify the reliability of promoter characteristics,
we performed
analysis of variance (four-way ANOVA) on the estimated α and α from the experiments shown in . In this analysis,
we partitioned the variance in these measures of promoter activity
into that due to the identity of the promoter of interest (plasmid),
experimental replicate, inoculating colony, and the four growth conditions
tested ().
In each ANOVA test (for α and α), all factor effects were significant ( < 0.01),
but their contribution to variance was very different for each measure.
Ideally, a robust characteristic of promoters would be subject to
variance only due to the identity of the promoter being measured and
would be invariant to nonspecific factors. For α (A,C), we
found that only 22% of variance was attributed
to the identity of the promoter being measured ( = 24), and the largest contribution to variance was due to changing
growth conditions (47%,  = 36). A further 30% of
the variance in α was not attributed to the four
factors included in the analysis and represents some combination of
technical (due to equipment) and biological (due to cells) variations.
For α (B,D), variance was dominated by growth conditions (76%,  = 36), with little effect (6%,  = 24)
from the identity of the host plasmid, i.e., the EYFP promoter. Hence,
in our experiments, the activity of the reference promoter was largely
independent of the promoter of interest. Similar to the EYFP channel,
α was also subject to variance from sources unspecified
(16%). Promoter characteristics  measured
from dual channel plasmids in four growth conditions. EYFP (α) and ECFP (α) promoter characteristics
measured from cells growing in M9 + 0.2% glycerol (A, B), M9 + 0.4%
glucose + 1 μg/mL chloramphenicol (C, D), M9 + 0.4% glucose
+ 1 μg/mL rifampicin (E, F), and M9 + 0.4% glucose (G, H). Error
bars show one standard deviation. Promoter characteristic
α and peak growth rate
μ in different growth media. (A) Mean and standard
deviation (error bars) of peak growth rate (μ) for
cells containing the six dual-channel plasmids growing in four different
growth media. (B, C) Promoter characteristics for (B) the promoter
of interest (α) and (C) the reference promoter (α) for each plasmid measured in the four growth media showed
a clear negative relation to peak growth rate. Heat maps of promoter characteristics α from
six plasmids in four growth conditions. (A, B) Heat maps of promoter
characteristics α (A) and α (B)
from each of six plasmids (-axis) with six measurements
(three replicates of two colonies) under each of four growth conditions
(-axis). (C, D) Analysis of variance (four-way ANOVA)
shows that single-channel characterization of the promoter of interest
(α) is not robust to media changes (22% of variance
attributed to plasmid or promoter identity). Pie chart sectors not
labeled were <1%. Mathematical Derivation of Promoter Characteristics from Fluorescent
Protein Synthesis Rates We now outline a simple model of
the observed variation in promoter characteristic α, the rate of fluorescent protein synthesis relative to growth, and
in the following section, we use it to derive an intrinsic promoter
characteristic. Previous studies have shown that promoter activity
is a saturating function of growth rate or is proportional
to growth rate. These observations are consistent
with each other at subsaturating growth rates such as those that might
be expected in minimal media. Note that in these reports the growth
rate variation considered was between experimental conditions rather
than over the population growth cycle. Our results confirm the observed
dependence of promoter activity on growth rate during exponential
growth phase under the given growth conditions. However, comparing
estimated promoter characteristics (α) between experimental
conditions showed a decreasing trend in relation to peak growth rate
(B,C). The empirical relation between promoter activity and growth rate
suggests that growth rate is an indicator of limiting factors (or
resources) common to both biomass production and promoter activity
(e.g., RNA polymerase holoenzyme). Intuitively,
as limiting factors increase, growth rate will eventually saturate
to some maximum. Denoting limiting factors as (), we represent saturation of growth rate with a Michaelis–Menten
equationwhere μ* is the theoretical maximum
growth rate with increasing ()
and  is the rate of use of limiting factors in growth.
In the case of low (), that is, () ≪ 1, this simplifies toSolving for ()
givesSimilarly,
promoter activity is also dependent
on limiting factors (), and again
at low values of (), we have the
transcription rate ()where  is the rate of use
of limiting factors in promoter activity and  is the theoretical
maximum transcription rate at saturation (() ≫ 1). Hence, promoter activity is proportional
to growth rate. With short mRNA half-lives (typically, ∼2 min),
we can assume quasi-steady-state, and assuming first-order degradation
at fixed rate δ, we have mRNA concentrationApproximating
translation as a first-order
process and assuming that maturation is in steady-state, the synthesis
rate of mature fluorescent proteins from each cell then followsand substituting for transcription
rate giveswhere φ is the fraction
of fluorescent proteins in the mature state and the terms () and () are the time-varying plasmid
copy number and translation rate, respectively. Relating this model
to the equation for fluorescent protein synthesis rate given in  gives an expression for
the promoter characteristic This model predicts
that promoter characteristics (α and α) are subject to variation from a
number of sources. First, gene copy () and translation efficiency () can vary in different media and over time due to availability of ribosomes and other limiting factors. Allocation of resources to growth (μ* and ) would likely depend on growth media and other experimental
conditions. Finally, despite accounting for growth rate dependence
of promoter activity, α is predicted to decrease
with increasing growth rate (μ()) and maximal
growth rate (μ*), as we found from our results in different
media (). However,
it seems reasonable to assume that the affinity of a promoter for
available resources () and its maximal attainable
activity () are specific or intrinsic characteristics
and are not dependent on growth conditions. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00116/suppl_file/sb5b00116_si_001.pdf Now consider promoter
characteristics measured from our dual-channel
plasmids. Since both promoters are encoded on the same plasmid, we
can assume that gene copy (())
is common. Similarly, with concurrent  measurement,
we have promoters active in the same cells, which exhibit particular
allocation of resources to growth (μ* and ). Furthermore, the close similarity in our fluorescent reporter
transcripts (ECFP and EYFP) suggests that translation efficiency () and mRNA degradation rate
δ would be similar. Our model then predicts that
the characteristics of the promoter of interest (α) and the reference promoter (α) across a range
of conditions should be correlated due to common sources of variation.
Confirming this prediction, across the four growth conditions we tested,
with three replicates of two colonies in each condition, variation
in the estimated promoter characteristics (A–H) for EYFP and ECFP was closely
correlated ( > 0.95 for each plasmid; A). Flow cytometry
of cells
grown in M9 + 0.4% glucose also indicated correlation at the single-cell
level ( > 0.7) for all plasmids (see ). Promoter characteristics
from dual-channel plasmids were well-correlated
across all growth conditions. (A) Characteristics of promoter of interest
(-axis) and reference promoter (-axis) for each plasmid (colors) in all four growth conditions. Lines
show regression fits ( > 0.95 in all cases).
(B)
The ratios of promoter characteristics ( =
α/α) were maintained in all growth
conditions (CVs < 12%,  = 24; error bars show
standard deviation). Ratiometric Measurement Approximates Intrinsic Characteristics
of Promoters The model derived above shows that the fluorescent
reporter-based promoter characteristic α is a product
of intrinsic factors ( and ) and extrinsic
factors due to mRNA degradation, translation, fluorescent protein
maturation, and cell growth. Without accounting for all extrinsic
factors, individual promoter characteristics (α and
α) were not reliable under changing growth conditions.
In the absence of direct measurement of most of these extrinsic factors,  suggests that we can use
our dual-channel measurements to extract an intrinsic promoter characteristic
via the ratiowhere we have assumed common copy number (()), translation rate (()), and mRNA degradation rate (δ), consistent
with our dual-channel plasmid design (). A further reasonable
approximation given their similar maturation half-lives is that the
fractions of EYFP and ECFP in the mature state are the same (φ ≈ φ). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00116/suppl_file/sb5b00116_si_001.pdf We computed the ratio
ρ for the experiments () in which each plasmid was measured under four growth
conditions. Even though single-channel characteristics of promoter
activity varied significantly (around 4-fold) among these conditions,
the computed ratios showed low coefficients of variation (B; CVs 6–12%).
Analysis of variance (four-way ANOVA as above,  <
0.01 for all factors) showed that 96% ( = 24) of
variance was due to the identity of the promoter of interest (). Variance due to
growth conditions was largely eliminated (<1%,  = 36), and unspecified sources of variance were also reduced (3%).
In separate experiments, we measured the six plasmids in cells growing
in LB rich media and found that estimates of ρ agreed closely
with those measured in M9 minimal media (see ). Thus, we define ρ as an intrinsic
ratiometric promoter characteristic
that reliably quantifies the behavior of a promoter with respect to
an  reference. Heat map of ratiometric
promoter characteristic ρ from six
plasmids under four growth conditions. (A) Heat map of ratiometric
promoter characteristics ρ = α/α from each of six plasmids (-axis), with
six measurements (three replicates of two colonies) under each of
four growth conditions (-axis). (B) Analysis of
variance (four-way ANOVA) shows that normalization to an  reference promoter provides a reliable characteristic
with 96% of variance explained by promoter identity. Pie chart sectors
not labeled were <1%. Synthetic biology aims to create an engineering
discipline for
the design of functional genetic circuits. Promoters often perform
critical functions in such circuits, so obtaining
reliable quantitative characteristics of their activity is essential
to this design process. In this work, we studied fluorescent reporters
fused to previously well-characterized constitutive promoters carried
on plasmids. Using microplate fluorometer measurements, we highlighted
technical issues affecting estimation of promoter activity from time-series
data. We developed a simple analytical approach to computing promoter
activity that overcame several of these issues to give accurate characteristics.
This analysis explicitly revealed the dependence of promoter activity
computation on growth rate during exponential phase as a linear model.
The slope of this linear model (α) gave a promoter
characteristic that was largely invariant to approximately 4-fold
changes in growth rate over exponential phase. We then subjected
cells to extrinsic factors known to affect promoter
activity by growing them with different carbon sources and in the
presence of bacteriostatic drugs. While α was reliable
over exponential growth phase under a given experimental condition,
with these additional extrinsic factors we observed significant variation.
Furthermore, this variation showed a negative relation to the peak
growth rate observed under each test growth condition. Statistical
analysis showed that 78% of the variance in characteristics was attributed
to extrinsic factors, of which 47% was due to the imposed extrinsic
factor and 30% to unidentified sources. Only 22% of variance was attributed
to the identity of the promoter. Our design of dual-channel
fluorescent reporter plasmids allowed
us to concurrently measure and compute promoter characteristics (α, α) from a promoter of interest and a reference
in very similar genetic contexts. We derived a simple mathematical
model of these promoter characteristics. This model confirmed our
observation that α decreased with increasing peak
growth rate. It also suggested that promoter characteristics α and α would be correlated due to common
extrinsic factors. This was supported by our data in which promoter
characteristics measured from the same plasmid were closely correlated
across all conditions tested ( > 0.95). This
analysis
then predicted that the ratio α = α/α would be consistent when cells were subjected to extrinsic
factors. Our data showed that the fraction of variance in promoter
characteristics attributed to imposed extrinsic factors was reduced
from 47% to less than 1% after computing the ratio ρ = α/α. Other unidentified sources of variance
were reduced from 30% to just 3% of variance. Overall, the identity
of the promoter accounted for 96% of the variance, and only 4% was
due to extrinsic factors. We therefore propose the ratiometric characteristic
(ρ) with respect to an  reference as
an intrinsic promoter characteristic. We showed that common
extrinsic factors dominated the variation
in constitutive transcription from promoters hosted on the same plasmid
and that ratiometric characteristics were largely unaffected by this
variation. The mechanisms by which extrinsic factors affect promoters
and fluorescent reporter measurements of them are currently poorly
understood and thus cannot be incorporated into quantitative models.
Our approach utilized an  constitutive reference
promoter placed in a genetic context as similar as possible to that
of the promoter of interest, with the same RBS and almost identical
fluorescent reporter coding sequence. This context-matched reference
promoter, therefore, provided a live concurrent readout of common
extrinsic effects on promoter activity. This means that, in principle,
ratiometric characteristics could be used to estimate the activity
of promoters operating under novel conditions from measurements of
the reference promoter alone. While this study focused on constitutive
promoters, ratiometric
characterization can also enable accurate quantification of specifically
regulated promoters (e.g., inducible) by minimizing the effects of
common extrinsic factors and revealing specific regulatory effects
on promoters measured under different conditions. These conditions
might, for example, be concentrations of inducers (e.g., IPTG, aTC)
that bind transcription factors associated with promoters (e.g., LacI,
TetR). Such approaches will be essential to the accurate design of
functional genetic circuits by parametrizing models of transcription
regulation. Previous work from our laboratory demonstrated this approach
to modeling of a homoserine lactone regulated promoter. The results presented here were based
on microplate fluorometer
measurements of bacteria in bulk culture. However, the principle of
ratiometric promoter characterization could be applied to other techniques
in which concurrent dual-channel fluorescence measurements can be
made and even to multicellular organisms. Previous work from our laboratory
successfully applied a similar approach to confocal microscopy images
of plant tissues. Thus, we have presented
an approach to characterization that enables simple and reliable quantification
of promoter activity under a range of conditions and organisms and
that we hope will further progress toward rational design of synthetic
genetic circuits. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00116/suppl_file/sb5b00116_si_001.pdf A step-by-step
protocol for ratiometric characterization
of a promoter of choice using our plasmids is given in . Microbial Strains and Growth
Conditions 0.4% (w/v) glucose +1 μg mL chloramphenicol 0.4%
(w/v) glucose +1 μg mL rifampicin strain
EC10G (Invitrogen) was used for all
experiments. Growth media were based on M9 minimal medium with 0.2% (w/v) casamino acids, kanamycin (50
μg mL) for selection, and four different
additional supplement combinations: http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00116/suppl_file/sb5b00116_si_001.pdf All constructs used in
this study were constructed
from BioBricks obtained from the Registry of Biological Parts distribution
kit (Registry of Standard Biological Parts, MIT, ) and assembled into pSB3K3CY. pSB3K3CY was created by cloning BBa_J23101
promoter, ribosome binging site BBa_B0034, cyan fluorescent protein
BBa_E0020, and BBa_B0015 terminator into pSB3K3 vector backbone between
the kanamycin resistance gene and p15A origin of replication by Gibson
assembly. Each of the promoters used
in this study, R0051, R0011, R0040, J23101, J23150, and J23151, was
fused to RBS BBa_B0034, EYFP BBa_E0030, and bidirectional terminator
BBa_B0015; these cassettes were subsequently cloned between prefix
and suffix sequences of pSB3K3CY using BioBrick assembly (sequences
listed in ). For assembly, a master mix was prepared by combining 100 μL
of 5× isothermal reaction buffer, 2 μL of 1 U μL T5 exonuclease (Epicenter), 6.25 μL of 2 U
μL Phusion DNA polymerase (Thermo Scientific),
50 μL of 40 U mL Taq DNA ligase (NEB), and
water up to a final volume of 375 μL. 15 μL of this reagent–enzyme
mix were added to purified DNA fragments totaling 5 μL and incubated
for 1 h at 50 °C. 5× isothermal buffer was prepared following
Gibson et al. EC10G chemically competent
cells were transformed by heat shock and plated on LB agar plates
with kanamycin (50 μg mL). Plasmids
are available from AddGene. Each of
the plasmids described
above (A) was
transformed into chemically competent  strain EC10G (Invitrogen) and incubated overnight in LB agar plates
containing kanamycin (50 μg mL) for selection.
Next, two colonies of each of these transformations were selected
and inoculated into 5 mL of one of the M9 media (A–D, see above)
and grown overnight in a shaking incubator at 37 °C for approximately
16 h. Cultures were then diluted 1:100 into fresh identical medium.
Then, 200 μL of this diluted culture was added in three replicates
to each well of a black 96-well microplate with a clear bottom (Greiner).
A BMG Fluostar Omega plate reader was used to measure optical density
at 600 nm and fluorescence every ∼12 min. Excitation filter
430/10 nm and emission filter 480/10 nm were used for measuring ECFP,
whereas excitation filter 500/10 nm and emission filter 530/10 nm
were used for EYFP measurements. The plate was maintained at 37 °C
during the measurement assay. Between readings, plates were shaken
at 200 rpm. http://www.github.com/timrudge/platypus www.github.com/timrudge/platypus Matlab (Mathworks)
was used for all data
analysis, and a custom python script was used to import data from
the BMG spreadsheet format (all code is available from ). Gompertz models were fitted to OD data using the “nlinfit”
matlab function, which implements the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm. Statistical analysis was carried out with Matlab
functions that implement standard methods for linear regression, ANOVA,
and ANCOVA (“polyfit”, “anovan”, and “aoctool”)..