Component limitations arise
in synthetic biology because a restricted number of biological parts
can be reliably used to program cellular behaviors. Gene
fragmentation represents a simple strategy to overcome component limitations
by converting proteins encoded by individual genes into proteins encoded
by two or more gene fragments. Protein fragments that
arise from fission display “AND” gate logic when the
ORFs encoding the different fragments are placed under distinct transcriptional
regulation so that protein fragment complementation occurs only when
the promoter driving transcription of the first ORF is active AND
the promoter controlling transcription of the second ORF is also active. Unfortunately, we often cannot predict  where genes (and proteins) can be fragmented into
pieces to construct AND gates. In these cases, laboratory evolution
can be used to identify which of the many possible fission sites within
a protein are least disruptive to function. This combinatorial approach has the advantage that it samples all
of the possible designs for constructing fragmented proteins and provides
information on the backbone fission sites that yield fragments with
the strongest functional complementation. In addition, comprehensive
information on protein tolerance to fission can be used to guide the
construction of more complex logic gates, such as three-input AND
gates. Fragmented proteins often display
decreased activity compared with
that of their natural counterparts encoded by single polypeptides,
which can limit their utility for synthetic biology applications. One way to create fragmented proteins with improved
activity is to introduce nondisruptive backbone fission sites into
homologues having enhanced stability, such as a thermophilic homologue
of a fragmented mesophilic protein. Highly
stable proteins can also be used as starting points for laboratory
evolution experiments to increase the fraction of fragmented proteins
that retain function within a combinatorial library, provided that a highly stable homologue is available as
a starting point for laboratory evolution. An alternative way to enhance
the cooperative function of protein fragments is to fuse protein fragments
to a pair of proteins that form a stable complex and promote complementation. Assisted protein-fragment complementation has
been used to create a variety of genetically encoded devices whose
molecular outputs report on a protein–protein interaction,
including devices that generate metabolic, visual, transcriptional, proteolytic, and antibiotic resistance outputs. The design
of fragmented proteins that report on molecular interactions can be
arduous, and no laboratory evolution methods have been described
to simplify the discovery of protein fragments that require assistance
for complementation. We recently described a transposon mutagenesis
approach for constructing
libraries of vectors that express different fragmented variants of
a protein. Libraries created using this
method can be coupled to screens and selections to convert any protein
into a genetically encoded AND gate, provided that one or more pairs
of fragments derived from that protein cooperatively function. Because
previous studies have shown that interacting proteins can assist with
the complementation of protein fragments, we sought to explore whether this library approach could be extended
so that it generates each possible two-fragment variant of a protein
as fusions to a pair of proteins that associate to form a complex
(Figure ). We hypothesized that fragmented
proteins mined from this type of library would require associating
proteins for maximal activity. We focused our efforts on the near-infrared
fluorescent protein (IFP), a mutant of the  bacteriophytochrome BphP that displays
spectral properties that are compatible with whole body imaging in
animals. This protein uses biliverdin
(BV) as a chromophore and folds into a structure containing a knot. The extent to which IFP can be fragmented to create bimolecular
fluorescence complementation assays has not been explored using laboratory
evolution, although fragmented IFP have been discovered through rational
design that require assistance from a protein–protein interaction
for fragment complementation. To better understand IFP tolerance to fragmentation and the
best
architectures for building bimolecular near-infrared fluorescence
complementation devices, we developed a simple method to construct
libraries encoding the different possible fragmented IFP as fusions
to pairs of associating peptides (and proteins) and screened for IFP
that display near-infrared fluorescence. We examined whether the fluorescent
fragmented IFP required assistance from protein–protein interactions
for complementation, and we investigated how the biochemical properties
of fragmented IFP differed from those of full-length IFP. Fragmented IFP created
by random fission and rational fusion. (A)
Transposon mutagenesis creates clones that use two promoters (P and P) to control
the expression of IFP fragments (F1 and F2) fused at their termini
to a pair of proteins (P1 and P2) that associate. When both fusion
proteins (F1–P1 and P2–F2) are expressed, they associate
to form a folded two-fragment IFP that binds BV and emits in the near-infrared.
(B) Truth table for a two-fragment protein AND gate that requires
fusion to associating proteins for an output. Combining
IFP Fission with Fusion to Peptides To establish
where IFP can be fragmented into polypeptides that cooperatively fold
without assistance, we first created a library of vectors that express
fragmented IFP using transposon mutagenesis and screened this library for variants that fluoresce like IFP in
the near-infrared upon expression within . Screening this library did not identify any
two-fragment IFP that retained fluorescence, suggesting that the IFP
structure is easily disrupted by fragmentation. Because previous studies
have shown that interacting proteins can assist with the complementation
of some fragmented proteins, we hypothesized
that combining random IFP fission with fusion to associating proteins
would enrich the library in variants whose fragments associate into
an IFP-like structure, bind the BV chromophore, and fluoresce in the
near-infrared. To test the combined effects of random fission
and rational fusion on IFP fluorescence, we constructed a library
that fuses a pair of peptides (IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3) designed to associate
strongly ( = 70 nM) to the IFP fragment
termini. In this EK library, the IAAL-E3
peptide was added to the C-terminus of the IFP fragment that precede
the backbone fission site, whereas the IAAL-K3 peptide was added to
the N-terminus of the IFP fragment that follows the fission site.
The IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 peptides were chosen for initial library construction
because they are small (21 residues each), form a heterodimeric coiled-coil, and have been previously used to assist with
fragment complementation. Structural studies
have shown that the N- and C-termini of IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 that become
fused to IFP fragment termini have a physical separation of ∼30
Å. To minimize IFP structural disruption
upon fusion of fragments to termini having this separation, 12 residue
glycine-rich linkers were used for library construction. IFP Tolerates
Fission When Fused to Peptides Screening
1760 clones from the EK library identified multiple colonies with
λ > 700 nm, and sequencing vectors from these
colonies
identified seven unique fragmented IFP having their peptide backbone
cleaved distal (>25 residues) from the termini. Mapping the locations
of these backbone cleavage sites onto the  BphP chromophore-binding domain, the
protein that was mutated to create IFP, revealed that all of the fission sites are proximal to the linker
that connects the PAS (er/RNT/im) and GAF (cMP phosphodiesterase/denyl cyclase/hlA) domains within IFP (Figure A). These fission sites occur at the end of the second β-sheet
within the PAS domain (117-EK and 118-EK), the end of the third β-sheet
within the PAS domain (129-EK and 131-EK), and the beginning of first
helix within the GAF domain (140-EK, 142-EK, and 144-EK). The finding that peptide fusion was required to discover
fragmented
IFP with near-infrared fluorescence suggested that these proteins
may be marginally stable and display fluorescence that is sensitive
to increasing temperature. To test this idea, we compared the near-infrared
fluorescence of each variant with full-length IFP at 23 and 37 °C.
A comparison of  expressing
each fragmented IFP revealed similar emission intensity as that of
full-length IFP when fluorescence was analyzed at 23 °C (). In contrast, greater variability
was observed when measurements were performed at 37 °C (Figure B), the temperature where IFP biosensors must function
to be useful within animal models. Two fragmented IFP displayed <30%
of the IFP emission intensity (117-EK and 118-EK), one displayed higher
fluorescence (140-EK), and all others displayed intermediate signals.
To determine whether the varying fluorescence intensities of the mutants
arose because they had peak emission and excitation wavelengths that
differed from IFP, we measured the fluorescence
spectrum of each variant. All of the fragmented IFP displayed maximal
excitation and emission within 4 nm of intact IFP (). To investigate whether the variability in
whole cell fluorescence
arose because some fragmented IFP required a different concentration
of supplemental BV for maximal fluorescence, we evaluated the dependence
of whole cell fluorescence on the amount of BV added to the cells
expressing each fragmented IFP (). In all cases, the concentration of BV required for half-maximal
fluorescence in whole cells (2.3–15.5 μM) was lower than
the concentration (80 μM) used for screening the libraries.
The amounts of BV required for half-maximal fluorescence with fragmented
IFP were also similar to the amount (11.2 μM) required for half-maximal
fluorescence with IFP. Furthermore, the concentrations required for
half maximal fluorescence did not correlate with the relative emission
from each fragmented IFP. These findings suggest that the variability
in emission does not arise because fragmented IFP differ in the fraction
of protein that contains bound BV. To test whether the variation in
emission of the IFP variants arose because the different fragment
pairs accumulated to varying steady-state levels, we used western
blot analysis to evaluate IFP fragment stability (Figure C). These experiments revealed that the different
IFP fragments accumulated to similar extents when expressed from the
same promoters and ribosomal binding sites (RBS) and did not reveal
a correlation between near-infrared emission and protein fragment
expression. Taken together, these findings suggests that the differences
in fluorescence arise because of structural and/or fragment association
differences among the split IFP. The IFP BV chromophore makes
a large number of noncovalent interactions
with residues within the C-terminal GAF domain that reside within
the C-terminal fragments. This clustering of BV-interacting residues
suggested that fragmented IFP may require BV association with only
one fragment to fluoresce. To test this idea, we cloned each pair
of IFP gene fragments into vectors that use different inducible promoters
(P and P) to control expression (Figure ) and examined whether the maximum signal required
expression of both the N- and C-terminal fragments. Whole cell fluorescence
measurements revealed that each of the fragmented IFP displayed the
highest fluorescence when  harboring
these vectors was grown in the presence of both arabinose and IPTG.
140-EK displayed the highest fluorescence, similar to that observed
with the constructs discovered in the EK library, and similar whole
cell fluorescence as cells expressing full-length IFP from either
inducible promoter (data not shown). In all cases, we detected a low
level of near-infrared fluorescence with cells grown only in the presence
of arabinose. This trend was interpreted as arising from basal expression
of the fragments under P promoter regulation, which has
been observed previously with the vectors used for the measurements. These results show that all seven of the fragmented
IFP exhibit AND gate genetic logic. Fluorescent
fragmented IFP from the EK library. (A) For those variants
that displayed near-infrared fluorescence, the IFP backbone fission
sites (spheres) were mapped onto the PAS (blue) and GAF (red) domains
of BphP, PDB = 1ZTU, using PyMol. Each site represents
the last IFP residue in the N-terminal fragment. The domain linker
that is disordered in the BphP structure is shown as a dashed line.
(B) Fluorescence of each fragmented IFP upon expression in  is shown relative to that of cells expressing
full-length IFP and lacking an IFP (−ctrl). Whole cell fluorescence
(λ = 684 nm; λ = 710 nm) was
measured at 37 °C and normalized to cell density. The fluorescence
intensity obtained with cells expressing each split variant was significantly
different from cells lacking an IFP (two tailed -test;  < 0.01). (C) Western blot detection
of N-terminal IFP fragments fused to IAAL-E3 (IFP-F1 + E3), which
have a GST tag, and the C-terminal IFP fragments fused to IAAL-K3
(IFP-F2 + K3), which have an HA tag. Error bars represent ±1σ
calculated using three or more replicates. Two-input transcriptional regulation of
fragmented IFP. The near-infrared
fluorescence of  (XL1-Blue)
transformed with vectors that use IPTG- and arabinose-inducible promoters
to express the N- and C-terminal fragments of IFP, respectively. The
individual and combined effects of 5 mM arabinose (ARA) and 5 mM IPTG
on whole cell fluorescence (λ = 684 nm; λ = 710 nm) was measured at 37 °C, normalized to cell
density, and reported relative to the fragmented IFP with the largest
signal. Error bars represent ±1σ. Fragmented IFPs Require Assistance for Fluorescence The
paucity of fluorescent proteins discovered when IFP was subjected
to fission alone suggested that the fragmented IFP mined out of the
EK library might require assistance from the IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 coils
for maximal fluorescence. This idea was tested by analyzing the fluorescence
of cells expressing each fragmented IFP without fusion to these associating
peptides. All of the fragmented IFP lacking peptides displayed <10%
of the whole cell fluorescence observed with full-length IFP (Figure A) and lower fluorescence than that of identical
IFP fragments fused to the IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 peptides. Among the
different fragmented IFPs that fluoresce, peptide removal led to a
loss of fluorescence that varied between 7- and 40-fold (Figure B). To investigate why peptide removal decreased fluorescence
of the
fragmented IFP, we analyzed the fluorescence spectra, fluorescence
dependence on BV, and steady-state expression of fragments lacking
peptide fusions. Fragmented IFP lacking peptides displayed similar
excitation and emission maxima as that of homologous variants fused
to the IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 peptides (). In contrast, higher concentrations of BV (25.3–76.4 μM)
were required for half-maximal fluorescence with IFP fragments lacking
the IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 peptides (). This finding indicates that these variants displayed only a fraction
of their maximal whole cell fluorescence under the conditions in which
library screening was performed (80 μM BV). Western blot analysis
revealed that the different IFP fragments lacking peptides accumulated
to similar extents (Figure C) and did not
reveal a strong correlation between near-infrared emission and the
relative expression of the different fragmented variants lacking fusion
to peptides. A comparison of a subset of the fragmented IFP containing
IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 and homologous fragmented IFP lacking these peptides
(), however, revealed that removal
of the peptides from the fragmented IFP altered steady-state levels
of each homologous polypeptide fragment. Removal of IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3
increased accumulation of the N-terminal IFP fragments preceding the
peptide backbone cleavage site and decreased accumulation of the C-terminal
fragments following the cleavage site. We posited that the decreased
expression of C-terminal fragments
upon IAAL-K3 removal arose in part because translation initiation
of this fragment was decreased by changing the context of the RBS
driving expression. This idea was tested by using a thermodynamic
model to calculate the relative translation initiation rates from
the RBS controlling IFP fragment expression. All seven of the C-terminal fragments had lower calculated translation
initiation rates upon removal of the IAAL-K3 peptide (). To test this prediction, we created
vectors that expressed all of the IFP variants with only one fragment
(C-terminal) fused to a peptide (IAAL-K3). Thermodynamic calculations
predicted that all of these vectors would initiate translation of
the IFP fragments to the same extent as that of fragmented IFP fused
to both IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3. We found that fragmented IFP fused to
only one peptide displayed 1–7.5% of the whole cell fluorescence
observed with full-length IFP (Figure A).
This fluorescence emission was similar to or lower than that observed
with homologous IFP lacking both peptides (Figure B). We also found that the excitation and emission spectrum
of each variant was comparable to that of IFP fragments fused to IAAL-E3
and IAAL-K3 (). Western blot analysis
did not reveal a strong correlation between near-infrared emission
and the relative expression of the different N- and C-terminal fragments
(Figure C). However, we found that the C-terminal
fragments fused to the IAAL-K3 peptide accumulated to greater levels
than the same IFP fragments lacking the peptide (), as predicted from our RBS strength analysis. To test whether other interacting proteins could
support the complementation
of IFP fragments identified in the EK library, we created vectors
that expressed each of the fragmented IFP as fusions to  CheA (P2 domain) and CheY. CheA
and CheY were chosen because they associate to form a heterodimer and have been used to assist with fragment complementation
of other proteins. We hypothesized that
CheA and CheY would be able to substitute for IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3
without disrupting the fragmented IFP fluorescence because the distance
between the termini of CheA and CheY (∼30 Å) is similar
to the distance between the IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 termini fused to IFP
fragments. We found that IFP fragments
fused to CheA and CheY displayed between
15 and 71% of the whole cell fluorescence observed with full-length
IFP (Figure A). CheA and CheY enhanced IFP
fragment complementation to varying extents over IFP fragments lacking
fusions to interacting proteins, ranging from 4- to 22-fold (Figure B). The relative effects of CheA and CheY on fragmented
IFP emission were also similar to the effects of IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3.
IFP fragmented after residues 117 and 144 displayed the largest fluorescence
enhancement upon fusion to the associating proteins, whereas IFP fragmented
after residues 129 and 142 consistently exhibited the smallest enhancement.
On average, however, fragmented IFP fused to CheA and CheY displayed
lower whole cell fluorescence than that of the same IFP fragments
fused to IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 (Figure C). These
differences were not interpreted as arising from changes in spectral
properties or fragment expression. Fragmented IFP fused to CheA and
CheY displayed spectra with similar excitation and emission maxima
as that of IFP (), and IFP fragments
accumulated to a similar level when fused to CheA/CheY and IAAL-E3/IAAL-K3
(). Instead, these differences
are thought to arise from the varying strength of the protein–protein
interactions used to assist with IFP fragment complementation. The
fragment complementation correlated with the relative affinities of
the CheA/CheY ( = 200 nM) and IAAL-E3/IAAL-K3
( = 70 nM) complexes. IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 peptide removal diminishes IFP fragment
complementation.
(A) Whole cell fluorescence (λ = 684 nm; λ = 710 nm) of fragmented IFP lacking peptide fusions is shown
as the fraction of signal observed with cells expressing full-length
IFP. Fluorescence was measured at 37 °C and normalized to cell
density. (B) Ratio of fluorescence measured for two-piece IFP peptide
fusions (+EK) to homologous fragmented IFP lacking peptides (−EK).
Removal of the EK coils from each split IFP led to a significant change
in the fluorescence intensity of each variant (two tailed -test;  < 0.01 for all variants except
129, which had a  < 0.02). (C) Western blot detection
of IFP fragments expressed in  without IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 peptides. N-terminal IFP fragments (IFP-F1)
were detected using an antibody against their GST tag, and C-terminal
fragments (IFP-F2) were detected using an antibody against their HA
tag. Error bars represent ±1σ. Removal
of IAAL-E3 decreases IFP fragment complementation. (A)
Fluorescence of  (λ = 684 nm; λ = 710 nm) expressing fragmented
IFP with their C-terminal fragments fused to IAAL-K3 and their N-terminal
fragments lacking a peptide. Fluorescence is reported as the fraction
of the signal observed with full-length IFP. (B) Ratio of fluorescence
measured for fragmented IFP having IAAL-K3 fused at the terminus of
one fragment (+K) to fragmented IFP homologues lacking peptide fusions
(−K). The fluorescence intensity of split variants containing
one K coil was not significantly different from that of variants lacking
both coils, with the exception of variants 142 and 144 (two tailed -test;  < 0.05). (C) Western blot
detection of N-terminal IFP fragments (IFP-F1), which have a GST tag,
and the C-terminal fragments fused to IAAL-K3 (IFP-F2 + K3), which
have an HA tag. Error bars represent ±1σ. CheA
and CheY rescue IFP fragment complementation. (A) Whole cell
fluorescence of  expressing
each pair of IFP fragments as fusions to CheA and CheY. Fluorescence
emission (λ = 684 nm; λ = 710
nm) measured at 37 °C was normalized to cell density and is shown
relative to the signal from cells expressing full-length IFP. (B)
Ratio of fluorescence measured for fragmented IFP having CheA and
CheY fused at their termini (+AY) to that of homologous IFP fragments
lacking CheA and CheY (−AY). The fluorescence intensity obtained
with each split variant +AY was significantly different from that
for homologous variants −AY (two tailed -test;  < 0.005). (C) Ratio of fluorescence for fragmented
IFP having IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 fused at their termini (+EK) to that
for homologous IFP fragments having CheA and CheY fused at their termini
(+AY). Error bars represent ±1σ. Four variants (118, 140,
142, and 144) displayed significantly higher fluorescence +EK compared
with that +AY (two tailed -test;  < 0.05). Combining CheA/CheY Fusion
with IFP Fission We next
sought to determine if combining random IFP fission with fusion to
CheA and CheY would yield distinct fragmented IFP from those discovered
in the EK library or fragmented IFP with a higher fluorescence. We
hypothesized that screening for fragmented IFP from a library created
using an alternative protein–protein interaction might identify
different fragmented IFP because of differences in fragment expression,
stability, and association. To test these ideas, we created a library
where CheA and CheY were fused to the termini of each randomly fragmented
IFP. Like the EK library, screening 1760 clones from this AY library
for variants with near-infrared fluorescence yielded multiple variants
with λ > 700 nm. Sequencing vectors from these
cells identified nine IFP that were fragmented distal from the termini
(>25 residues). Although three of these variants (118-AY, 131-AY,
and 140-AY) were identified when screening the EK library, six of
the variants had distinct fragmentation sites. Mapping the locations
of these sites onto the BphP structure revealed that they cluster near the boundary of the PAS and GAF
domains (Figure A). Two of the backbone fission
sites are after the first β-strand of the PAS domain (108-AY
and 111-AY), one is within the linker that connects the domains (135-AY),
two are within the first helix of the GAF domain (141-AY and 143-AY),
and one is after the first helix of the GAF domain (147-AY). Cells expressing the variants mined out of the
AY library displayed
only a fraction (16–69%) of the fluorescence signal obtained
with cells expressing full-length IFP (). The IFP variants arising from backbone cleavage proximal
to the residues linking the PAS and GAF domains showed the highest
whole cell fluorescence, similar to that observed with fragmented
IFP discovered in the EK library. Analysis of the emission and excitation
spectrum of each variant also revealed maximal excitation and emission
similar to that of IFP (). We posited
that the fluorescence of fragmented IFP discovered in the AY library
would depend on fusion to interacting proteins, like the variants
discovered from the EK library. To test this idea, we built constructs
that expressed each of these fragmented IFP without fusion to any
proteins, and we measured the near-infrared fluorescence of cells
transformed with these vectors. All of these cells expressing fragmented
IFP displayed decreased fluorescence upon removal of CheA and CheY
(Figure B), as observed with variants discovered
in the EK library. The fluorescence of cells expressing IFP fragments
fused to CheA and CheY was 4- to 21-fold higher than that for cells
expressing IFP fragments lacking CheA and CheY fusions. This finding
provides additional evidence that random protein fission can be combined
with rational fusion to discover near-infrared fluorescence protein
fragments that report on protein–protein interactions. To establish if the variants discovered in the AY library were
dependent upon CheA and CheY for maximal fluorescence, we substituted
the IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 peptides for CheA and CheY, respectively,
and analyzed IFP fragment complementation. Substitution of the peptides
for CheA and CheY enhanced fragment complementation over that observed
with fragmented IFP lacking fusion to any peptides or proteins (Figure C). As observed with fragmented IFP discovered in
the EK library, fluorescence complementation was enhanced to the greatest
extent when IFP fragments were fused to the IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 peptides
(Figure D). These findings suggest that the
affinity of the protein–protein interaction used for library
construction contributes to protein-fragment complementation because
the higher affinity interaction (IAAL-E3/IAAL-K3) consistently yielded
stronger complementation with the fragmented IFP. Fluorescent
fragmented IFP discovered in the AK library. (A) Backbone
fragmentation sites (spheres) of fragmented IFP discovered in the
AY library mapped onto the PAS (blue) and GAF (red) domains of BphP using PyMol. (B) Ratio of fluorescence measured
for fragmented IFP having CheA and CheY fused at their termini (+AY)
to that for homologous variants lacking CheA and CheY (−AY).
The fluorescence intensity obtained +AY was significantly different
from that for homologous variants −AY (two tailed -test;  < 0.01 for all variants excluding 143,
which had a  < 0.02). (C) Ratio of fluorescence
measured for fragmented IFP having IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 fused at their
termini (+EK) to that for variants lacking peptides (−EK).
The fluorescence intensity obtained +EK was significantly different
from that −EK (two tailed -test;  < 0.01). (D) Ratio of fluorescence measured for fragmented
IFP having IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 fused at their termini (+EK) to that
for variants fused to CheA and CheY (+AY). Three variants (111, 141,
and 147) displayed significantly higher fluorescence +EK compared
with that +AY (two tailed -test;  < 0.05). Error bars represent ±1σ. Comparison
with Previous Protein Fragmentation Studies The results described
herein show how combining random gene fission
with fusion to ORFs encoding associating proteins can aid the discovery
of protein fragments that cooperatively function (fluorescence) and
display two-input AND gate logic (two-promoter regulation). The EK
and AY libraries yielded fragmented IFP that displayed near-infrared
fluorescence, while fluorescent variants were not discovered in the
library encoding IFP that had been subjected to random fission alone.
The fragmented IFP discovered in the EK and AY libraries provide positional
information on the combined effects of fission and fusion on IFPs
retention of near-infrared fluorescence. All of the IFP backbone fission
sites discovered using laboratory evolution were distal from the BV-binding
site, suggesting that IFP fission and fusion near this chromophore
binding site is disruptive to fragment complementation. The backbone
fragmentation sites described here are also distinct from those evaluated
in previous studies that used rational design to sample a smaller
number of backbone cleavage sites within IFP and iRFP, an IFP homologue that displays
higher affinity for biliverdin. These previous studies each found
that backbone cleavage sites within the interdomain linker can be
used to generate split proteins whose association depends upon fusion
to interacting proteins. Our sites clustered proximal to the best
site (132) identified in the IFP study and within the secondary structures
(α-helixes, β-sheet, and loops) adjacent to this domain
linker. Whether or not any of our split IFP will have any advantages
or disadvantages over the rationally designed IFP/iRFP fragment complementation
assays will require additional experiments that directly compare the
background signal (self-association), reversibility, and fluorescence
signal of each split IFP upon fusion to different interacting proteins. The decreased near-infrared fluorescence consistently observed
when the associating peptides and proteins were removed from the 13
fragmented IFP is interpreted as arising because each of these IFPs
requires assistance from interacting proteins for fragment complementation.
Evidence for this idea comes from the finding that IAAL-E3 removal
diminished fluorescence complementation dramatically (10- to 70-fold)
while only having minor effects on IFP fragment levels. These observations
suggest that these fragmented IFP will be useful for reporting on
protein–protein interactions within animal models, which are
hard to study using fragmented GFP. The longer wavelengths
of light used to excite IFP penetrates tissues to a greater extent
than the wavelengths used to excite GFP family members. The fragmented IFP identified by laboratory
evolution will also be useful for studies examining the spatial and
temporal distribution of promoter activities within different cells
within animals. Such measurements are currently needed to guide proteomic
studies that use two-input AND gates to control metabolic labeling
of newly synthesized proteins and to
perform proteomic measurements with improved temporal and spatial
resolution. IFP fragment complementation
can be used to report on the subset of cells within an organism (bacterial
or eukaryotic) where a given pair of promoters is active, information
that cannot be obtained using pairs of near-infrared fluorescent protein
reporters because their excitation and emission spectra overlap. Among the three libraries screened for
protein fragments displaying
near-infrared fluorescence, only the IAAL-E3/IAAL-K3 and CheA/CheY
libraries yielded fragmented IFP with strong signals. The dependence
on associating peptides (or proteins) for discovery of fragmented
IFP can be contrasted with past fission studies. Using laboratory
evolution, larger numbers of nondisruptive backbone fragmentation
sites have been discovered within  adenylate kinase, methionyl tRNA synthetases, and T7 phage RNA polymerase. We believe that the paucity of fragmented IFP that retained strong
near-infrared fluorescence without assistance from interacting proteins
arose because our IFP screen could only reliably identify fragmented
proteins with near-native function, while previous studies used assays
that could detect a fraction of parental protein activity. In addition,
IFP fragmentation could decrease its affinity for BV, which is required
for fluorescence, and the stability of IFP under the screening conditions.
Support for the latter idea comes from the observation that full-length
IFP displays almost 4-fold lower whole cell fluorescence when expressed
at 37 °C compared with that at 23 °C (data not shown). Future Applications of Random Fission and Rational Fusion Our findings suggest that the best way to apply transposon mutagenesis
to the discovery of other fragmented proteins whose complementation
depends on a protein–protein interaction is to (i) initially
screen for fragmented proteins that retain function upon fusion to
a pair of interacting proteins like IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 and (ii) rescreen
for loss-of-function upon removal of only one of the fused proteins.
Testing the dependence of protein-fragment complementation by removing
only one of the interacting peptides simplifies interpretation of
results by avoiding changes in the translation initiation rates of
the fragments. Future applications of this transposon mutagenesis
approach are expected to simplify the discovery of fragmented protein
devices that couple the function of other fragmented proteins to protein–protein
interactions. In cases where fused proteins
have an interaction that is conditional, e.g., dependent upon ligand or cofactor binding,
fragmented proteins will display three-input AND gate logic. The first
two inputs will be the promoters controlling protein fragment expression,
while a third input will be the post-translational event that promotes
the protein–protein interaction. The protein fission
strategy described here is expected to be useful for synthetic biology
applications that involve DNA minivectors (and minicircles), small
vectors that contain only the DNA sequence of interest, e.g., promoter,
RBS, open reading frame, 3′ UTR, and poly A tail. These small
DNAs are being developed for gene therapy because of their ability
to enter difficult-to-transfect mammalian cells and survive shear
forces often associated with DNA delivery. The beneficial
properties of these small DNAs are inversely correlated with DNA length,
and only a limited number of natural proteins can be encoded by a
single minivector at the sizes (<1000 base pairs) where these small
DNAs display the greatest stabilities. The benefits of minivectors
could be leveraged with larger proteins if those proteins were broken
into smaller fragments that fit into minivectors having sizes <1000
base pairs because pairs or trios of minivectors encoding these fragments
could be delivered to difficult-to-transfect mammalian cells to reconstitute
a functional protein through fragment complementation. Because our
results show that IFP can be fragmented into pieces that associate
through the fusion of small coils, we expect that this method will
be useful for breaking natural proteins into pieces that can be encoded
by minivectors. The transposon mutagenesis approach used to
randomly fragment IFP
and fuse it to interacting proteins differs from a combinatorial protein
engineering method previously described for this type of mutagenesis,
which uses incremental truncation for random fission and blunt ligations
for rational fusion. In contrast to transposon
mutagenesis, incremental truncation requires
the creation of two vector libraries: one that encodes the different
N-terminal protein fragments and a second that encodes the C-terminal
protein fragments. Genes encoding a pair
of interacting proteins are then subcloned into each of these libraries
using blunt ligation, and the two vector ensembles are cotransformed
into cells and screened or selected for pairs of complementing fragments.
We expect that transposon mutagenesis will be easier for many synthetic
biology laboratories to implement because transposon-mediated fission
does not require time-dependent sampling like incremental truncation. In addition, gene fragments created using transposon
mutagenesis can be fused to genes encoding associating proteins by
simply creating an insert encoding a pair of interacting proteins
() and cloning that insert into
the NotI restriction site created by transposon insertion (). The sequence diversity created by
transposon mutagenesis [= protein length – 1] is also more
constrained than that created by incremental truncation [= (protein
length – 1)×(protein length – 1)]. This occurs
because transposon mutagenesis cleaves a gene into two fragments within
the context of a single vector by inserting a unique NotI restriction
site at different locations. In contrast, incremental truncation generates
two vector libraries encoding the different types of proteins fragments
and screens all possible N-terminal fragments with all possible C-terminal
fragments by crossing the two libraries. Whether or not the more limited diversity created by transposon
mutagenesis is more or less advantageous than that created by incremental
truncation will require further experiments. The major advantage of
creating limited diversity is that additional targeted diversity can
be included in combinatorial libraries, e.g., within the linker region,
and more thoroughly sampled using screens whose throughput is limited. A library of
randomly fragmented  genes was constructed as
illustrated in  using pGEX2TK-IFP1.4,
a pGEX-2TK-derived
vector that expresses IFP1.4 from a  promoter with glutathione S-transferase (GST) fused
to its N-terminus and a hemagglutinin (HA) tag fused to its C-terminus.
A transposon containing NotI restriction sites proximal to both ends
was inserted into pGEX2TK-IFP1.4 by incubating 310 ng of pGEX2TK-IFP1.4,
100 ng of M1-Kan transposon (Thermo Scienctific), and
1 U of HyperMu MuA transposase (Epicenter Biotechnologies) in a 20
μL reaction containing HyperMu buffer for 14 h at 37 °C.
Reactions were terminated by adding HyperMu Stop Solution (1 μL)
and incubating each reaction at 70 °C for 10 min. Total DNA was
purified, electroporated into , spread onto multiple Luria Broth (LB)-agar plates containing 25
μg/mL kanamycin, and grown at 37 °C overnight. Total plasmid
DNA was purified from colonies obtained on plates to obtain the Mu-insertion
library. The ensemble of purified vectors was digested using restriction
enzymes (BamHI and EcoRI) that cut at sites flanking the IFP gene.
Then, agarose electrophoresis was used to purify the -transposon hybrids (2.1 kb) away from the other DNA fragments (1
kb  alone, 5 kb vector backbone, and 6.1 and 7.2
kb vector backbones containing one or two 1.1 kb transposons). The -transposon hybrids were cloned back into pGEX2TK to
create a size-selected library (pGEX2TK-IFP-SS). DNA inserts shown
in  (, , and )
were subcloned in place of the transposon within pGEX-IFP-SS to create
three different libraries of vectors that express randomly fragmented
IFP, including (i) the split IFP library that expresses fragmented
IFP without fusion to other proteins, (ii) the EK library, which expresses
the N- and C-terminal IFP fragments as fusions to the IAAL-E3 and
IAAL-K3 peptides, and (iii) the AY library, which expresses the N-
and C-terminal IFP fragments as fusions to  CheA (P2 domain; residues 175–264) and CheY. All steps involving
bacterial transformations used MegaX DH10B competent cells (Life Technologies)
and yielded lawns of colonies (>50 000 per transformation)
whose numbers were always >10-fold larger than the number of variants
in each library. Each library contained similar sequence diversity
(1924 variants), which is determined by the product of the number
of sites in the IFP gene (962) where NotI is inserted by the transposase
MuA and the number of orientations (2) that each synthetic DNA (, , and ) can be integrated the NotI sites introduced into
the IFP gene by MuA. Rosetta
2 DE3 (Novagen) or BL21 Star DE3 (Life Technologies) transformed with
each library were spread onto LB-agar plates containing 100 μg/mL
ampicillin and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Single colonies
from these plates were arrayed into 96-well deep well plates containing
200 μL of LB and 100 μg/mL ampicillin and grown for 18
h at 37 °C while shaking at 250 rpm. Stationary phase cultures
were diluted 4× by adding LB containing 100 μg/mL ampicillin.
After growing for 1 h at 37 °C, isopropyl β--1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG) and BV (Frontier Scientific) were added to final concentrations
of 0.5 mM and 80 μM, respectively. Deep well plates were incubated
at 23 °C while shaking at 250 rpm for 18 h in the dark. A fraction
(150 μL) of each culture was transferred to clear polystyrene
96-well flat bottom plates (Corning), cells were pelleted by centrifuging
plates at 3000 for 5 min, supernatant containing
excess BV was removed, and whole cell fluorescence (λ = 684 nm; λ = 695–720 nm) was measured
using a Tecan M1000 plate reader. IFP variants with fluorescence (703
to 714 nm) that was >3σ higher than the signal obtained from
cells lacking the IFP gene were sequenced and given names that correspond
to the IFP residue at the end of the first fragment followed by letters
that describe the proteins fused to the termini created by fragmentation,
where EK designates IAAL-E3 and IAAL-K3 and AY designates CheA and
CheY. Vectors encoding fragmented IFP
were transformed into  BL21
Star DE3, and individual colonies were used to inoculate LB cultures
containing 100 μg/mL ampicillin. After 16 h at 37 °C and
250 rpm, cells (1 mL) were harvested by centrifugation and used to
inoculate a fresh 5 mL LB culture containing 0.5 mM IPTG, 80 μM
BV, and 100 μg/mL ampicillin. Cells were grown for 5 h at the
indicated temperatures and 250 rpm in the dark, washed with 25% glycerol
(1 mL), and resuspended in 25% glycerol (1 mL). Whole cell absorbance
(600 nm) and fluorescence (λ = 684 nm, λ = 695–800 nm) were acquired from samples arrayed
in flat bottom 96-well plates using a Tecan M1000 plate reader. Emission
data was normalized to absorbance in each well, and data reported
represent the average of three or more colonies for each sample with
four replicates measured for each within 96-well plates. The vector
that expresses full-length IFP (pGEX2TK-IFP1.4) and the same vector
lacking the IFP gene were used as frames of reference for fragmented
IFP signals. The BV dependence of whole cell fluorescence was measured
using an identical protocol except that the concentration of BV was
varied. To create pairs of vectors for
analyzing regulated expression of each fragmented IFP, N-terminal
IFP fragments were cloned into pQE80Δcm, a plasmid
with an IPTG-inducible T5 promoter, and C-terminal IFP fragments were
cloned in place of T7 RNA polymerase in the plasmid pTara, which has an arabinose-inducible P promoter. pQE80Δcm was created by deleting the
chloramphenicol resistance gene from pQE80 (Qiagen). All other expression
vectors were generated by subcloning different NotI-flanked DNA inserts
in place of the NotI-flanked inserts used to build vectors in each
library. expressing the different fragmented IFP were grown as described
for fluorescent analysis, harvested by centrifugation, and resuspended
to identical optical densities. Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was carried out under reducing conditions
using NuPAGE 12% Bis-Tris Gels (Life Technologies) and MOPS SDS running
buffer and transferred to Protran nitrocellulose membrane (Whatman)
using a TE 22 mini Tank Transfer Unit (GE Healthcare). After washing
the nitrocellulose paper in TBST buffer (100 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150
mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20) for 5 min and blocking for 1 h with 10% dry
milk in TBST, the membranes were incubated for 1 h with either GST
rabbit (Millipore) or hemagglutinin Ab-1 (NeoMarkers) polyclonal antibodies
at dilutions of 1:10000 in TBST. The nitrocellulose was then incubated
for 1 h in TBST with secondary antibody, goat anti-rabbit IgG conjugated
to peroxidase conjugate (Calbiochem), at a dilution of 1:10000. Signals
were detected using the ECL western blotting substrate (GE Healthcare)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol..