There are known knowns; these are things we know we
know. We also know there are known
unknowns; that is to say we know there are some things we do not know. But there are also unknown unknowns -
the ones we don’t know we don’t know. Donald Rumsfeld, Former U.S. Secretary of Defense, 2/12/2002 While the phrasing of this tripartite classification was
not intended to describe the current state of natural products research,
it could have been, as it provides an apt description of the field
today. The organic molecules lumped under the term natural products
elude an easy definition. They are a structurally diverse collection
of molecules produced by organisms in an idiosyncratic fashion, and
their biological activities reflect the diversity of their producers
and structures. Inclusion in or exclusion from the natural product
family reflects the elasticity of classification. Consider three molecules
that are closely related structurally and biosynthetically: tryptophan,
serotonin, and psilocin (Figure a). Tryptophan’s
universal distribution as a proteinogenic amino acid excludes it from
being a natural product. Serotonin’s widespread distribution
and well-understood biological activities result in its classification
as a hormone or neurotransmitter, while psilocin, a hallucinogenic
relative produced by only a few New World mushrooms, is a natural
product. All natural products have one feature in common, biosyntheses
by a genetically encoded pathway, and the possibilities for re-engineering
these pathways connects natural products to synthetic biology. The opening quotation’s classification would differentiate
natural products into the known knowns, such as the antibiotic erythromycin,
for which we know the molecule (and in this case its genetically encoded
biosynthetic pathway); the known unknowns or “cryptic metabolites”,
which have never been isolated and characterized but whose existence
can be inferred from biosynthetic pathways in sequenced genomes; and
the unknown unknowns, or molecules whose existence has not been suspected
through genomic or any other sort of analysis. We do not know
how many natural products exist, but the  lists 170,000 known structures, which effectively
represents today’s universe of known knowns. The biosynthetic
pathways for most of these have not been definitively described, but
progress on this front is extremely rapid, especially for molecules
with significant biological activity produced by bacteria and fungi.
The biosynthetic pathway encoding the genes that synthesize erythromycin’s
core, a molecule called erythronolide, condenses seven three-carbon
fragments with additional possible transformations following each
condensation, and because of the modular and repetitive nature of
the biosynthetic chemistry, the gene cluster is also large (∼50
kb) and highly repetitive (Figure b). Biosynthetic gene clusters like the one making erythromycin are
relatively easy to identify in sequenced genomes, and their identification
has been automated with programs like antiSMASH. The genes for many biosynthetic pathways can be manipulated
relatively easily to create what have been called unnatural natural
products. The erythromycin pathway is arguably the
world’s best studied and most manipulated natural product biosynthetic
pathway, and the  describes
34 biosynthetic relatives, some naturally occurring and some laboratory
generated. (a) Three molecules
with similar structures and largely shared biosynthetic pathways,
only one of which is a natural product. (b) Erythronolide A, the core
of the antibiotic erythromycin, which is made by repetitive condensation
of three carbon units as illustrated by the blue and red color scheme.
(c) Artemisinin, the potent antimalarial drug, can be chemically synthesized
from artemisinic acid, which can be made on a ton scale from a re-engineered
biosynthetic pathway. (d) Coelichelin, a cryptic metabolite from , that was identified bioinformatically and
discovered with differential metabolomics. (e) Tropodithietic acid
and roseobacticide A, a structurally unusual antibiotic and an algaecide,
produced by . One important way synthetic biology connects
with natural products of the known known variety is increasing the
production of high-value materials with re-engineered pathways. The
production of artemisinic acid, a key intermediate in the production
of the important antimalarial drug artemisinin, represents a milestone
achievement in this area (Figure c). For the
past few thousand years artemisinin, an ingredient in traditional
Chinese medicine, was obtained from the sweet wormwood plant (), and today China, Vietnam, and East Africa
are the major producers. The vagaries of agricultural production coupled
with the sensitivity of malaria therapeutics to cost of goods considerations
led Jay Keasling and co-workers to apply synthetic biology principles
to artemisinin production. The biosynthetic pathway
leading to artemisinic acid, which can be converted to artemisinin
in a straightforward if technically challenging synthetic step, was
re-engineered in both a bacterial () and a yeast () host. Significantly,
the approach differed from traditional heterologous expression by
using hosts belonging to different taxonomic kingdoms from the original
plant producer, and all of the biosynthetic steps in the pathway were
recreated using genes from a variety of organisms. The resulting pathway
differed from the known pathway in significant features. For example,
the  pathway did not use the bacteria’s
native deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate (DXP) mevalonate biosynthetic pathway
but instead used the mevalonate pathway from yeast, and the enzymes
were linked into a polyprotein rather than left as free-standing entities.
The authors reported their initial success in 2006, and after a prolonged
development period, Sanofi-Aventis just announced that it had produced
39 metric  of artemisinic acid. , the erythromycin producer, provides a convenient example of the
known unknowns or cryptic metabolites category of natural products.
The complete genome of  became available
in 2007 and contained some 17 other pathways that were likely to produce
small molecules. These pathways were easily
identified because of their size and repetitive nature. The ratio
of known to cryptic metabolites from  has been mirrored in virtually all other bacterial genomes, and
cryptic metabolites represent both a significant opportunity and a
vexing challenge for natural products research. The opportunity for
finding molecules with the potential utility of erythromycin in easily
cultivated producers is tantalizing, but developing a broadly applicable
approach to producing and identifying them has been quite difficult.
Greg Challis and his co-workers pioneered one of the most successful
and widely used approaches in their studies of , the first fully sequenced member of the bacterial
group that has produced the majority of useful therapeutic agents.
The researchers first identified a cluster for a cryptic metabolite,
named it coelichelin, and proposed a structure that could guide the
search. They then genetically disabled
the candidate pathway and compared the suites of small molecules,
the metabolomes, of wild type and mutant to identify a molecule present
in wild type but absent in the mutant (Figure d). While this  approach of generating targeted mutants and comparing metabolomes
has been successful in many other projects, a universally applicable,
high-throughput approach would greatly increase discovery rates. One
tempting strategy, moving the pathways for cryptic metabolites to
alternative hosts, has not been widely successful. Synthetic biology
might provide a more fruitful approach by ‘refactoring’
the biosynthetic pathways of cryptic metabolites. In refactoring,
which represents an even more thorough bottom-up re-engineering than
the initial artemisinin pathways developed by the Keasling team, all
noncoding DNA, regulatory proteins, and nonessential genes are deleted
from the pathway. The remaining genes
are recoded to generate a DNA sequence that diverges as much as possible
from that of the native pathway. These new genes are organized into
operons and placed under the control of synthetic promoters, terminators,
and ribosome binding sites to create a pathway with completely defined
genetic parts that shares minimal DNA sequence similarity to the native
pathway. Refactored pathways have been created for known knowns, which
represent an important proof of principle, but success with known
unknowns has not yet been reported. With known knowns like artemisinin, synthetic biology supports natural
products by improving supply; with known unknowns like cryptic metabolites,
synthetic biology will likely support natural products by enabling
discovery; and with unknown unknowns, natural products can inform
synthetic biology. The discovery of unexpected natural products from
new sources with new phenotypic screens will provide new tools for
synthetic biology. As a modest example, consider tropodithietic acid
and roseobacticide A, metabolites from marine proteobacteria that
play key roles in a variable symbiosis between a marine microalga
() and the bacterial producer () (Figure e). Tropodithietic acid functions as an antibiotic
for the symbiotic pair during the mutualist phase of the association,
and roseobacticide A functions as an algal toxin during the antagonistic
phase of the association. Both represent strikingly different chemotypes
with largely unknown gene clusters and completely unknown biosynthetic
pathways. However, when their biosynthetic pathways are known, they
will provide powerful search tools for additional examples of these
interesting if unfamiliar structures along with new tools, their biosynthetic
enzymes, for the synthetic biology toolbox. In the ways briefly
outlined in this essay, one of the most venerable fields of chemistry,
natural products, and one of the most exciting new fields, synthetic
biology, can intersect to the mutual benefit of both..