In 1997 during
the ninth International
Conference on Bacilli, the complete genome sequence of the widely
appreciated bacterial cell factory  168 was announced. This represented
one of the early milestones in bacterial genomics, and it was the
starting point for many subsequent systems and synthetic biological
studies. These included a first systematic analysis of essential gene
functions and the genome-wide elucidation of gene regulatory and metabolic
networks. Importantly, the genome sequence of a bacterium
that is naturally competent for DNA uptake opened up unprecedented
possibilities for synthetic biology. Accordingly, several subsequent
studies explored to what extent the genome of  can be engineered, for instance, by the removal of prophages, AT-rich
islands, and otherwise dispensable genes. From a biotechnological perspective, engineering the  genome is very attractive, as it allows the elimination of unwanted
features like the production of surfactants and the redirection of
cellular metabolism toward the production of proteins and vitamins,
which are major  products. Nonetheless, most  genome engineering
studies to date were more focused on understanding the complexity
of a living cell from a fundamental point of view than on industrial
applications of genome-reduced bacteria. In fact, the possibility of redesigning  as a cell factory was so far only explored for the production of
industrial enzymes and nucleosides such as guanosine and thymidine
from bacilli. As shown by Ogasawara and
colleagues, reducing the  genome
by 20.7% (strain MGB874) allowed improved production of the secreted
alkaline cellulase Egl237 by about 2-fold. Yet, another  strain (MG1M) with
a 23.3% reduced genome secreted an alkaline cellulase and a subtilisin-like
alkaline protease to comparable levels as the parental 168 strain. While these findings were encouraging, they
did not yet represent radical improvements in terms of the overall
productivity of . In a recent
study, Reuβ  presented
the smallest engineered  genomes
known to date. Starting from the previously
constructed  Δ6 strain, which
lacks 332 prophage- and AT-rich island-encoded genes (, 7.7% of the wild-type genome), the total number of genes was reduced
to 2700 in strain PG10 and 2648 in strain PS38. This represented a
genome reduction of ∼36% compared to the wild-type genome,
which includes 4253 genes. Importantly, compared to other genome-engineered  strains, the PG10 and PS38 strains lacked
the genes for eight major secreted  proteases,
which were previously identified as major bottlenecks for heterologous
protein production. In addition, Reuβ  overcame the loss
of genetic competence that was previously observed upon genome reduction
by introducing a cassette for enhanced expression of the competence
transcription factor ComK. While the “mini” strains PG10 and PS38 were characterized in much detail
with respect to overall physiological features, their application
potential had not been addressed. Thus, we asked the question whether
these genome-reduced strains might be advantageous for the production
of “difficult proteins” that are highly susceptible
to proteases and poorly secreted by the  strains generally used in the laboratory or industry, including
the prototype strain 168. In this respect, it is noteworthy that secretory
protein production systems are preferable over cellular production
systems, as the downstream processing of secreted proteins is generally
easier and more cost-effective. Here we show that the genome-reduced  PG10 strain allows the production of secreted
heterologous proteins that cannot be obtained with the 168 strain.
Briefly, the beneficial changes in the PG10 strain relate both to
reduced proteolysis and enhanced translation. This represents an important
step forward in the secretory production of difficult proteins. Susceptibility of Model Staphylococcal Proteins
to Particular
Secreted Proteases To test the application potential of mini strains for production of difficult proteins, we
selected four heterologous secreted reporter proteins that we (i)
could not produce in  168 or the
previously developed protease mutant  WB800, (ii) could produce and purify from another expression host,
in this case , and (iii) could
detect either with a specific antibody or a tag. These are four
secreted proteins of , namely, the
chemotaxis inhibitory protein (CHIPS), the staphylococcal complement
inhibitor (SCIN), the immunodominant staphylococcal antigen A (IsaA),
and the  nuclease (Nuc). In the present
study, these proteins served primarily as read out for improved secretion,
but they also have potential applications in antistaphylococcal immunotherapies
or as diagnostic markers. In addition, we focused our study
on the PG10 strain because it still contains the  gene that can serve as a facile chromosomal expression platform. As a first approach to determine the overall
feasibility of producing CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA and Nuc in , we produced these proteins in  as
previously described, and then tested their stability in spent culture
media of different  mutant strains.
In addition to  168, these strains
included mutants lacking combinations of the , , , , , , , , and  protease genes
as well as the genome-engineered Δ6 and PG10 strains. As shown
in , within
2 h of incubation, the four  reporter
proteins were degraded in spent media of , with the exception of media from strains that lack the  gene for the “wall protease A” (including
the mini PG10). Of note, all four reporter
proteins remained stable for up to 24 h in spent growth media, as
long as the respective cultured cells were WprA-deficient (not shown).
WprA was thus far considered to be active at the membrane-cell wall
interface of , and the present findings
show for the first time that the secreted fraction of this enzyme
has strong proteolytic activity as well (). Taken together, these observations show
that degradation by extracellular proteases can be a major limiting
factor in the production of CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA, and Nuc in Stability of staphylococcal proteins to particular
secreted proteases.
Culture supernatants from  overexpressing
the staphylococcal proteins IsaA, CHIPS, Nuc, or SCIN were mixed with
spent culture media from  168, the
protease mutants BRB02 to BRB14 or the genome-engineered strains Δ6
or PG10. Names of strains that lack the  gene
are indicated in bold. Proteins were TCA-precipitated after 2 h of
incubation at 37 °C, and their degradation was assessed by Western
blotting. Immunodetection was performed with anti-his6 antibodies
to detect CHIPS and Nuc, the human monoclonal antibody 6D4 against
SCIN, or the human monoclonal antibody 1D9 against IsaA. Secretion of Staphylococcal Proteins by  PG10 To express the staphylococcal
reporter proteins CHIPS,
SCIN, IsaA, and Nuc in  we used the
“subtilin-regulated expression system” (SURE). This inducible high-level expression system
is based on sensing of the bacteriocin subtilin by the SpaRK two-component
regulatory system which subsequently drives the transcription of the
P promoter. Therefore, the  genes were inserted into the  gene of both
the 168 and PG10 strains. To direct secretion of the staphylococcal
reporters into the growth medium, we initially selected the N-terminal
signal peptide of the α-amylase AmyQ (SP) of . While
this signal peptide directed some secretion of SCIN in the 168 strain,
it did not facilitate any secretion of CHIPS, IsaA, or Nuc. Yet, the
CHIPS and IsaA proteins fused to this signal peptide were detectable
in the cell fraction and the same applied to SCIN (A and data not shown). In fact,
168 cells producing the SP-SCIN fusion accumulated
this precursor in substantial amounts (A). Since ineffective protein secretion may
relate to the choice of signal peptide, the CHIPS, IsaA, and Nuc proteins
were also fused to the signal peptide of the xylanase XynA (SP) of , which did allow some secretion of CHIPS and IsaA in the
168 strain (A). However, in this case also the CHIPS and IsaA proteins accumulated
in the cells, mostly in a precursor form (A). Of note, no secretion of Nuc was detectable
when fused to SP (not shown). To pinpoint potential
bottlenecks in the secretion of SCIN and IsaA by the 168 strain, the
respective cells were fractionated, and the localization of these
two staphylococcal proteins was assessed by Western blotting, using
the native cytoplasmic protein TrxA and the membrane-associated lipoprotein
EfeM as controls (B). This showed that SCIN and IsaA accumulated in the membrane
fraction, while these proteins were not detectable in the cytoplasmic
fraction (B)
or in the cell wall (not shown). The accumulation of SCIN and IsaA
in the membrane fraction is indicative of aberrant translocation by
the Sec secretion machinery and ineffective processing of the signal
peptide by signal peptidase. Further, the absence of these proteins
from the cell wall and growth medium suggests that SCIN and IsaA either
do not reach these destinations due to defective membrane translocation
or that they are subject to degradation by proteases like WprA as
soon as they appear at the membrane-cell wall interface. Next, we investigated
the secretion of CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA and Nuc
in the genome-reduced strain PG10. To this end, secretion of SCIN
was directed by SP, whereas secretion of CHIPS, IsaA
and Nuc was driven by SP. As shown in C, effective secretion of all
four staphylococcal proteins by the PG10 strain could be demonstrated,
albeit that the cells did accumulate some precursor forms of CHIPS,
SCIN and IsaA. Of note, all the Nuc produced by strain PG10 was secreted.
On this basis, we conclude that the PG10 strain displays improved
secretion and substantially reduced extracytoplasmic degradation of
CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA and Nuc. The lowered degradation of the four staphylococcal
proteins is in line with the absence of eight secreted  proteases from the PG10 strain, and the absence of CHIPS, SCIN,
IsaA and Nuc degradation in spent medium of this strain as shown in . Having demonstrated
production and secretion of staphylococcal proteins by PG10, we next
examined the amount of IsaA protein secreted into the growth medium
because, of all four staphylococcal proteins, IsaA was produced at
the highest level. As shown by LDS-PAGE and a standard curve with
bovine serum albumin, IsaA was secreted to a concentration of about
7 mg/L after 2 h of induction (data not shown). While this is a relatively
low yield compared to the gram/liter yields of industrial enzymes
obtained in industrial fermentations, it is still a considerable yield
compared to the close-to-zero yield observed for the 168 strain. Nonetheless,
this raised the question whether genome engineering had somehow affected
the full potential of the PG10 strain for protein secretion compared
to the parental 168 strain. This possibility was tested by expressing
the α-amylase AmyQ in the PG10 strain. The level of AmyQ secretion
by PG10 was about 2-fold lower compared to the 168 strain (). This may relate
in part to the degradation by an as yet unidentified protease as evidenced
by the presence of AmyQ degradation products in the growth medium
of strain PG10. Induced overproduction
of staphylococcal proteins in  168
and PG10. The  genes were introduced in
the  locus of  168 and PG10 to allow subtilin-inducible expression of reporter
proteins with the aid of the  promoter on plasmids
pRAG3:: (SP), pRAG1:: (SP), pRAG3:: (SP) and pRAG3:: (SP). Protein expression
was induced with subtilin and culture samples were collected 2 h post
induction. (a) The cellular (cells) and extracellular (medium) levels
of the expressed staphylococcal proteins were assessed by Western
blotting with an anti-his6 antibody to detect CHIPS, the monoclonal
antibody 6D4 against SCIN, or the monoclonal antibody 1D9 against
IsaA. (b) The subcellular localization of SCIN produced in  168 was assessed by fractionation. As a
negative control, noninduced cells were used. TrxA and EfeM were used
as markers for cytoplasmic and membrane-bound proteins, respectively.
(c) CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA, and Nuc were produced and secreted by the mini strain PG10. Precursor forms of CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA
and Nuc, and full-size TrxA and EfeM are marked with filled arrow
heads; mature forms of CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA, and Nuc are marked with
open arrow heads. Overproduction of AmyQ in the mini strain
PG10. To express the  α-amylase
AmyQ,  PG10 was transformed with
plasmid pKTH10. (a) Production of AmyQ by  strains 168 and PG10. Mature AmyQ retained in the cells or secreted
into the growth medium was detected by Western blotting using specific
antibodies. The filled arrowhead indicates the position of mature
AmyQ. Detectable dominant degradation products of AmyQ are marked
with open arrow heads. (b) Amylase activity of AmyQ secreted by  strains 168 and PG10 was visualized by
spotting 20 μL aliquots of the growth medium fraction of the
respective cultures on LB agar plates supplemented with 1% starch.
Zones of starch degradation were detected after overnight incubation
at 37 °C. Enhanced Secretion of IsaA
in  PG10 To assess whether
the addition of subtilin has a detrimental
effect on the PG10 strain, we compared the growth curves of the 168
and PG10 strains carrying pRAG3:: when subtilin
was added during the exponential growth phase (). The  shows that addition of subtilin, as was done in the
experiments presented in , slowed down the growth of both strains, but it certainly
did not impair growth or lead to severe cell lysis. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00342/suppl_file/sb8b00342_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00342/suppl_file/sb8b00342_si_001.pdf To investigate whether the improved
performance of strain PG10
relates to changes in the balance between induced protein secretion
and degradation, we performed a time course experiment where the production
and secretion of IsaA in the PG10 and 168 strains was assayed as a
function of the time of induction with subtilin. Indeed, the amount
of IsaA detectable in the medium at 15 min post induction was higher
in PG10 than in 168, which implies that IsaA translation was more
effective in the PG10 strain. In addition, the time course experiment
highlighted distinctive features of the 168 and PG10 strains in terms
of IsaA secretion. In particular, induction of IsaA production in
the 168 strain led to rapid accumulation of full-size IsaA in the
cells until 5 h post induction (, upper panel), while at later time points (from 24
h onward) IsaA production was strongly reduced. The secreted full-size
IsaA (marked *) was mostly detectable but at very low amounts in the
growth medium of the 168 strain at 15 min post induction after which
it started to disappear; concomitantly, IsaA forms with aberrant mobility
started to appear in the medium. Between 30 min and 4 h post induction
of IsaA production, strain 168 mounted a high secretion stress response
as was evidenced by relatively high levels of the secretion stress-responsive
HtrA and HtrB proteins in the medium (). Since it was previously shown that the secretion
stress response in  is elicited by
malfolded secretory proteins at the membrane-cell wall interface, our present findings for strain 168 are indicative of saturation
of the secretion pathway with IsaA molecules at this subcellular location,
ultimately leading to a block in secretion and production of IsaA.
Compared to 168, the levels of IsaA detectable in the PG10 cells remained
low, and the full-size IsaA form (*) as observed in strain 168 was
not detectable at all in cells of the PG10 strain. Yet, this form
was gradually secreted into the growth medium and clearly accumulated
at late time points post induction (from 24 h). Of note, PG10 did
secrete smaller-sized forms of IsaA at earlier time points, especially
until 5 h post induction (, middle panel). The latter forms may represent incompletely
synthesized IsaA as the full-size mature IsaA was 100% stable when
incubated in spent medium of the PG10 strain (). Of note, the detected smaller-sized forms
of IsaA are possibly not derived from IsaA degradation by HtrA and
HtrB in the cells and growth medium, because the levels of these proteases
were comparable in samples with high or low IsaA degradation levels
(). Moreover, at
those time points where the 168 strain decreased the production of
IsaA (, 24 and 48 h post induction), the HtrA
and HtrB proteins were barely detectable. The appearance of the marker for cell lysis, TrxA, in the
growth
medium of the 168 strain will depend on the combined effects of cell
lysis and extracellular proteolysis by secreted proteases. As evidenced by the TrxA levels, within the
first 5 h post induction, extracellular proteolysis was probably still
low in the 168 strain, whereas some cells started to lyse. At later
stages, extracellular proteolysis led to complete disappearance of
secreted IsaA and, ultimately, also extracellular TrxA became degraded
(, lower panel).
In contrast, extracellular proteolysis was largely suppressed in the
PG10 strain as shown in  and, hence, in this strain the extracellular appearance of
TrxA was probably largely due to cell lysis. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00342/suppl_file/sb8b00342_si_001.pdf To assess a possible
effect on protein production owing to differences
in the copy number of plasmid pRAG3:: in the
168 and PG10 strains, a whole-genome sequencing analysis was performed.
On the basis of the ratios of the average coverage of plasmid and
chromosomal reads, it was inferred that pRAG3:: has relative copy numbers of ∼107 in the PG10 strain and
∼80 in the 168 strain (). This difference is too small to account for the strong
difference in IsaA productivity in the two strains. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00342/suppl_file/sb8b00342_si_001.pdf Since even
in the PG10 strain some IsaA degradation was detectable,
as was the case for AmyQ (), we investigated whether this residual protease activity
could be inhibited by adding protease inhibitors to the media of growing
bacteria. Indeed, this was the case for IsaA produced by the PG10
strain, where IsaA degradation was substantially reduced for the first
5 h postinduction (). On the other hand, the protease inhibitors were incapable
of rescuing IsaA produced by the 168 strain. Still, especially at
24 h postinduction IsaA degradation did increase, while the levels
of HtrA and HtrB remained the same (). In fact, the latter is indicative of effective
protease inhibition as it was previously shown that the secreted forms
of HtrA and HtrB are sensitive for degradation by other secreted proteases
of . This raises the question, which residual proteases
are still released into the growth medium of the PG10 strain. An intriguing
option is that these are cytoplasmic proteases, because the degradation
of IsaA secreted by strain PG10 after 24 h post induction coincided
with increased levels of cell lysis as visualized by increased extracellular
levels of the cytoplasmic protein TrxA (, bottom panel). Of note, in a previous study,
we have shown that autolysis can be increased in protease mutant strains
as the extracellular proteases downregulate the levels of autolysins
like LytD. While reduced extracellular proteolysis
explains part of the improved
extracellular production of staphylococcal antigens by strain PG10,
it explains neither the drastic differences in the observed precursor
levels of CHIPS and IsaA in the cells, nor the accumulation of SCIN
in the membrane (b). Instead, this would suggest that there may also be differences
between the 168 and PG10 strains in the secretion efficiency of these
proteins. Such differences could relate to the total amount of secreted
proteins competing for the same pathway or to the overall rates of
translation. In fact, the idea that the translation rates in strains
168 and PG10 differ would be consistent with the previous observation
that cells of the PG10 strain produce about 25% less ribosomal proteins
than the 168 strain. To test whether
the rates of translation in strains 168 and PG10 differ, we employed
a synthetic module where GFP transcription is coupled to the expression
of the  genes for a drug efflux pump of . In a previous study, we have shown that
the expression of  is regulated  transcriptional attenuation that is modulated by translation of
the BmrB leader peptide. When BmrB translation
is slowed down by ribosome-targeted antibiotics, such as lincomycin,
the expression of  is triggered. Therefore,
we introduced the transcriptional -GFP fusion
into the  locus of strains 168 and PG10, and
assessed the levels of GFP expression during growth in the presence
or absence of lincomycin. Under both conditions, the expression of
GFP in the PG10 strain remained much lower than in the 168 strain
where the presence of lincomycin elicited strong induction of GFP
transcriptional activity (). We also assessed the effects of subinhibitory concentrations
of
lincomycin for the 168 and PG10 strains carrying the GFP fusion. As previously shown for the 168 strain, subinhibitory
concentrations of lincomycin between 0.02 and 0.2 μg/mL still
induced -GFP, but the level of induction decreased
with the reduction of the lincomycin concentration. In line with this previous observation, in the PG10 strain
a very mild -GFP induction was observed in the
presence of the subinhibitory lincomycin concentration of 0.2 μg/mL,
but not for a lincomycin concentration of 0.02 μg/mL (data not
shown). These observations imply that, despite the lower levels
of ribosomal
proteins, the translational efficiency of BmrB is higher in strain
PG10 than in the 168 strain, irrespective of the presence of lincomycin.
Accordingly, it appears that translation is more effective in strain
PG10 than in the 168 strain. It is tempting to speculate that the
apparently enhanced translational activity in the mini PG10 relates to the substantially decreased number of translatable
mRNAs as a consequence of the significant genome reduction in this
strain. Growth of  168 and PG10 carrying
pRAG3:: in the presence or absence of subtilin
induction. Overnight cultures of  168 and PG10 carrying pRAG3:: were diluted
1:50 in 100 μL of fresh LB medium in a 96-well microtiter plate,
and incubated with shaking at 37 °C in a Biotek synergy 2 plate
reader. OD readings were recorded every 10 min. When
the strains reached the midexponential phase, 1% subtilin was added
to the cultures (indicated with arrows) to induce IsaA production. Secretion of IsaA by  168 or PG10.
The production of IsaA by exponentially growing cells of  168 and PG10 containing the  genes in  and carrying plasmid pRAG3:: was
induced with 1% subtilin ( = 0). Subsequently, samples
were withdrawn at the indicated time points, and cells were separated
from the growth medium by centrifugation. After correction for the
respective culture OD, cellular proteins and proteins
secreted into the growth medium were separated by LDS-PAGE and analyzed
by Western blotting with the IsaA-specific monoclonal antibody 1D9.
The levels of the cytoplasmic protein TrxA in growth medium fractions
were assessed by Western blotting with a specific polyclonal antibody
and used as readout for cell lysis. The two IsaA-specific bands marked*
have the same electrophoretic mobility. Secretion of IsaA by  168 or PG10
in the presence of protease inhibitors. Production of IsaA in  168 and PG10 was assessed as described
for , but in
this case, the growth medium was supplemented with the Complete protease
inhibitor without EDTA cocktail from Roche. Production of IsaA was
induced with 1% subtilin ( = 0), and samples were
collected as a function of the time indicated. The cytoplasmic protein
TrxA was used as a marker for cell lysis. The positions of TrxA and
the precursor and mature forms of IsaA are indicated with arrow heads. Translational efficiency in  168
and PG10 based on lincomycin-inducible  expression.
The expression of  gene transcription in  168 and PG10 was measured in real time
using a ::GFP fusion. (a) GFP transcriptional
activity (TAU) in  168 -GFP and PG10 -GFP was assessed in the presence
or absence of lincomycin. (b) GFP transcriptional activity in  PG10 -GFP in the presence
or absence of lincomycin. In conclusion, the present
study provides proof-of-principle that
genome engineering can open a window of unprecedented possibilities
for the production of “difficult proteins” in the bacterial
cell factory . This was exemplified
with the mini strain PG10 producing four
different staphylococcal antigens that cannot be produced with currently
applied  strains. Of note, the 168
and PG10 strains are far from isogenic due to the deletion of 36%
of the genome in strain PG10. This makes it challenging to pinpoint
the particular mutations and their relative contributions that resulted
in improved protein production by the PG10 strain. Nonetheless, the
present study underlines the benefits of genomic streamlining as an
approach to potentiate and increase the valuable properties of  strains for protein production. Clearly, to reach
the full potential of such mini strains they
need to be further optimized, especially with respect to potential
product degradation, reduced cell lysis and ease of use in large-scale
fermentation. We are confident that this will deliver new-generation
production strains for a wide spectrum of proteins including not only
enzymes but also many dearly needed biopharmaceuticals. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00342/suppl_file/sb8b00342_si_001.pdf Bacterial strains and plasmids
used in this study are listed in .  was grown in M17 medium (Oxoid Limited)
containing 0.5% glucose (GM17) at 30 °C without shaking. Medium
was supplemented with 5 μg mL chloramphenicol,
or 5 μg mL erythromycin as appropriate.  was grown in LB medium (Becton Dickinson)
at 37 °C with shaking. Where needed, medium was supplemented
with 2 μg mL erythromycin, or 20 μg
mL kanamycin.  N315
was grown at 37 °C as standing culture in tryptone soy broth
(Oxoid Limited). To assess
the stability of
CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA and Nuc, aliquots of  cultures producing these staphylococcal proteins were added to spent
growth media of different  strains.
To produce the staphylococcal proteins, overnight cultures of  carrying pNG4210::, pNG4210::, pNG4210:: or pNG400:: were diluted 1:20 in GM17 medium with chloramphenicol. Upon reaching
an optical density of 600 nm (OD) of ∼0.5, the
production of CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA or Nuc was induced with nisin by addition
of the culture supernatant from an overnight culture of the nisin-producing  strain NZ9700 at a 1:1000 dilution. After
16 h induction, the cultures were centrifuged and growth medium fractions
were harvested. 500 μL growth medium aliquots containing either
CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA, or Nuc were mixed with 500 μL spent growth
medium of different protease-deficient  strains. The latter spent media were obtained by growing  strains overnight in LB medium, dilution
of the overnight cultures into fresh LB medium, and continued growth
until 2 h after entry into the stationary phase. At this point in
growth, cells were separated from the growth medium by centrifugation
and the supernatant fractions were collected and applied to assess
the stability of CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA, or Nuc by incubation at 37 °C
for 2 or 24 h. The presence or absence of CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA, or Nuc
was visualized by LDS-PAGE and Western blotting with specific antibodies
against SCIN, IsaA or a hexa-histidine tag. Construction of Expression
Plasmids http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00342/suppl_file/sb8b00342_si_001.pdf All plasmids in
this study were constructed using conventional cloning techniques.
The oligonucleotides listed in  were obtained from Eurogentec. Phusion-HF DNA polymerase,
restriction endonucleases, and T4 DNA ligase were obtained from New
England Biolabs.  MG1363 was transformed
by electrotransformation and used as an intermediate cloning host
for plasmid amplification and verification. Constructions were verified
by Sanger sequencing (Eurofins Genomics) prior to introduction into  through transformation of competent cells.
The  genes, integrated in the  gene of  168 (also referred to
as pNZ8900), were transferred to strain PG10 by transformation of
competent cells. To this end, the competence of strain PG10 was induced
with mannitol at a final concentration of 0.25%. Subsequently, the
PG10 strain carrying  was transformed with plasmids
for the expression of CHIPS, SCIN, IsaA or Nuc. To create the
plasmid pRAG1 for subtilin-inducible expression of C-terminally his6-tagged
staphylococcal proteins, the sequence for SP was amplified
from pKTH10 with primers SPamyQ_F and SPamyQ_R, thereby introducing
a HI cleavage site 5′ to the SP-coding sequence. A multiple cloning site was copied from plasmid
pNG4210 using primers MCS4210_F and MCS4210_R, thereby adding the
sequence encoding a C-terminal his6-tag as well as a 3′ dIII cleavage site. Both PCR fragments were merged by
overlap extension PCR with primers SPamyQ_F and MCS4210_R. The resulting
PCR fragment was cut with HI and dIII and ligated into the I and dIII sites of the receiving plasmid pNZ8910. The plasmid pRAG1
was used as a backbone for the insertion of staphylococcal
genes. The , , and , genes were amplified using primers pNG42ins_F and
pNG42ins_R. The  gene was amplified from pNG4210::,  was amplified from pNG4210:: and the  gene was amplified from
pNG4210::. The  gene was
amplified from  N315 with primers NucN315_F
and NucN315_R. The amplified PCR products and receiving plasmid pRAG1
were digested with HI and I, and T4-ligated. The resulting plasmids were verified by sequencing
and named pRAG1::, pRAG1::, pRAG1:: and pRAG1::. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00342/suppl_file/sb8b00342_si_001.pdf To construct pRAG3, the sequence encoding SP was
amplified from  168 with the primers
SPxynA_F and SPxynA_R, which introduced flanking 5′ RV and 3′ HI restriction sites.
The pRAG1 based plasmids carrying the , , , or  genes
were used as vector backbones, by amplification with primers woSP_F
and woSP_R, thereby eliminating the sequences encoding SP. The amplified PCR products were digested with HI and RV and T4-ligated, resulting in the fusion
of , , , or  with sequences encoding SP. The plasmids thus obtained were named, pRAG3::, pRAG3::, pRAG3:: and pRAG3::. The Part ID’s of the plasmids constructed in
this study are available from the ACS Synthetic Biology registry as
specified in . Lithium Dodecyl Sulfate-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (LDS-PAGE)
and Western Blotting Protein samples were prepared and separated
by LDS-PAGE as described previously. Before
loading, samples were corrected for OD. For Western
blotting analysis, proteins separated by LDS-PAGE were blotted onto
a nitrocellulose membrane (Protran). Subsequent immunodetection of
bound proteins was performed with anti-his6 antibodies (Life Technologies),
the human monoclonal antibody 6D4 against SCIN, or the human monoclonal antibody 1D9 against IsaA. For visualization of antibody binding, the 6D4
and 1D9 antibodies were directly labeled with IRDye 800CW (LiCor Biosciences),
whereas bound anti-his6 antibodies were visualized with secondary
antibodies labeled with IRDye 800CW. Fluorescence was recorded at
800 nm with an Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LiCor Biosciences). Protein Production, Localization, and Quantification For
production of staphylococcal proteins in  strains, overnight cultures were diluted to a final OD of 0.15 and incubated until midexponential growth when protein expression
was induced with 1:100 supernatant from  ATCC6633, which contains subtilin. Cells were further incubated
for 2 h, and samples were taken for LDS-PAGE and Western blotting.
For the secretion of IsaA by  168
or PG10 in terms of time and protease activity, cells were grown in
medium in the presence or absence of the Complete protease inhibitor
cocktail without EDTA from Roche and samples were taken at different
time points after induction with subtilin. Subcellular localization
of the staphylococcal proteins in  168 was performed by fractionation experiments as described previously. In short, cells from an overnight culture were
harvested by centrifugation, resuspended in protoplast buffer (100
mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2, 20 mM MgCl, 20% sucrose, 1 mg/mL
lysozyme, 0.01% DNase, and Complete protease inhibitors from Roche)
and incubated for 30 min. The resulting protoplasts and liberated
cell wall proteins were then separated by centrifugation. The protoplasts
were resuspended in disruption buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2, 2.5
mM EDTA) and disrupted with glass beads using a Precellys24 bead beater
(Bertin Technologies, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France). Cellular debris
and unbroken protoplast were removed by low-speed centrifugation (10
min, 4000, 4 °C), and the resulting supernatant
fraction was subject to ultracentrifugation (30 min, 200 000, 4 °C). The resulting supernatant fraction with cytosolic
proteins was collected. The pelleted membranes were resuspended in
solubilization butter (20 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 10% glycerol, 50 mM NaCl,
0.03% DDM) and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Subsequently, nonsolubilized
and solubilized membrane proteins were separated by centrifugation
(15 min, 100 000, 4 °C). Lastly, the
resulting supernatant fraction with solubilized membrane proteins
was collected. The cytoplasmic protein TrxA and the lipoprotein EfeM
were used as markers for the cytosolic and membrane fractions, respectively.
Correct localization of EfeM, TrxA, and the staphylococal proteins
was corroborated by Western blotting with rabbit polyclonal antibodies
against TrxA or EfeM. Quantification of staphylococcal proteins
was done with a standard
curve of bovine serum albumin. Protein samples were prepared for LDS-PAGE,
and proteins were stained with SimplyBlue SafeStain (Novex). Proteins
were visualized with an Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LiCor Biosciences),
and the signal in each lane was quantified using the ImageJ gel analyzer. Overnight cultures were diluted 1:50
in 100 μL of LB medium. Then cultures were incubated with shaking
at 37 °C in a Biotek synergy 2 plate reader. When the cultures
reached the midexponential phase, subtilin was added at a final concentration
of 1%. OD readings were recorded every 10 min. Live cell array analyses were
performed as described previously. In short,
overnight cultures were diluted 1:1000 in 100 μL culture supplemented
with 2 μg/mL lincomycin or HO in 96-well flat bottom
microtiter plates (Greiner Bio-One). Then, cultures were grown at
37 °C in a Biotek synergy 2 plate reader, and OD and GFP fluorescence (excitation 485/20 nm, emission 528/20 nm)
readings were taken every 10 min for 24 h. Background fluorescence
was subtracted from control strains not expressing GFP. Finally, arbitrary
transcriptional activity units (TAU) were calculated with the equation:
(GFP – GFP)/OD. In
this equation,  represents a specific time point
and  – 1 the previous time point at which
fluorescence was measured. Plasmid Copy Number Determination Next generation sequencing
was used to determine the copy number of plasmid pRAG3:: in  168 and PG10 as described previously. Total DNA extraction for sequencing was performed
from colonies using the Ultraclean Microbial DNA Isolation Kit (MO
BIO Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA, US) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. DNA concentrations were determined using a Qubit 2.0 fluorometer
and the dsDNA HS and/or BR assay kit (Life technologies, Carlsbad,
CA, US). DNA libraries were prepared using the Nextera XT DNA Library
Preparation Kit (llumina, San Diego, CA, US). Sequence analysis was
performed with an Illumina Miseq System generating paired-end reads
of 300 bp.  assembly of paired-end reads was
performed using CLC Genomics Workbench v11.0.1 (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany).
To approximate plasmid copy numbers, the ratio of the average coverage
of plasmid and genomic reads was calculated for each strain..