Originally
discovered in  as a protecting
mechanism against invasion by foreign genes, RNA interference (RNAi)
has subsequently been found in diverse eukaryotes. The RNAi is a sequence-specific,
post-transcriptional silencing process, which is initiated by ∼21nt
short interfering double-stranded RNAs (siRNA) homologous to the gene
being suppressed and mediated by the RNA-induced silencing complex
(RISC). Since its discovery about 20 years ago, RNAi has
become a powerful tool to study gene functions  and . Furthermore,
the gene-specific targeting feature of RNAi offers unprecedented opportunities
for developing novel therapeutics for human diseases, which is highlighted
by the recent US FDA and European Commission’s approval of
the first RNAi-based drug, ONPATTRO (Patisiran), for the treatment
of the polyneuropathy of hereditary transthyretin-mediated (hATTR)
amyloidosis in adults in August 2018. Such a milestone event in RNAi therapeutics development,
together with the key advances in the design, delivery, and modification
technologies of RNAi drugs, is likely to move more candidate RNAi
drugs to preclinical and clinical pipelines in coming years. Nonetheless, the practical
applications of siRNA-based gene silencing
require effective expression and delivery of siRNAs into target cells
transiently and/or for long-term expression. RNAi is usually achieved by delivering chemically synthesized double-stranded
siRNA into cells, or by expressing short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) or
siRNAs in cells. However, RNAi-mediated gene silencing usually necessitates the use
of multiple siRNA target sites for a gene of interest, a time-consuming
process to construct. We previously developed the pSOS system, in
which the siRNA duplexes are made from an oligo cassette driven by
converging U6 and H1 promoters. While
effective, this system usually requires construction of multiple vectors
to achieve effective knockdown when multiple siRNA sites are desired.
Thus, we later took the advantage of the Gibson DNA assembly technique
and developed a simplified one-step assembly system, the so-called
pSOK system, for engineering a single vector that expresses multiple
siRNA target sites. While we and others
have successfully used the pSOK system and carried out numerous siRNA-based
studies, the Gibson DNA assembly technique is highly empirical and not user-friendly
for researchers with average experience in molecular cloning. Here, we sought to develop a more user-friendly system to accomplish
multiplex siRNA expression in a single vector. Specifically, by taking
the advantage of a unique feature of restriction endonuclease BstXI,
we developed a modular BstXI-based shotgun cloning (BSG) system that
consists of three entry vectors with three siRNA expression units
(SiEUs) flanked with four distinct BstXI sites, allowing shotgun assembly
of multiple SiEUs simultaneously in a retroviral destination vector.
To demonstrate the user-friendliness, technical feasibility, and functionality
of the BSG system, we carried out three series of proof-of-principle
studies by engineering multiplex siRNA vectors that silence mouse
β-catenin, mouse Smad4, or both β-catenin and Smad4, respectively,
and tested their functionalities in mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
iMEFs. We demonstrated that a mix of three siRNA cassettes were effectively
cloned into respective entry vectors through a shotgun approach. Furthermore,
the pooled BstXI-released SiEU fragments could be specifically and
effectively assembled seamlessly in a defined order at distinct BstXI
sites into the retroviral destination vector using the one-step shotgun
approach. We demonstrated that the target genes, mouse β-catenin,
Smad4, or β-catenin and Smad4, were effectively silenced by
the multiplex siRNAs. Furthermore, we found that stable expression
of these multiplex siRNAs in MSCs significantly inhibited the pathway-specific
reporter activities and the Wnt3A or BMP9-induced expression of downstream
target genes. Furthermore, we demonstrated that silencing β-catenin,
Smad4, or both β-catenin and Smad4 significantly diminished
the Wnt3A and/or BMP9-induced osteogenic differentiation of MSCs  and . Collectively, these
results demonstrate that the BSG system provides a highly simplified
and user-friendly method to express multiplex siRNAs in a single vector
for silencing one gene or multiple genes, and thus should be a valuable
tool for gene function studies and the development of experimental
therapeutics. Development of a Versatile
BstXI-Based Shotgun (BSG) Cloning
System for Multiplex siRNA Expression in a Single Vector Restriction endonuclease BstXI recognizes the 12-bp sequence CCANNNNNNTGG,
which contains six undefined base pairs flanked by three defined palindromic
sequences (A,a). By taking advantage of the unique feature of BstXI sites, we
engineered four distinct BstXI sites, namely BstXI-A (CCATGG), BstXI-B (CCATGG), BstXI-C (CCATGG), and BstXI-D (CCATGG), each of which, upon BstXI digestion, yields unique and nonpalindromic
overhangs for specific complementary sequence-based ligation (underlined
and italicized). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00203/suppl_file/sb9b00203_si_001.pdf Supplemental Figure 1A, 1B, and 1C http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00203/suppl_file/sb9b00203_si_001.pdf We first sought to construct a series of entry vectors, which contain
modular siRNA expression units (SiEUs), and are flanked with distinct
BstXI sites (A,b). We have demonstrated that the convergent U6 and H1 promoters
can effectively drive siRNA expression from an oligonucleotide cassette. To ensure high specificity
during shotgun ligations, we engineered unique restriction sites for
each oligo cassette and SiEU (B). As a proof-of-principle study, we designed three
BstXI-based shotgun (BSG) entry vectors, namely pBSG361A, pBSG361B,
and pBSG361C for cloning individual siRNA cassettes (B, and ). The one-step assembly
of BstXI-digested multiple SiEUs can be then carried out through shotgun
ligation at distinct BstXI sites (e.g., BstXI-A through BstXI-D),
generating a retroviral multiplex siRNA expression (destination) vector,
pSEB361-siRNA (ABC) (C,a,b, and ). It is conceivable that more than three SiEUs can be included in
this system, as long as additional distinct BstXI sites are engineered.
However, in this case more entry vector(s) with unique BstXI overhangs
need to be engineered. Furthermore, the cloning efficiency is expected
to decrease when more fragments are ligated into a single vector.
Nonetheless, the BSG system is a highly versatile system to simultaneously
express multiple siRNAs. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00203/suppl_file/sb9b00203_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00203/suppl_file/sb9b00203_si_001.pdf A schematic representation of the BstXI-based shotgun
(BSG) cloning
strategy for the expression of multiplex (three) siRNAs in a single
vector. (A) Schematic depiction of the modular siRNA expression unit
(SiEU) flanked by two distinct BstXI sites (a). A prototypic BxtXI
recognition site is shown (b), where N represents any nucleotide,
and the cleavage sites on both strands are indicated with red arrows.
A siRNA oligonucleotide cassette is first cloned into unique restriction
sites E1 and E2; and its expression is driven by the converging U6
and H1 promoters. (B) The shotgun cloning of individual siRNA oligo
cassettes (SiOCs) at unique restriction sites. The representative
three-siRNAs, that is, siR-A, siR-B, and siR-C, are first simultaneously
cloned into the unique restriction sites of the entry vectors, pBSG361A,
pBSG361B, and pBSG361C (see ). (C) The one-step assembly of multiple siRNA
expression units (SiEUs) through shotgun ligation at distinct BstXI
sites, namely BstXI-A through BstXI-D. The three individual SiEUs
are first released from pBSG361 entry vectors by BstXI digestion (a),
and are simultaneously assembled into a retroviral destination vector,
pSEB361-BSG (see ) at BstXI-A and BstXI-D sites, resulting in the pSEB361-siRNA (ABC)
(b), which expresses three different siRNAs. Shotgun Cloning of Three siRNAs Targeting
Mouse β-Catenin
(simBC) Using the BSG Vector System To demonstrate the technical
feasibility of the BstXI-based shotgun cloning system, we designed
three siRNAs targeting mouse β-catenin (i.e., simBC-A/B/C) as
one of the proof-of-principle experiments (A). It is been well established that β-catenin
is an essential mediator/regulator of the canonical Wnt signaling
pathway. For shotgun ligations, the three pBSG361 entry vectors were digested
with BstXI and mixed together as the vector pool, while the three
annealed simBC oligo cassettes were mixed at equal molar concentration
as the pooled inserts. Conventional ligations were performed (NEB),
and the ligation products were transformed into electro-competent
DH10B cells via electroporation, yielding an average of about 200
colonies per plate (A). Bacterial colonies were PCR screened with siRNA-specific
primers for simBC-A, simBC-B, or simBC-C, which yielded approximately
30–40% positivity for each SiEU (B), indicating that the shotgun cloning of
the simBC cassettes is effective and specific. Next, we sought to carry
out a second round of shotgun cloning
to assemble the three simBC expression modules into the pSEB361-BSG
destination vector. To test ligation efficiency and specificity of
the BstXI-digested simBC SiEUs, we first tested if the three SiEUs
could be effectively assembled and ligated to the pSEB361-BSG vector.
We found that simBC-A/B/C fragments (about 0.5kb each) were effectively
ligated to form an expected ∼1.5kb product (A,a). As expected, simBC-A
and simBC-C failed to form any larger ligation product, indicating
that the distinct BstXI site-mediated ligations are not only effective
but also specific. In an alternative approach, we directly set up
a ligation reaction using a mix of the BstXI-digested pSEB361-BSG
destination vector and the pooled simBC-A/B/C fragments (A,b). Both ligation
approaches yielded approximately similar numbers of colonies upon
bacterial transformation (A,c). Using the simBC site-specific primer pairs for
simBC-A/simBC-B and simBC-B/simBC-C we were able to confirm the presence
of all three simBC SiEUs in the final construct, namely pSEB361-simBC
(Ba,b). Shotgun cloning of three
siRNAs targeting mouse β-catenin
(simBC) into the entry vectors. (A) The pBSG361A/B/C entry vectors
were digested with BstXI, while the oligonucleotides for the three
siRNA target sites of mouse β-catenin were annealed to form
double-stranded oligo cassettes. Shotgun ligation was carried out
by mixing the three entry vectors with the three simBC oligo cassettes
in one ligation reaction. (B) Identification of individual SiEU clones
through PCR colony screening with SiEU-specific primers. The PCR screening
reactions employed the same upstream primer derived from the pBSG361
entry vectors and the reverse primers of individual SiEUs. PCR screening
results from randomly picked 10 clones were shown for each simBC vector.
Positive clones are indicated with red asterisk signs. Positive clones
from PCR screening were further verified at the plasmid DNA level
by PCR and DNA sequencing. The cloning and PCR screening assays were
repeated at least in three different batches of experiments. Representative
results are shown. BstXI-based
shotgun assembly of three simBC expression units into
pSEB361-BSG destination vector. (A) Two approaches for assembling
the three simBC SiEUs. In the first approach, the prepared three simBC
SiEUs were mixed and preligated to yield the simBC-A+B+C fragment
before being cloned into the BstXI-digested pSEB361-BSG (a). Note
that simBC-A and simBC-C failed to form a simBC-A+C fragment due to
incompatible BstXI ends. Alternatively, the prepared three simBC SiEUs
were pooled and ligated into the BstXI-digested pSEB361-BSG (b). Both
approaches yield robust numbers of colonies upon bacterial transformation
(c). (B) PCR confirmation of the presence of three simBC expression
units in the BstXI-based shotgun assembly in pSEB361-simBC. Six potential
pSEB361-simBC clones (in plasmid DNA form) were PCR verified with
two pairs of simBC-specific primers: (a) simBC-A forward and simBC-B
reverse, and (b) simBC-B forward and simBC-C reverse. The selected
six clones were positive for both PCR primer sets. Silencing Mouse β-Catenin by pSEB361-simBC Effectively
Suppresses Wnt3A-Induced Osteogenic Differentiation of Mesenchymal
Stem Cells (MSCs) We next evaluated the effect of multiplex
β-catenin siRNA expression on the biological functions of Wnt/β-catenin
as we and others have demonstrated that canonical Wnt signaling plays
an important role in osteogenic lineage differentiation in MSCs. We first established the iMEF-simBC
and iMEF-siControl stable lines. Western blotting analysis showed
that simBC expression effectively reduced β-catenin expression
and prevented Wnt3A-induced elevation of β-catenin at the protein
level (A,a).
Similar results were obtained from qPCR analysis of β-catenin
expression in the iMEF cells (A,b). Furthermore, silencing β-catenin by simBC
diminished Wnt3A-induced Tcf4/LEF reporter activity (B,a), and inhibited the expression
of Wnt3A-induced Wnt/β-catenin target genes, c-Myc and cyclin
D1 (B,b,c). Silencing β-catenin by simBC significantly
inhibited, both qualitatively and quantitatively, Wnt3A-induced activities
of the osteogenic marker alkaline phosphatase (ALP) in MSCs (C,a,b). Collectively,
these results demonstrate that multiplex β-catenin siRNA expression
with the BSG vector system effectively silences mouse β-catenin
and inhibits its biological functions in MSCs. Silencing mouse β-catenin
by pSEB361-simBC effectively suppresses
Wnt3A-induced osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs). (A) pSEB361-simBC effectively knocks down β-catenin
expression and prevents Wnt3A-induced increase of β-catenin
in MSCs. The pSEB361-simBC was used to package retrovirus for establishing
the stable MSC line iMEF-simBC, while a scrambled pSEB361-siControl
was used to generate the control line iMEF-siControl. Both cell lines
were infected with Ad-GFP or Ad-Wnt3A for 72h. (a) The infected cells
were lysed and the total cell lysate was subjected to Western blotting
analysis with an anti-β-catenin antibody. β-Actin expression
was used as a loading control. (b) The infected cells were also used
for total RNA isolation, followed by TqPCR analysis of β-catenin
expression ( as a reference gene). Double asterisks
(∗∗) indicate  < 0.01, the simBC
group vs the siControl group. (B) Silencing β-catenin suppresses
Tcf4/LEF reporter activity and the expression of β-catenin downstream
target genes c-Myc and cyclin D1. (a) The iMEF-simBC and iMEF-siControl
cells were transfected with pBGluc-Tcf4/LEF reporter and infected
with Ad-Wnt3A or Ad-GFP. At 48 h after transfection, the culture supernatants
were collected for Gaussia luciferase assays. (b,c) Subconfluent iMEF-simBC
and iMEF-siControl cells were infected with Ad-Wnt3A or Ad-GFP for
72 h. Total RNA was isolated from the infected cells and subjected
to TqPCR analysis of c-Myc () and cyclin D1 () expression. Double asterisks (∗∗) indicate  < 0.01, the simBC group vs the siControl group. (C)
Silencing β-catenin expression diminishes Wnt3A-induced osteogenic
differentiation of MSCs. Subconfluent iMEF-simBC and iMEF-siControl
cells were infected with Ad-Wnt3A or Ad-GFP. At days 3, 5, and 7 after
infection, the infected cells were subjected to qualitative histochemical
staining assay (a) and quantitative bioluminescent assay (b) of the
early osteogenic marker ALP. Representative images are shown. Double
asterisks (∗∗) indicate  < 0.01,
the simBC group vs the siControl group. Silencing Mmouse Smad4 (simSmad4) Using the BSG Vector System
Effectively Inhibits BMP9-Induced Osteogenic Differentiation of MSCs We carried out the second proof-of-principle experiment by constructing
a multiplex siRNA targeting mouse Smad4, or simSmad4, using the BSG
vector system. Smad4 is an essential signaling mediator of TGF-β
and BMP signaling pathways. We showed that the simSmad4 effectively
silenced endogenous Smad4 and prevented BMP9-induced Smad4 expression
both at mRNA and protein levels (A,B). Accordingly, BMP9-stimulated 12xSBE-FLuc
BMP-R Smad reporter activity was effectively inhibited in the iMEF-simSmad4
cells, compared with that of the iMEF-siControl cells ( < 0.01) (C). Therefore, these results confirm that multiplex Smad4 siRNA expression
with the BSG vector system effectively silences mouse Smad4 expression
in MSCs. We further examined the
biological consequence of Smad4 knockdown
in MSCs by evaluating the effect of simSmad4 on the well-characterized
BMP9 target genes. We found that
silencing Smad4 by simSmad4 markedly decreased the BMP9-induced expression
of Runx2, Id1, Ctgf, and osteopontin (Opn) (D,a–d). Even though BMP9 is one of
the most potent osteogenic BMPs, simSmad4 significantly inhibited BMP9-induced ALP activity in MSCs
both qualitatively and quantitatively (E,a,b). Thus, the above results demonstrate
that multiplex Smad4 siRNA expression using the BSG vector system
effectively silences mouse Smad4 and inhibits BMP9-induced osteogenic
differentiation of MSCs. Silencing mouse Smad4 (simSmad4) effectively inhibits BMP9-induced
osteogenic differentiation of MSCs. (A) pSEB361-simSmad4 effectively
knocks down Smad4 expression in MSCs. The retroviral vector pSEB361-simSmad4
was used to establish the stable MSC line iMEF-simSmad4 (iMEF-siControl
as a control). Both cell lines were infected with Ad-GFP or Ad-BMP9
for 72 h. Total RNA was isolated and subjected to TqPCR analysis of
Smad4 expression ( as a reference gene). Double
asterisks (∗∗) indicate  < 0.01,
the simSmad4 group vs the siControl group. (B) The iMEF-simSmad4 and
iMEF-siControl cells were infected with Ad-GFP or Ad-BMP9 for 72 h,
and were lysed and subjected to Western blotting analysis with an
anti-Smad4 antibody. β-Actin expression was used as a loading
control. (C) Silencing Smad4 suppresses BMPR-Smad reporter 12xSBE-Luc
activity in MSCs. The iMEF-simBC and iMEF-siControl cells were transfected
with the 12xSBE-Luc reporter and infected with Ad-BMP9 or Ad-GFP.
At 48 h after transfection, the cells were lysed and subjected to
firefly luciferase activity assay. Double asterisks (∗∗)
indicate  < 0.01, the simSmad4 group vs the
siControl group. (D) Silencing Smad4 suppresses BMP9-induced expression
of downstream target genes in MSCs. The cDNA samples prepared in panel
A were further subjected to TqPCR analysis of Runx2 (a), Id1 (b),
Ctgf (c), and Opn (d) expression, while  served
as a reference gene. Double asterisks (∗∗) indicate
 < 0.01, the simBC group vs the siControl group.
(E) Silencing Smad4 expression inhibits BMP9-induced osteogenic differentiation
of MSCs. Subconfluent iMEF-simSmad4 and iMEF-siControl cells were
infected with Ad-BMP9 or Ad-GFP. At days 3, 5, and 7 after infection,
the infected cells were subjected to qualitative histochemical staining
assay (a) and quantitative bioluminescent assay (b) of the early osteogenic
marker ALP. Representative images are shown. Double asterisks (∗∗)
indicate  < 0.01, the simSmad4 group vs the
siControl group. Simultaneous Silencing of β-Catenin
and Smad4 (simBC/Smad4)
Effectively Diminishes Wnt3A and BMP9-Induced Osteogenic Differentiation
of MSCs  and To demonstrate the versatile applications of the BSG multiplex siRNA
expression system, we constructed the pSEB361-simBC/Smad4 vector,
which simultaneously targets both β-catenin and Smad4 (A). TqPCR analysis
showed that both β-catenin and Smad4 were significantly knocked
down in the iMEF-simBC/Smad4 cells, and Wnt3A and BMP9 failed to upregulate
the expression of β-catenin and Smad4, respectively (B,a,b). Accordingly,
Wnt3A failed to effectively activate Tcf4/LEF-GLuc reporter activity,
and BMP9-induced 12xSBE-FLuc activity was significantly inhibited
in the iMEF-simBC/Smad4 cells (C,a,b). Similarly, Wnt3A-upregulated expression of C-Myc and cyclin
D1
was inhibited in the iMEF-simBC/Smad4 cells, while silencing both
β-catenin and Smad4 in MSCs drastically decreased BMP9-induced
expression of Runx2 and Id2 (D,a–d). Furthermore, BMP9-induced osteogenic
marker ALP activity decreased significantly in the iMEF-simBC/Smad4
cells, compared with that of the iMEF-siControl cells (D,a,b). Lastly, we conducted
an  study to evaluate
the effect of silencing β-catenin or Smad4 alone or in combinations
via the BSG multiplex siRNA expression system on BMP9-induced bone
formation from MSCs. When the iMEF stable lines were infected with
Ad-BMP9 or Ad-GFP, and implanted subcutaneously into athymic nude
mice for 5 weeks, we found that silencing either β-catenin,
Smad4, or both β-catenin and Smad4 in MSCs resulted in significantly
diminished bone formation by gross examination, microCT imaging, and
quantitative average bone volume analysis, compared with that of the
control group (e.g., the iMEF-siControl cells) (A,a–c). As expected, a simultaneous
knockdown of both β-catenin and Smad4 led to the greatest decrease
in ectopic bone formation, compared with either silencing β-catenin
or Smad4 alone (A). H&E histologic evaluation further demonstrated that silencing
either β-catenin, Smad4, or both in MSCs resulted in a significant
decrease in the number and thickness of trabecular bone, compared
with that of the siControl group (B,a). Masson’s trichrome staining
further revealed that there was a significant decrease in mature and
fully mineralized bone matrix in the β-catenin, Smad4, or both
knockdown groups, compared with that of the siControl group (B,b). Collectively,
the above  results further substantiate our  findings, and demonstrate that multiplex siRNAs
expressed by the BSG shotgun system are highly effective in targeting
one gene or multiple genes in mammalian cells. Simultaneous silencing of β-catenin and Smad4 (simBC/Smad4)
effectively diminishes Wnt3A and BMP9-induced osteogenic differentiation
of MSCs. (A) Schematic representation of the pSEB361-simBC/Smad4 multiplex
siRNA construct, which contains two modular units of mouse β-catenin
siRNAs (i.e., simBC-A and simBC-C) and one module of mouse Smad4 siRNA
(i.e., simSmad4-B). The siRNA sites are highlighted in red letters.
(B) The simBC/Smad4 construct effectively knocks down the expression
of both β-catenin and Smad4 in MSCs. The stable lines iMEF-simBC/Smad4
and iMEF-siControl were infected with Ad-GFP, Ad-Wnt3A, or Ad-BMP9
for 72 h. Total RNA was isolated and subjected to TqPCR analysis of
β-catenin (a) or Smad4 (b) expression ( as a reference gene). Double asterisks (∗∗) indicate
 < 0.01, the simBC/Smad4 group vs the siControl
group. (C) The simBC/Smad4 construct suppresses both β-catenin/Tcf4
and BMPR-Smad reporter activities in MSCs. Subconfluent iMEF-simBC/Smad4
and iMEF-siControl cells were transfected with Tcf4/LEF-GLuc or 12xSBE-Luc
reporter plasmid, and infected with Ad-GFP, Ad-Wnt3A, or Ad-BMP9 for
48 h. Tcf4/LEF-GLuc reporter assays were done by measuring GLuc activity
in the culture medium (a), while 12xSBE-Luc reporter activities were
determined by lysing the cells for firefly luciferase activity assays
(b). Double asterisks (∗∗) indicate  < 0.01, the simBC/Smad4 group vs the siControl group. (D) The
simBC/Smad4 construct effectively suppresses the target gene expression
of both Wnt/β-catenin and BMPR-Smad signaling pathways in MSCs.
Subconfluent iMEF-simBC/Smad4 and iMEF-siControl cells were infected
with Ad-GFP, Ad-Wnt3A, or Ad-BMP9 for 48 h. Total RNA was isolated
for TqPCR analysis for the expression of c-Myc (a) and cyclin D1 (b),
Runx2 (c), and Id2 (d) by Wnt3A and BMP9, respectively.  was used as a reference gene. Double asterisks (∗∗)
indicate  < 0.01, simBC/Smad4 group vs siControl
group. (E) The simBC/Smad4 construct effectively inhibits BMP9-induced
ALP activity in MSCs. Subconfluent iMEF-simBC/Smad4 and iMEF-siControl
cells were infected with Ad-GFP or Ad-BMP9. At the indicated time
points, the cells were fixed and subjected to the histochemical staining
assay for ALP activity (a). Alternatively, the infected iMEFs were
lysed at the indicated time points, and subjected to quantitative
bioluminescent assay (b). Double asterisks (∗∗) indicate
 < 0.01, simBC/Smad4 group vs siControl group. Silencing β-catenin
and/or Smad4 in MSCs significantly diminishes
BMP9-induced ectopic bone formation . (A)
The effect of silencing of β-catenin and/or Smad4 in MSCs on
BMP9-induced ectopic bone formation . Exponentially
growing iMEF-simBC, iMEF-simSmad4, iMEF-simBC/Smad4, and iMEF-siControl
cells were infected with Ad-BMP9 or Ad-GFP for 36 h, and collected
for subcutaneous injection into the flanks of athymic nude mice ( = 5 per group). At 5 weeks after implantation, animals
were sacrificed, and bony masses at the injection sites were retrieved.
Representative gross images are shown (a). No detectable masses were
retrieved from the GFP group. The retrieved masses were subjected
to microCT imaging, and representative results of the 3-D reconstruction
of scanning are shown (b). The average bone volumes of the retrieved
bony masses were quantitatively analyzed by using the Amira software
(c). Double asterisks (∗∗) indicate  < 0.01, siRNA groups vs siControl group. (B) Histology and trichrome
staining. The retrieved samples were decalcified and subjected to
hematoxylin and eosin staining (a) and Masson’s Trichrome staining
(b). Representative images are shown. The BstXI-Based Modular siRNA Expression System Provides a Flexible
and Versatile Platform for Efficient Multiplex Gene Silencing To overcome the technical challenges in simultaneously expressing
multiple siRNAs in a single vector to accomplish silencing a specific
gene or different genes, here, we developed a modular BstXI-based
shotgun cloning (BSG) system that consists of three siRNA expression
units (SiEUs) flanked with four distinct BstXI sites, allowing shotgun
assembly of multiple SiEUs simultaneously. In fact, the BSG system
employs two stages of shotgun cloning. The first step involved in
shotgun cloning of individual siRNA oligo cassettes into respective
SiEU vectors at unique restriction sites. The second shotgun-cloning
step is to assemble individual SiEUs into the retroviral destination
vector at distinct BstXI sites. To demonstrate the user-friendliness,
technical feasibility, and functionality of the BSG system, we carried
out three sets of proof-of-principle studies by engineering multiplex
siRNA vectors that silence the expression of mouse β-catenin
(simBC), mouse Smad4 (simSmad4), or both β-catenin and Smad4
(simBC/Smad4) in mesenchymal stem cells iMEFs, respectively. Our results
indicate that a mix of individual siRNA cassettes were effectively
cloned into respective pBSG361 vectors through a shotgun approach.
A mix of BstXI-released SiEU fragments can then be specifically and
effectively assembled at distinct BstXI sites with one-step ligation
into the distinct BstXI sites of the destination retroviral vector
pSEB361-BSG. We demonstrated that the target genes, mouse β-catenin,
Smad4, or β-catenin and Smad4, were effectively silenced by
the multiplex siRNAs. Furthermore, we found that stable expression
of these multiplex siRNAs in MSCs significantly inhibited the pathway-specific
reporter activities and the expression of well-established downstream
target genes for Wnt3A and/or BMP9, respectively. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that silencing β-catenin, Smad4, or both β-catenin
and Smad4 significantly diminished the Wnt3A and/or BMP9-induced osteogenic
differentiation of MSCs  and . Collectively, these results demonstrate that the BSG system provides
a rapid, simplistic, and user-friendly method to express multiplex
siRNAs for efficient knockdown of one gene or multiple genes. It is conceivable that the reported BSG system can be easily customized
to accommodate more than three SiEUs if more distinct BstXI sites
are designed, which provides another layer of flexibility and variability
to expand siRNA targeting complexity. Furthermore, the reported BSG
system can be easily configured for lentiviral, adenoviral, and/or
adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector systems. In these cases, viral
vector-specific destination vectors need to be constructed, while
the same entry vectors can be used. Such potential further highlights
the versatility of the BSG system in expressing multiplex siRNAs in
mammalian cells. The development of an effective siRNA delivery
and expression system
is attractive and beneficial to the scientific community. By employing
the Gibson DNA Assembly technology, we previously developed a one-step
system, so-called pSOK system, to simultaneously express multiple
siRNAs that silence one specific gene or different genes in a single
vector. We and others successfully used
this system and carried out numerous siRNA-based studies. However, the Gibson DNA Assembly methodology is rather finicky and
highly empirical. In fact, vectors containing more than two siRNAs
were less effectively assembled under the reported assembly condition.
Therefore, while the pSOK system is working robustly for experienced
molecular biologists, this system is not user-friendly for researchers
with average experience in molecular cloning. In this report, we have
developed a better and more user-friendly system to accomplish multiplex
siRNA expression in mammalian cells. It is conceivable that
the BSG system can be further modified for
expressing multiplex sgRNAs in a single vector for CRISPR/Cas9-based
genome editing studies. Nonetheless, other strategies for single-vector-based
multiplex siRNA and/or sgRNA expression should be explored. Similar
to our pSOK system for siRNA expression, Breunig et al. reported a so-called STAgR (string assembly gRNA
cloning) technique, which is a single step gRNA multiplexing system
by taking the advantage of the N20 targeting sequences as necessary
homologies for Gibson Assembly. More
recently, Zukermann et al. developed an elaborate procedure that allows
the assembly of multiple gRNA expression cassettes into a vector of
choice within a single step, or so-called ASAP (adaptable system for
assembly of multiplexed plasmids)-cloning. This ASAP-cloning system combined the “PCR-on-ligation”
step for flexible generation of individual insert fragments and the
utilization of pairs of isocaudomers for ligation of the generated
inserts into type II restriction endonuclease sites in common expression
vectors. While these systems can be modified
for siRNA expression, such modifications are more technically challenging
as siRNAs require the expression of both strands, which is not the
case of sgRNA expression. In summary, we developed a simplified
and versatile BstXI-based
shotgun (or BSG) cloning system for a rapid generation of multiplex
siRNA expression in a single-vector. We carried out three series of
proof-of-principle studies and engineered multiplex siRNA vectors
to silence the expression of mouse β-catenin, mouse Smad4, or
both β-catenin and Smad4. Experimentally, we demonstrated that
distinct siRNA expression units can be assembled seamlessly in a defined
order into the destination vector using one-step shotgun approach.
Our  studies revealed that the multiplex
siRNA expression mediated by BSG single vectors effectively silenced
β-catenin, Smad4, or both β-catenin and Smad4, and inhibited
the Wnt3A and/or BMP9 signaling activities, as well as blunting BMP9-induced
osteogenic differentiation of MSCs . The BSG
system can be easily customized to accommodate the expression of more
than three siRNAs, offering more flexibility and variability to expand
siRNA targeting complexity. Taken together, our results demonstrate
that the BSG system provides a rapid and user-friendly method to express
multiplex siRNAs in a single vector and thus should be a valuable
tool for gene function studies and the development of therapeutics. HEK-293
cells were obtained
from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). HEK-293
derivative lines 293pTP and 293 RAPA cells were previously characterized. Mouse mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) line iMEFs was previously characterized. All cell lines were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS, Gemini Bio-Products, West Sacramento, CA), containing
100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin, at 37 °C
in 5% CO as described. All restriction endonuclease enzymes were purchased
from New England Biolabs (NEB, Ipswich, MA). Blasticidin S was purchased
from InvivoGen (San Diego, CA). Unless indicated otherwise, other
reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) or Thermo
Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Construction of BstXI-Based
Shotgun (BSG) Multiplex siRNA Expression
System http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00203/suppl_file/sb9b00203_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00203/suppl_file/sb9b00203_si_001.pdf The entry vectors pBSG361A/B/C were first engineered
on the base of pBR322 plasmid so that each vector contains the converging
U6–H1 promoters to drive siRNA expression, as previously described, with unique restriction sites for the subcloning of siRNA oligo
cassettes (SiOCs), whereas the U6–H1-driven siRNA expression
units (SiEUs) were flanked with a pair of distinct BstXI sites, namely
BstXI-A and BstXI-B in pBSG361A, BstXI-B and BstXI-C in pBSG361B,
and BstXI-C and BstXI-D in pBSG361C, respectively (). A retroviral destination
vector, pSEB361-BSG, was also engineered for shotgun cloning of multiple
BstXI-digested SiEUs from the pBSG361 vectors at the BstXI-A and BstXI-D
sites (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00203/suppl_file/sb9b00203_si_001.pdf The
siRNA sites targeting the coding regions of mouse β-catenin
(NM_007614.3) and Smad4 (NM_008540.3) were designed by using the  (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and/or
the  programs (Dharmacon, Lafayette, CO),
as previously described. Three scrambled oligo sequences, which do not target any significant
known human and rodent transcripts, were used as controls, or siControl.
The annealed siRNA oligo cassettes () were used for shotgun cloning into the pBSG361 entry
vectors. The resulting constructs were designated as pBSG361-simBC-A/B/C
(for mouse β-catenin siRNAs) and pBSG361-simSmad4-A/B/C (for
mouse Smad4 siRNAs), as well as pBSG361-simBC/Smad4 for the dual targeting
siRNAs of β-catenin/Smad4, and pBSG361-siControl. To construct
a multiplex siRNA expression retroviral vector, the three corresponding
SiEUs were isolated from pBSG361 vectors by BstXI digestion, and pooled
for shotgun ligation into the BstXI-A/BstXI-D sites of the pSEB361-BSG
retroviral vector. All cloned oligo cassettes were verified by DNA
sequencing. Details about the construction of these vectors and related
vector sequences are available upon request. Establishment of Stable
siRNA Expressing Cell Lines of Mesenchymal
Stem Cells iMEFs The retroviral transfer vectors pSEB361-simBC,
pSEB361-simSmad4, pSEB361-simBC/Smad4, and pSEB361-siControl were
cotransfected with retroviral packaging plasmids into the 293 Phoenix
Ampho (293PA) cells to generate retrovirus supernatants for infecting
subconfluent iMEF cells as previously described. At 36–48 h post-viral-infection,
the cells were subjected to blasticidin S selection (final concentration
at 3 μg/mL) for 5 days. The resultant stable lines were designated
as iMEF-simBC, iMEF-simSmad4, iMEF-simBC/Smad4, and iMEF-siControl,
respectively. Generation and Amplification of Recombinant
Adenoviruses Ad-Wnt3A,
Ad-BMP9, and Ad-GFP Recombinant adenovirus expressing mouse
Wnt3A (i.e., Ad-Wnt3A) or human BMP9 (i.e., Ad-BMP9) was constructed
by using the AdEasy system as described. These adenoviruses were further
amplified in 293pTP or RAPA cells to achieve high titers. Ad-Wnt3A and Ad-BMP9 also coexpress GFP as a marker for monitoring
infection efficiency. An analogous adenovirus expressing only GFP
(i.e., Ad-GFP) was used as a mock virus control. Furthermore, polybrene (aka, hexadimethrine bromide) was
added to the culture medium (at final concentration of 5 μg/mL)
of adenovirus infection to enhance adenoviral infection efficiency. Total RNA Isolation and Touchdown-qPCR (TqRCR) Analysis http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00203/suppl_file/sb9b00203_si_001.pdf At the indicated time points, total RNA was isolated from the treated
cells using TRIZOL Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions and subjected to reverse
transcription as previously described. The RT cDNA products were further
diluted and used as PCR templates. The qPCR primers were designed
by using the Primer3 Plus program (). TqPCR was performed to quantitatively assess the
expression levels for the genes of interest as previously described. The 2xSYBR Green qPCR reactions
(Bimake, Houston, TX) were set up according to manufacturer’s
instructions.  was used as a reference gene.
All sample values were normalized to  expression
by using the 2-ΔΔCt method. Bacterial Colony PCR Screening
Assay Ligation products
were transformed into aliquots (usually 5–10 μL) of electro-competent
DH10B cells (NEB) via electroporation and directly plated onto LB/agar/Kan
or Amp plates, as described. Bacterial colonies were grown for 14–16 h in a 37 °C
incubator. Colony PCR was performed as described. Briefly, PCR master mix (usually 10–20 μL/reaction)
was first aliquoted into a 96-well PCR plate (or multiple 8-tube strips
for PCR). At the same time, a replicate of a sterile 96-well cell
culture plate was set up by adding ∼50 μL/well LB/Amp
or LB/Kap medium. Bacterial colonies were then carefully picked up
with sterile p200 pipet tips and loaded onto a 12- or 8-channel pipet.
The colony-containing tips were first rinsed gently in the 96-well
culture plate loaded with LB/Amp or LB/Kam culture medium, and then
rinsed in the corresponding wells of the PCR plate. The LB plate was
moved to a 37 °C bacterial incubator, whereas the PCR plate was
used for 26–28 cycles of PCR amplification. The PCR products
were resolved on 1% agarose gels. Bacterial culture medium corresponding
to positive PCR results was grown up for plasmid DNA preparations
and further confirmation by PCR, restriction digestion, and/or DNA
sequencing. Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP) Assays At the indicated
time points, ALP activities were assessed either quantitatively by
using the modified Great Escape SEAP chemiluminescence assay (Takara
Bio USA, Mountain View, CA), and/or qualitatively by using histochemical
staining with a mixture of napthol AS-MX phosphate and Fast Blue BB
salt, as previously described. Each assay condition was performed in triplicate. The results were
repeated in at least three independent experiments. Transfection
and Gaussia and Firefly Luciferase Reporter Assays Subconfluent
iMEF-derived stable cells were seeded in 25 cm cell culture
flasks and transfected with 8 μg/flask
of pBGLuc-Tcf4/LEF or p12xSBE-FLuc reporter plasmid using polyethylenimine
(PEI) reagents (Polysciences, Inc., Warrington, PA) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. At 16 h after transfection, cells
were collected, replated into 24-well plates, and infected with compatible
titers of Ad-GFP, Ad-Wnt3A, or Ad-BMP9. At the indicated time points
after infection, cell culture medium was taken for Gaussia luciferase
assay for the pBGLuc-Tcf4/LEF transfected cells, while the cells were
lysed for firefly luciferase assays for the p12xSBE-FLuc transfected
cells, as previously described. The luciferase assay kits were purchased from NEB. Each assay condition
was performed in triplicate. Subcutaneous Stem Cell Implantation and Ectopic
Bone Formation The animal use and care involved in this study
was approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. All experimental
procedures were carried out in accordance with the approved guidelines.
The subcutaneous iMEFs cell implantation procedure was performed as
described. Specifically, the iMEFs cells were infected with Ad-BMP9 or Ad-GFP
for 36 h. The infected cells were harvested, resuspended in sterile
PBS (80 μL each injection), and injected subcutaneously into
the flanks of athymic nude mice (Envigo/Harlan Research Laboratories;  = 4/group, female, 5–6 week old; 2 × 10 cells per injection site). The animals were maintained ad
lib in the biosafety barrier facility. At 5 weeks after implantation,
the mice were euthanized, and the implantation sites were retrieved
for μCT imaging and histologic evaluation. Microcomputed
Tomographic (μCT) Analysis The
retrieved specimens were fixed in 10% formalin and imaged using the
micro-CT (μCT) component of the GE triumph (GE Healthcare, Piscataway,
NJ, USA) trimodality preclinical imaging system. The image data were
quantitatively analyzed by Amira 5.6 (Visage Imaging, Inc.), and 3-D
volumetric data and bone density were determined as previously described. Histologic Staining and Masson’s Trichrome Staining After microCT imaging, the retrieved masses were decalcified and
embedded in paraffin. Serial sections of embedded specimens were deparaffinized
and subjected to hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and Masson’s
trichrome staining as described. All quantitative studies were
carried out in triplicate and/or performed in three independent batches.
Statistically significant differences between samples were determined
by one-way analysis of variance. A value of  <
0.05 was defined as statistically significant when a comparison was
being made..