http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf The construction
of novel, reliable
genetic circuits relies largely on the reproducible characterization
of standard genetic parts. Fluorescence is often used as a quantitative
output for engineering genetic circuits and can be measured in microplate
readers or flow cytometers. Plate readers are particularly suited
for high throughput applications, such as understanding temporal dynamics
of multiple different constructs and conditions simultaneously. However,
the data are bulk measurements that obscure population heterogeneity.
Flow cytometry reveals this information but has more limited throughput
capabilities. Recently, an inexpensive and easily implementable protocol
to convert green fluorescence measurements from both instruments into
intercomparable standard units of molecules of equivalent fluorescein
(MEFL) per particle was validated across hundreds of laboratories
in the international Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM) competition. Measurements of standard calibrants are used
to create calibration curves to convert the arbitrary units (a.u.)
of individual machines to standardized units, a technique that has
previously been established. Currently, however, software tools
for calibration and normalization exist across multiple platforms
and different coding languages including MATLAB (for example, TASBE
Flow Analytics), Python (CytoFlow and FlowCal), R (flowBeads), and Excel (iGEM’s Plate Reader Calibration
preformatted data sheet).  compares the features between current
free calibration software tools for plate reader and flow cytometry
data. Although this variety offers choice to end users, it makes high-throughput
application difficult and time-consuming. In addition, autofluorescence
normalization for plate reader measurements is often implemented inconsistently
and in an “” manner, even though
it has been shown to be critical particularly when measuring fluorescent
particles that share a similar emission wavelength with nonfluorescent
cells. Consequently, standards for calibration
and normalization have yet to be widely adopted and fluorescent data
collected from microplate readers and flow cytometers is currently
still often reported in arbitrary units. Our goal is to create a single,
open source, easily usable tool to calibrate and normalize both plate
reader and flow cytometer data to comparable standard units. Here we present FlopR, a full calibration and normalization package
in R, the free and open source programming language, for both flow cytometry and microplate reader fluorescent
data. FlopR normalizes raw data, then uses data from measurements
of standard calibrants to generate calibration curves and convert
sample data recorded in arbitrary units to units of molecules of equivalent
fluorophore (MEF) per particle. We demonstrate FlopR can accurately
normalize and calibrate fluorescence data from  that are constitutively expressing GFP to agree with normalized
and calibrated literature values. Finally, we show FlopR can reconstruct
the growth of individual fluorescent subpopulations of cells from
plate reader data of heterogeneous bulk cell cultures, demonstrating
its potential for complex and high throughput applications such as
studies of dynamics within mixed microbial consortia. Full Normalization
and Calibration Workflow FlopR has
been designed to be simple to use for people with a limited background
in programming. As such, it only requires one function call to normalize
and calibrate an entire folder of flow cytometry data or a file containing
microplate reader data. The full workflow is shown in  and a detailed tutorial can
be found on the GitHub page. As there is no common format for microplate
reader data, a function to parse the data into a standard format is
required. We provide an example parsing function, spark_parse(), which
converts data from Tecan microplate readers. Flow cytometry data, in the form of .fcs files,
are processed using
the process_fcs_dir() function. The function takes several arguments
that control its behavior. A folder containing the .fcs files is specified
and any file with a filename that matches the given pattern is processed.
The data are first trimmed to remove debris and then singlet events
are isolated from doublets and larger aggregates, as specified in
the methods. If normalization and/or calibration is required, the
names of the fluorescence channels to be processed are given. If a
nonfluorescent control file is provided, it is first processed as
above, after which the geometric mean of each fluorescence channel
is calculated. These values are then negated from the other samples
to provide normalized fluorescence values. If calibration of the flow
cytometry data is desired,
an .fcs file with “beads” as part of the filename must
be in the folder. Calibration is performed using measurements of fluorescent
beads labeled with known quantities of fluorophore. The peak values
in each channel, produced by the bead manufacturer, need to be given
to the function. If values are only given for a subset of the fluorescence
channels, only those channels specified will be calibrated. A plot
of the calibration curve for each fluorescent channel is produced
along with the locations of the bead peaks identified by the software.
If these peaks have not been correctly identified, the user can modify
a function argument; increasing the value may be necessary if erroneous
peaks have been identified. If the bead identification still fails,
the bead peak locations can be specified manually. If desired, a plot
will be saved showing the trimming, normalization, and calibration
of the data. Each processed .fcs file will have additional columns
for normalized and calibrated events, and is saved in a new folder. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf The microplate reader workflow consists of two distinct parts:
generation of calibration parameters, and generation and processing
of sample data. The user should first prepare and measure a plate
of standard calibrants (, microspheres and fluorescein)
at a range of dilutions, following the protocol developed for the
iGEM competition and described in . The calibration data
from the plate reader is first parsed and if using a Tecan plate reader
the provided spark_parse() function can be used. The function needs
to be provided with the path to the calibration data in the form of
a .csv file, and the path to a .csv file detailing the layout of the
calibration plate. This outputs a formatted .csv file. The generate_cfs()
function uses the parsed calibration data to produce a .csv file that
can then be used to calibrate later plate reader experiments. This
protocol does not need to be carried out before every experiment but
should be carried out regularly—roughly monthly—to ensure
that the parameters reflect the machine’s current behavior. To process experimental plate reader data, the user should first
create a .csv file with details of the samples and their position
on the plate. The experimental data can then be parsed in the same
way by providing the spark_parse() function with the path to the data
and layout .csv files. The parsed data can then be given to the process_plate()
function. One or more blank and nonfluorescent control wells can be
specified. The names of the channels for absorbance and fluorescence
measurements also need to be given. These should be the respective
column names found in the input .csv file. We use a model based approach
for autofluorescence normalization, detailed below, and allow the
user to select the most appropriate model for their data. If the prior
calibration protocol has been carried out, the experimental data can
be converted to calibrated units. The gain level used for each fluorescence
channel needs to be given along with the .csv file produced by generate_cfs().
The output is saved as a .csv file containing all the original data,
along with normalized and calibrated absorbance and fluorescence values. Full plate reader and
flow cytometry data processing by FlopR,
including relevant function calls. FlopR normalizes and calibrates
parsed plate reader sample data using the process_plate() function,
and cleans, normalizes and calibrates .fcs flow cytometry data stored
in a directory using the process_fcs_dir() function. FlopR outputs
processed data in comparable, standard units of MEF/particle. Normalization of Autofluorescence in Plate Reader Data http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf Careful
normalization of plate reader data is required to correctly
remove autofluorescence from the measurements of sample of interest.
Incorrect normalization can diminish the dynamic range of the measured
fluorescent output, particularly in the case of GFP. Often normalization is done simply by subtracting the fluorescence
of a negative control consisting of nonfluorescent cells from the
fluorescence of the cells of interest at the same time point. To calculate
the fluorescence per OD, the normalized fluorescence is then divided
by the blank-normalized OD. We describe this first, and most rudimentary,
approach as “time normalization”. This time-based normalization
does not take into account growth differences between the nonfluorescent
control and the sample population, which can be common in cells containing
genetic circuits that may affect growth. A second normalization strategy, “Time OD normalization”,
takes the ratio of fluorescence to OD of both types of cells first,
and then subtracts nonfluorescent cell measurements from those of
the cells of interest. This can help account for differences in OD
between the two types of cells but assumes a proportional relationship
between OD and autofluorescence over time. Equations for “time
normalization” and “time OD based normalization”
are given in . Another
normalization approach involves using spectral unmixing of the main
identified autofluorescent agents; however, this
requires detailed knowledge of the source of the autofluorescence. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf Our approach is to fit an absorbance  autofluorescence calibration curve of the nonfluorescent
control cells (a), which gives autofluorescence as a function of absorbance over
time for normalization. Previous mechanistic models have suggested that autofluorescence
is proportional to the total volume of cells while flavin production
and cell size remains constant. However,
cell size is not constant across growth phases and
production of flavins increases on approach to stationary phase. This means that autofluorescence is not linearly
proportional to optical density. Indeed, we have observed that the
relationship between OD and autofluorescence is monotonic from lag
phase to early stationary phase, but during stationary phase autofluorescence
increases while absorbance remains stable. Furthermore, over very
long time periods, wells containing nonfluorescent cells can show
a decrease in absorbance while maintaining the same level of autofluorescence
(). Due to the complexity of modeling
this relationship, we chose a nonlinear smoothing approach to fit
an autofluorescence calibration curve. The user can choose the best
fitting nonlinear model, and has the options of a generalized additive
model (GAM), locally estimated scatterplot
smoothing (LOESS) model, a second-order
polynomial or exponential model to fit the data. Extrapolation is
a weakness of the two smoothing models. If the nonfluorescent control
population does not grow as well as the samples, it may be better
to choose one of the other models. However, this is an uncommon scenario
in synthetic biology since engineered strains are often burdened by
the circuits they carry. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf In order to show quantitatively the performance of the different
normalization approaches in cases of growth differences between normalized
cells and normalizing cells, we grew nonfluorescent cells at different
starting dilutions for 15 h ().
Accurate normalization of nonfluorescent cells should remove all autofluorescence,
so the “ground-truth” fluorescence is expected to be
zero (shown in c as the orange dashed line). The mean absolute error (MAE) from
the zero-fluorescence ground truth can then be used as an indicator
of normalization performance. Pairs of wells, inoculated at different
starting densities, were normalized against each other using the three
different normalization methods (), and their MAE calculated during the main growth phase of the sample
well (b). As
the difference in starting dilution between the wells increases, the
deviation from zero of both time normalization methods (“time
normalization” and “time OD normalization”) increases
substantially. FlopR fitted normalization also shows a moderate increase
but it is considerably smaller than the other types of normalization,
indicating more consistent normalization performance, independent
of growth. c shows the normalized MEFL per particle of a subset of these nonfluorescent
wells over time. In the middle panel, the sample well and normalizing
well are identical indicating that all methods perform well. Time-based
normalization methods are particularly prone to poor normalization
at early time points, when delays or differences in the start of exponential
growth of the two populations are emphasized. Fluorescence normalization in plate readers.
(a) GAM fit of the
absorbance  fluorescence of a well containing nonfluorescent
control cells used for FlopR normalization. (b) Comparison of normalization
performance by mean absolute error from the expected zero-fluorescence
ground truth for nonfluorescent control cells using FlopR normalization,
time normalization, or time OD normalization. Initial inoculates were
serially diluted by a factor of 3:8. The fold difference is the pairwise
initial dilution difference between sample and normalizing well. (c)
MEFL per particle timecourses of nonfluorescent cells calculated using
time normalization, time OD normalization, or FlopR normalization
at different starting concentration of cells for the sample well and
normalizing well. Orange dashed lines show the expected “ground
truth” zero-fluorescence. Calibration of Plate Reader
and Flow Cytometer Fluorescence
Data After normalization, FlopR converts the fluorescence
of the cell sample of interest from arbitrary units to standardized
units of MEF per particle by multiplying the normalized values with
conversion factors generated from measurements of standard independent
calibrants. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf For the microplate reader calibration, measurements
of a calibration plate of serial dilutions of fluorescein and microspheres
measured prior to the main experiment are used as calibrants to generate
conversion factors using FlopR’s generate_cfs() function. Fluorescein
shares similar excitation and emission wavelengths to green fluorescent
protein (GFP), and the microspheres used are of approximately the
same size and diameter as . Our protocol was adapted from the iGEM standard
protocols and is available in the . The plate reader calibration plate
is measured under all of the potential experimental conditions under
which the fluorescent cells of interest will be measured in future
experiments, including plate type, well volume or lid type, and with
a range of gain settings. This is so that conversion factors generated
from the calibration plate data will be valid for future experiments
under a range of conditions. In particular, we note that the relationship
between gain and conversion factors on the plate reader that we used
was linear. This allows us to estimate the conversion factors if an
experiment is run with a gain that was not calibrated against. To
process data from the calibration plate, measurements are checked
for validity to ensure they are not saturated and a model incorporating
pipetting error is fitted to the remaining
data. Plots are produced showing the fit for each measured condition,
allowing the user to visually check the results. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf For flow cytometry
calibration, FlopR uses measurements of standard
calibration particles (also called calibration beads). The calibration
beads have known quantities of fluorophore bound to them and often
present a range of intensities. To identify the bead fluorescence
peaks measured by the flow cytometer, FlopR uses a Gaussian kernel
density estimate from the R “stats” package, as opposed to Gaussian mixtures models or k-means
clustering models used in other flow cytometry data calibration software. This allows us to provide the user with a single parameter to modify
(the bandwidth, which is equal to the kernel standard deviation) if
the default settings are unsuccessful at identifying bead peaks (). The default bandwidth that we have
specified (0.025) prevents over smoothing of narrow peaks at high
fluorescence intensity, but details of when and how to change the
bandwidth are in the tutorial. From experience with other software
tools, even with the ability to control parameters, bead peak identification
can fail, so we also provide the ability for users to manually specify
peak locations. Corresponding values of MEF for each identified peak
are provided by the calibration bead manufacturer and are input into
FlopR by the user for the specific bead lot and brand used (full details
available in the FlopR tutorial). The identified peaks are checked
for validity by comparing the fold change in measured fluorescence
of adjacent peaks to the expected fold change from the manufacturer
and discarding those that are more than 25% outside what is expected.
A model developed for FlowCal, which includes
bead autofluorescence, is then fitted to produce coefficients for
conversion between measured fluorescence in arbitrary units and calibrated
fluorescence in MEF. Demonstrating FlopR Function with Constitutive
GFP Expression
Data We sought to demonstrate the use of FlopR using constructs
that constitutively expressed GFP with differing strength promoters
(a). b shows the results
of measurements of three different strength constructs on a plate
reader and flow cytometer, compared against literature values of the
same constructs. We followed the protocol
conducted by the iGEM interlab study, in which only a single time
point is measured, so it is worthwhile to note that these were normalized
following the interlab protocol and were not normalized for autofluorescence
according to FlopR’s normalization fit. In this case the nonfluorescent
control cells and GFP-expressing cells showed similar growth dynamics,
so time-based normalization is expected to give accurate results.
The results show that FlopR produces results that are not only consistent
between replicates sampled on different days, but that are also comparable
with results from the literature that were measured on different instruments
and processed using other software. Demonstration of FlopR-produced MEFL per
particle values measured
by flow cytometry or on a plate reader. (a) Three different constitutive
GFP expression constructs were tested, with promoters J23101, J23106,
and J23117. (b) Fluorescence measurements on different days compared
to literature values for the same plasmids. Plate reader data shows the geometric mean and standard deviation
of 12 replicates on 2 days. Flow cytometry data shows the geometric
mean fluorescence intensities and standard deviation of 11 replicates
over 2 days. Applying FlopR to Identify
Bacterial Subpopulations in Bulk
Plate Reader Measurements Finally, we used FlopR’s
normalization capabilities to identify specific subpopulations of
cells in mixed cultures to demonstrate its potential applications
beyond green fluorescence calibration. There has been growing interest
in engineering multicellular consortia; however, identifying
the growth dynamics of individual strains within a mixed culture remains
challenging. We use a previously described system in which bacteriocin-producing fluorescent “killer”
cells were mixed at different starting fractions with nonfluorescent
competitor cells, and use FlopR to process the data measured in a
microplate reader and flow cytometer over 12 h (a). Traditionally, separation of the two
population fractions is only possible by clustering in flow cytometry
data (b), but
sampling is manual and low throughput, and it requires different fluorescence
proteins in either strain or high expression of a fluorescent protein
in order to adequately distinguish between subpopulations. In this
case, population fractions are simply calculated using the numbers
of cells of each population in each cluster. The killer cells were
engineered to produce two fluorescent proteins, GFP and mCherry, so
that clustering could be performed using both fluorescence channels
without the issue of spectral overlap of the competitor and killer
cell populations when fluorescence expression is weak. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf To reconstruct population fractions from plate reader data, we
make the assumption that fluorescent cells in a monoculture are representative
of the same cells in a coculture. With this assumption, we can use
a positive control well composed of only fluorescent killer cells
to create an absorbance–fluorescence calibration curve specific
to killer cells using one of the fluorescence channels (). This calibration curve allows us
to take into account the fact that fluorescence per cell may not remain
constant over time: a similar premise to the autofluorescence calibration
curve described previously. At each time point, the fraction of killer
cells was calculated bywhere () is
the normalized fluorescence of the sample at time , OD() is the
normalized absorbance of the sample at time , and  uses the calibration curve
to get the expected fluorescence at the given absorbance assuming
an entirely killer population. The calculated fraction of killer cells
from measurements in both instruments are shown in the bottom panel
of d, and a
comparison is presented in c, both showing that FlopR can closely reconstruct
accurate subpopulations of cells from bulk data. This fraction can
then be multiplied by the calibrated particle count of the mixed wells
to get the growth timecourses of individual subpopulations (top row
of d). At high
starting fractions of killer cells, the competitor cells are immediately
overwhelmed and the killer dominates the culture (right column of d). However, at low
initial killer cell fractions, the competitor cells experience an
initial growth phase, until the concentration of bacteriocin is sufficiently
large to begin eliminating the competitors. Reconstruction of cell
population fractions from plate reader measurements does not require
spectral separation of the two subpopulations and therefore the use
of both fluorescent protein channels is not necessary. It is indeed
possible to reconstruct cell fractions using the green fluorescence
channel () giving similar results
to the reconstruction using red fluorescence in . The same coculture system was explored
over a larger range of population ratios as well as a variety of starting
population densities and the final plate reader calculated population
fraction was compared with flow cytometry data (). These results further demonstrate the accuracy
of our method. However, the data also show that at low population
densities the subpopulation fraction calculation may produce inaccurate
estimates due to noisy measurement of absorbance in the plate reader
at those densities. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf We performed a sensitivity analysis to determine
how the true population
fractions, fluorescence intensities and absorbance values, along with
errors in measurement of absorbance and fluorescence, affect our ability
to correctly estimate population fractions (). We approximate measurement error by assuming measurements
are normally distributed around the true value and examine two scenarios:
the error is proportional to the measurement, and the error is constant
regardless of the magnitude of the measurement (). In the former scenario a measurement error of
1% produces a sensitivity of 1 (all population estimates are within
5% of the true value), a 2% error gives 0.94 and a 5% error gives
0.63 sensitivity. These hold regardless of the population ratios,
fluorescence intensity or absorbance. However, when the measurement
error is constant, the sensitivity decreases as the fluorescence intensity
or absorbance decrease because the error proportionally gets larger.
It is likely that true measurement error for plate readers is proportional
to the magnitude of the measurement down to a minimum error. This
would correspond with our observations in  of accuracy diminishing at the lowest population densities. Using FlopR to monitor
population dynamics of individual populations
within heterogeneous bulk plate reader measurements. (a) Mixed cocultures
of fluorescent killer cells and nonfluorescent competitor cells at
different starting ratios were measured and compared using FlopR.
(b) Distinct subpopulations are easily identifiable by clustering
flow cytometry data. (c) Comparison of plate reader calculated killer
cell fractions and flow cytometry measured killer cell population
fractions for wells at identical time points. (d) Dynamics of individual
cell populations (orange or gray for killer and competitor, respectively)
reconstructed from plate reader data using FlopR. The top panel shows
timecourses of cell number of strains reconstructed from plate reader
data. The bottom panel shows timecourse data of killer cell population
fractions calculated from plate reader data or measured from clustered
flow cytometry data. Data for (d) is mean and standard deviation of
two replicate wells measured on the same day. FlopR is a free and open source software tool
that allows direct
comparison of flow cytometry and plate reader green fluorescence data.
Future extensions to the software should include fluorescence calibration
for colors other than green fluorescence. For example, calibrants
for red fluorescence, such as TexasRed, are currently being investigated. Size calibration—currently available in other flow cytometry packages—can also be added, which may be of particular
use in order to understand changes or differences in morphology of
different bacterial strains. Size calibration may be particularly
important to understand the size of microsphere to use as a calibrant
to avoid over- or under-estimation of population size, as differences
in particle size can cause large differences in light scattering,
particularly when the size of the particle approaches that of the
incident light wave, as is the case with bacteria. Alternatively, the cells themselves could be used to create
the calibration curves for specific strains: by measuring the number
of cells in a known dilution in the flow cytometer, it would be possible
to estimate the number of cells in a dilution series of the same sample
measured in the plate reader. In addition, determination of the MEFL
per individual GFP protein, for example by flow cytometry and liquid
chromatography–mass spectrometry, would be useful to gain quantitative information on how many proteins
per cells are producing that fluorescence. This would be highly beneficial
to enable the coupling of computational models to experimental data.
As this software is open source, it can also be extended with methods
for calibration of other instruments and approaches, such as fluorescence
microscopy, or other imaging techniques. http://www.github.com/ucl-cssb/flopr Measurement standards help reproducibility, transparency and collaboration
within the scientific process. Despite this, fluorescence remains
identified as a problematic measurement area. We hope this tool will be of use to the synthetic biology community
to facilitate and encourage the use of standardized units in fluorescence
measurements. The full details on how to use the package and requirements
can be found in the tutorial on FlopR’s GitHub repository at . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf All plate reader experiments
were done on a Tecan SPARK Multimode Microplate Reader, using 96 well
black, clear bottom plates (Corning). Specific plate reader settings
for the individual experiments of each figure are outlined in . All fluorescence measurements were
made from the top of the plate, with 125 μL cell cultures. Plate
reader data for  and 5 was collected throughout the timecourse. Plate reader data
for b was collected
at a single time point, following the protocol detailed in Beal  and available at . All flow cytometry experiments
were carried out on an Attune NxT Flow Cytometer. Green fluorescence
was measured on the BL1 channel (excitation laser: 488 nm, emission
filter: 530/30 nm), and red fluorescence on the YL2 channel (excitation
laser: 561 nm, emission: 620/15 nm). Cell cultures were diluted 1
μL in 200 μL of filtered PBS, with 3 mixing cycles and
minimum 3 wash rinses between samples. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf As is noted in , data for  and  were measured
at excitation and emission wavelengths of 485/20
nm and 535/20 nm for green fluorescence. These differ by 3 nm for
excitation and 5 nm for emission from the flow cytometer excitation
and emission wavelengths of the BL1 green fluorescence channel in
the flow cytometer. However, as both the plate reader’s excitation
and emission bandwidths are 20 nm and the flow cytometer bandpass
filter is 30 nm, the small difference in the settings is negligible,
and the measurements from both instruments are still comparable. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf The full protocol for generating
serial dilutions of plate reader calibrants is detailed in . Briefly, fluorescein isothiocyanate
(Sigma-Aldrich, CAS: 3326-32-7) dissolved in PBS and 0.89 μm
monodisperse silica microspheres (Cospheric: SiO2MS-2.0 0.890um-1g)
suspended in microbiology grade water were used to create serial dilutions
in a 96 well black, clear bottom plate (Corning), with four replicate
dilution series for each calibrant. Due to the quick settling time
of the microspheres, their dilutions were remixed by pipetting up
and down immediately before measurement on the plate reader. For flow
cytometry calibration, one drop of Spherotech Rainbow calibration
particles (Biolegend catalog number: 422903, these are identical to
Spherotech catalog number: RCP-30-5A (8 peaks) Spherotech lot number:
073112) was mixed with 300 μL of PBS and measured using the
same settings as the relevant experiment. Strains and Cultures Conditions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00296/suppl_file/sb0c00296_si_001.pdf All plasmids, strains,
and antibiotic working concentrations used are listed in . For  and  cells were
cultured in M9 minimal media supplemented with 0.4% glycerol and 0.2%
casamino acids throughout the experiments. Cells for the experiment
in b were cultured
in LB media throughout the experiment, following the standard iGEM
protocol. For , 5 mL cultures were grown overnight in 14
mL round-bottom vented cap culture tubes at 37 °C and 200 rpm
in a SciQuip ZHWY-103D incubator, then diluted 1:1000 in fresh M9
media to a total of 5 mL in a new 14 mL tube, grown for 6 more hours
at 200 rpm, diluted in fresh M9 media to a target OD 700 nm of 0.1
and total volume of 5 mL, then diluted stepwise by a factor of 3/8
(for initial starting dilution ratios of 1, 0.375, 0.141, 0.053, 0.020,
0.007, 0.003, and 0.001) and final well volume of 125 μL per
well in a 96 well black, clear bottom plate. For , 5 mL overnight cultures were
diluted 1:100 in fresh M9 media to a total of 5 mL in 14 mL flasks,
then mixed at the specified ratios to a final volume of 125 μL
per well in a 96 well black, clear bottom plate. Each file
within the folder given as the dir_path argument is initially processed
to remove debris using the flowClust package to discriminate between bacterial and debris populations using logged
forward-scatter height  side-scatter height.
This uses a t-mixture model with a Box-Cox transformation to fit the
clusters and integrated completed likelihood to determine if there
is a debris population or not. If two populations are found, the one
with the greater mean forward-scatter height is chosen as the sample
population and the other is discarded as debris. If the data has already
had debris gated out during the experimental setup, the user can indicate
as such by setting the pre_cleaned argument to TRUE. In this case,
the 10% outliers are removed, and the remaining events are chosen
as the sample population. Next we attempt to remove doublets and larger
cell aggregates using the singletGate() function provided by the flowStats
package. This fits a linear model to
logged side-scatter height  side-scatter area
and discards events outside the 90% confidence interval. The manipulation
of the flow cytometry data within FlopR relies heavily on functions
provided by the flowCore package. The events from a nonfluorescent
control are trimmed to remove debris and select singlets, as above.
The geometric mean of each fluorescence channel is calculated, with
5% of observations from each end of the distribution removed prior
in order to prevent skew from extreme values. Sample data are then normalized by negating these calculated values
from each event in each fluorescence channel..