Mersacidin is a ribosomally
synthesized and post-translationally
modified peptide (RiPP), first described in 1992 as a fermentation
product of  species HIL Y-85,54728 (A). It has potent antimicrobial activity against a range of
Gram-positive bacteria, including methicillin-resistant strains. Its antimicrobial properties come from a singular
mode of action; , peptidoglycan biosynthesis
is inhibited by binding of mersacidin to the bacterial cell wall precursor
Lipid-II at a unique binding site. Mersacidin
has a globular shape brought about by
its lanthionine ring structures, which give a high stability to the
peptide and offer interesting properties from an engineering point
of view (A).
Ring A, for example, could be added to linear peptides to improve
their stability. Lanthionine rings can be engineered into linear peptides
to increase their stability, but to preserve
the original function, a minimal change in the peptides’ structure
is desirable. Mersacidin’s uniquely small ring A spans no additional
amino acids, making the application of this ring an attractive prospect
in lanthipeptide engineering of this nature. The other ring structures,
with their respective characteristics, might also prove to be useful
additions to the lanthipeptide engineering toolbox: Ring B spans seven
amino acids, while rings C and D are intertwined with ring D containing
a decarboxylated cysteine. Like for many lanthipeptides, the production of mersacidin
is partially
dependent on autoinduction. The production
of mersacidin-precursor MrsA from its gene cluster (B) is mediated by MrsR1, while
MrsR2 and MrsK2 regulate the expression of the immunity genes . Mersacidin’s
four methyl-lanthionine rings are installed by MrsM, which is responsible for both dehydration of threonine
and serine residues and the subsequent cyclization of the dehydrated
threonines with the respective cysteine residues. Decarboxylation
of the final cysteine is done by MrsD, a LanD enzyme related to the flavoprotein EpiD, which removes a
CO and two hydrogen atoms leading to a decrease in monoisotopic
mass of 46.0055 Da. When fully modified, premersacidin
is exported by the bifunctional transporter MrsT, which contains a
proteolytic domain that has been proposed to be involved in leader
processing. While this is typical for Class-II lanthipeptides, the conserved
recognition site for cleavage by LanT in the mersacidin leader does
not precisely align with that of the related peptides (). If the proteolytic domain of MrsT would
cleave after the conserved glycine–alanine recognition site,
part of the leader remains attached to the core peptide, and it has
thus been suggested that the final activation of mersacidin is done
by extracellular  proteases. Lanthipeptides are partially categorized by their modification
system. A major interesting difference
between different classes is that class I lanthipeptides, like nisin,
have two enzymes for maturation, , a LanB for
dehydration and a LanC for cyclization. In class II lanthipeptides,
like mersacidin, these activities are combined in one enzyme called
LanM. The respective specificities of these modification systems underlie
separate possibilities regarding ring-structure formation. For a comparison
of mersacidin maturation to that of other RiPPs, there are some excellent
reviews available. To date, mersacidin and
its derivatives have been exclusively produced
by using its full gene cluster in  species through the purification of mature mersacidin from the producer
supernatant. Although MrsA has been expressed in combination with
MrsD in , to study the oxidative decarboxylation reaction, the coexpression
of MrsM in this system has not been reported. Thus, no form of premersacidin
has been purified to date. Consequently, the suggested mechanism for
mersacidin leader processing has not yet been confirmed. Recently,
much progress has been made in the field of lanthipeptide
engineering, including the production of hybrid RiPPs, the incorporation
of noncanonical amino acids, ring shuffling, and more. Concurrently, it has become evident that, while many RiPPs have
therapeutic applications in theory, these applications are hampered
by drawbacks such as  instability. Solutions for these drawbacks are being found
in the development of novel lanthipeptide engineering tools. Thus, while mersacidin has good activity against clinically relevant
strains, the lack of a concise heterologous expression system excludes
it from the many advancements made in lanthipeptide expression in
standardized systems like  BL21(DE3).
Such a system would thus not only provide opportunities for leader
processing studies but also increase the relevance of the mersacidin
modification machinery in today’s field of lanthipeptide improvement
by engineering. The performance of the heterologous expression of
mersacidin in  rather than  has the extra advantage that  lacks
the wide variety of extracellular proteases that  has.  species produce a range of proteases, which would likely cleave the leader peptide
of the produced peptide, activating it during production or purification.
In , novel peptides can be produced without
the need for an immunity mechanism against these new-to-nature peptides,
as the leader is not likely to be processed by the producer. Effectively,
the produced peptide stays inactive until the leader is processed . Here, a modular plasmid system is presented
for the complete biosynthesis
of premersacidin in . This system employs
a minimal gene cluster, achieving full premersacidin biosynthesis
by expressing three of the ten genes, , from
the mersacidin gene cluster. As a proof of principle, the system was
employed to study mersacidin leader processing. The activation of
mersacidin by  supernatant
was examined. Additionally, the cleavage site of MrsT was studied
through the digestion of premersacidin  with
the MrsT proteolytic domain, MrsT150. In addition to the previously
mentioned advantages of this system in mersacidin related lanthipeptide
engineering, the modular nature of this heterologous expression system
allows one to study the effects of modification by MrsM and MrsD alone
or simultaneously. (A) Amino acid sequence of mersacidin with a
schematic overview
of its lanthionine rings and decarboxylation site. (B) The mersacidin
gene cluster, containing  (regulation of immunity),  (immunity),  (precursor),  (regulation of mersacidin production),  (decarboxylation),  (dehydration and cyclization),
and  (transport and leader protease). Alignment of several class-II lanthipeptide leaders to their GG-type
class-II LanT cleavage site, combined
with a conservation logo. If mersacidin
is cleaved after this sequence by MrsT upon export, between positions
−7 and −6, six residues of the leader remain attached
to the core peptide, likely rendering the exported product inactive. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf The mersacidin biosynthetic
genes  were
amplified from the genomic DNA of  strain BH072, which contains the mersacidin gene cluster. The nucleotide
sequence of all biosynthetic genes from this gene cluster is identical
with that of  sp. HIL-Y85/54728 with the exception of . The  gene encodes a protein differing 3 amino acids from MrsM in the
reported mersacidin producer strain (). The amplified biosynthetic genes were placed in compatible  plasmids. The resulting modular expression
system () was
employed to achieve heterologous expression
of mersacidin in  BL21(DE3). The N-terminally
His-tagged mersacidin precursor His-MrsA was expressed without modification
enzymes, in combination with MrsM, or in combination with MrsM + MrsD.
All samples were purified from the cell pellet through His-tag purification,
followed by desalting with an open C18 column. The samples were freeze-dried
and dissolved in Milli-Q, after which they were analyzed. Analysis by MALDI-TOF (, )
showed that the expression of His-MrsA in the presence of MrsM
gives a major product resembling fully dehydrated His-MrsA with a
theoretical mass of 8018.94 Da. When coexpressed with MrsM and MrsD,
the modified His-MrsA approaches the theoretical mass of mature His-premersacidin,
7972.91 Da. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf To confirm
full modification of His-MrsA by MrsM + MrsD, , the production of His-premersacidin, it was subjected
to an antimicrobial activity test. As mersacidin has been hypothesized
to be activated by extracellular proteases, the isolated prepeptide
was incubated with BH072 supernatant sampled from different growth
times between 20 and 96 h. All digested samples were active against  on a bacterial lawn, indicating that
His-premersacidin could be activated by BH072 supernatant from all
tested growth times (). The BH072
supernatant of all growth times without added His-premersacidin did
not produce a halo in the antimicrobial activity tests, indicating
the supernatant contained no compounds in concentrations high enough
to inhibit cell growth. Furthermore, in MALDI-TOF analysis of the
BH072 supernatant alone, mersacidin could not be detected (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf The acquired His-premersacidin
was further analyzed by HPLC (),
which showed that the major product
was separated into two distinguishable peaks (). Separated by HPLC, only one of these peaks
contained activatable premersacidin, which was identified through
an antimicrobial activity test against  (). The peak with presumed premersacidin
was purified by HPLC () and further
analyzed by LC-MS (). The main
products from this peak were found to approach the theoretical masses
of 7972.91 Da (His-MrsA-5HO, -CO) and 7990.92
Da (His-MrsA-4HO, -CO). This dehydration state
is comparable to that of the main product before purification (C), suggesting that
the product being divided into an activatable and nonactivatable peak
is the result of one or more cyclizations not occurring. The lack
of this peak in samples expressed without MrsD ( and ) points
toward the C-terminal ring not being formed. Most importantly, free-cysteine
assays of the activatable peak showed that all rings are formed, and
it thus proves that the fully dehydrated product is fully mature premersacidin
(). LC-MS analysis of His-MrsA
+ MrsM gave expected mass data but also showed signs of degradation,
pointing toward a stability function of the C-terminal decarboxylation
performed by MrsD. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf In the initial protocol, the peak containing activatable premersacidin
constituted approximately 15% of all the product. This value could
be increased to 25–30% by optimizing the expression protocol
for maximal antimicrobial activity (, ). The protocol was optimized
for induction time and temperature and for the amino acid sequence
of MrsM. During optimization, it was found that restoring the MrsM
amino acid sequence to that published for mersacidin producer  sp. HIL-Y85/54728 did not affect
modification efficiency. It was therefore decided to use the  gene from BH072 for further expression purposes. Optimal
production of His-premersacidin was reached by inducing the complete
system concurrently at 16 °C for 24 h. Using this optimized protocol,
a per liter yield could be reached of 2 mg of unmodified His-MrsA,
2.5 mg of His-MrsA + MrsM, and 7.5 mg of His-MrsA + MrsM + MrsD. Since
the addition of MrsD requires an extra plasmid and antibiotic resistance
marker, the 3-fold increase of production in the complete biosynthetic
system is striking. This again points toward the notion that the C-terminal
decarboxylation provides stability to the peptide. With the
quantified production yields, a standardized antimicrobial
activity test was performed. Each of the prepeptides was spotted against  with and without the addition of BH072 supernatant
(). The only
sample with antimicrobial activity was His-premersacidin incubated
with BH072 supernatant. This indicates that, unsurprisingly, MrsD
is crucial for mersacidin activity. A peak with a mass resembling
that of mersacidin (1826 Da) was identified upon MALDI-TOF analysis
of the activated His-premersacidin (A, ) http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf Finally, to assess the proteolytic activity of MrsT, its
proteolytic
domain was expressed in  with a C-terminal
His-tag (MrsT150-His) after the example shown for LagD. Upon incubation with His-premersacidin, MrsT150-His
cleaves at the theoretically predicted site, leaving six amino acids
of the leader attached to the core peptide (B, ). As expected, the remaining six amino acids inhibit
antimicrobial activity until subsequent cleavage with BH072 supernatant
(), which demonstrates a two-step
activation process to liberate active mersacidin. Plasmids for
expression of mersacidin in varying levels of maturation
in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf MALDI-TOF spectra for results from different expression plasmid
combinations. These masses approximate their theoretical masses (), and the masses
for His-MrsA + MrsM and His-MrsA + MrsM + MrsD were later determined
with higher resolution through LC-MS (). HPLC spectra of His-MrsA + MrsM and His-MrsA + MrsM +
MrsD. In
the presence of MrsD, there is a clear extra peak, which contains
His-premersacidin. As the product in both peaks is decarboxylated,
the decarboxylation itself does not cause this shift but rather closes
one or more lanthionine rings. Antimicrobial activity of mersacidin at varying levels
of maturation
with and without BH072 supernatant (SN) against . (1) His-MrsA + SN, (2) His-MrsA + MrsM + SN, (3) His-MrsA + MrsM
+ MrsD + SN, (4) SN, (5) His-MrsA, (6) His-MrsA + MrsM, and (7) His-MrsA
+ MrsM + MrsD. Only His-MrsA + MrsM + MrsD can be activated. Digestion patterns of His-premersacidin in combination
with (A)
BH072 supernatant, where the expected mass for active mersacidin is
found upon digestion with BH072 supernatant, and (B) MrsT150-His,
where masses are found complying with the theory that MrsT cleaves
the mersacidin leader between positions −7 and −6 (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf Theoretical Average
Masses of Different
Peptides Produced in This Study, Compared to Those Found in MALDI-TOF
and LC-MS Analyses () http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf His-MrsA + MrsM + MrsD (His-premersacidin) http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf His-premersacidin + supernatant
BH072 His-premersacidin + MrsT150-His MALDI-TOF His-premersacidin
-6 to 20 -3HO, -CO MALDI-TOF
His-premersacidin -6 to 20 -4HO, -CO MALDI-TOF His-premersacidin -6 to 20 -5HO,
-CO MALDI-TOF His-premersacidin
-48 to -6 Using the system described here, fully modified premersacidin was
purified from the Gram-negative host  BL21(DE3). The modular plasmid system, employing a minimal gene
cluster, allowed for the product to be purified from the producer
cell pellet in its inactive prepeptide from. This is in contrast to
previously described expression systems, where the complete mersacidin
gene cluster was employed in  sp. to acquire
mature mersacidin from the supernatant. Those systems,
while having an advantage when expressing wild-type mersacidin, would
experience multiple problems when employing it to produce new-to-nature
peptides. The transporter MrsT might not export certain substrates
deviating too far from the natural product, which would obstruct purification
from the supernatant. Additionally, the production of peptides with
an antimicrobial mode of action deviating from that of mersacidin
might kill the producer cell upon activation by  extracellular proteases. Or, when a produced peptide is susceptible
to degradation, it would be digested in the supernatant by extracellular
proteases before it can be purified. All the previously described
drawbacks are circumvented in the system presented here. An additional
advantage of production in  is that it
is a well-established expression host for which many lanthipeptide
engineering methods have been described. This combination makes the system developed here a useful tool in
mersacidin related lanthipeptide engineering. The plasmid system can
for example be used to produce RiPP hybrids, incorporate nonproteinogenic amino acids, or stabilize linear peptides. In the antimicrobial activity tests against , it was shown that  supernatant
can activate premersacidin. As natural producer strain, HIL Y-85,54728
is reported to start mersacidin production after 48 h; the fact that supernatant from a 20 h BH072 culture can
activate mersacidin points toward a general protease present in the
supernatant rather than a dedicated one. Additionally, MrsT was found
to cleave at the predicted site between positions −7 and −6. This partial leader cleavage does not lead to
activation, and so, an extra processing step is required for activation
after export. All these results point strongly toward the conclusion
that mersacidin is activated by one or more extracellular  proteases.  species are
known for their wide range of extracellular proteases with a generally
broad substrate specificity. Some proteases
from , AprE, Bpr, and WprA, were
shown to activate presubtilin by cleaving the leader peptide after
it was exported out of the cell. However,
as the first residue of the mersacidin core is part of an unusual
ring structure, the number of extracellular proteases able to perform
the final leader processing step may be limited. Hence, it is possible
that, due to differences between homologous  proteases, the mersacidin maturing protease is specific to . Although the identification of
any proteases involved here is not required for this expression system,
their identification would allow for interesting insights into the
binding pocket properties of proteases capable of cleaving at this
unique position. The mechanism of leader processing confirmed here
is not unique, but the function of partial
processing during export is unclear, especially because in this study
the preprocessing was found to be unnecessary for mersacidin activation
by extracellular proteases and to not increase the rate at which mersacidin
is activated after it is transported out of the cell. However, the
proteolytic domain is likely to be crucial for leader recognition and thus export. Conceivably, direct activation
upon export might cause mersacidin to adhere to its producer, decreasing
its effectiveness, which additionally could unbalance the autoinduction mechanism. Furthermore, the remaining six residues
of the leader might increase solubility and facilitate mersacidin
diffusion until its maturation by extracellular proteases. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf While
there already was strong evidence that MrsD is crucial for
mersacidin activity, the observed lack of activity
of supernatant-digested His-MrsA + MrsM can be regarded conclusive
in this regard. In the HPLC-spectra of His-premersacidin, both the
small activatable peak and the large peak are decarboxylated. The
masses found in both peaks are similar regardless of activity. This
indicates that the shift from the large to the small peak is caused
by a specific ring closing that is crucial for activity. As the HPLC
spectrum of His-MrsA + MrsM does not contain the small activatable
peak, decarboxylation appears to be important for this ring closure.
These results essentially point toward the C-terminal decarboxylation
drastically improving closing of the final ring. This would explain
the lower stability of His-MrsA + MrsM compared to the fully modified
premersacidin as well as the lower production of fully modified product
when MrsD expression is delayed compared to MrsM (). In conclusion, the system for heterologous
expression of mersacidin
in  presented here is functional and
has already been applied to elucidate mersacidin leader processing.
This system can be used to produce mersacidin, mersacidin derivatives,
or completely new molecules in , employing
current developments in RiPP engineering. Bacterial
Strains and Growth Conditions was grown at 37 °C in LB broth (Formedium)
at 225 rpm.  TOP 10 and BL21(DE3) were
grown at 37 °C on LB agar (Formedium) plates after transformation
or in LB broth at 225 rpm for plasmid isolation or expression unless
stated otherwise.  cultures were supplemented
with chloramphenicol (when using pACYC, 15 or 10 μg/mL for expression
cultures) or ampicillin (when using pBAD, 100 μg/mL). The indicator
strain  was grown under identical
conditions, except in activity test plates, where it was grown in
0.5% agar. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf All molecular
cloning was done in
accordance with previously described methodology, supplemented with the protocols of respective reagent manufacturers.
Oligonucleotides for insert and vector amplification and adaptation
were ordered from Biolegio (Nijmegen, The Netherlands) (). PCRs were performed using Phusion
polymerase (Thermofisher) in reaction conditions recommended by the
manufacturer, after which the reactions were cleaned up using a NucleoSpin
Gel and PCR Clean-up kit (Macherey-Nagel). Subsequent restrictions
of the PCR products were done using FastDigest restriction enzymes
(Thermo Scientific), after which the DNA was cleaned up as previously
mentioned. Ligation of the respective fragments was done with T4 DNA
ligase (Thermo Scientific), after which CaCl chemically
competent  TOP10 was transformed with
the resulting ligation mixture. Plasmid DNA was isolated from transformants
using a NucleoSpin Plasmid EasyPure kit (Macherey-Nagel), after which
correct transformants were selected after DNA sequencing by Macrogen
Europe (Amsterdam, The Netherlands). For expression purposes, CaCl chemically competent  BL21(DE3)
was transformed with sequenced plasmid DNA from TOP10. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf In all
cases, the original genetic sequence of MrsA, MrsM, MrsT, and MrsD
was amplified either directly or indirectly from the  BH072 genomic DNA using primers to
introduce overhangs for restriction and ligation (). In all cases, the vector was amplified through
PCR, in most cases introducing restriction sites. To construct
pACYC-MrsT150-His, the nucleotide sequence encoding
the N-terminal 150 amino acids of MrsT was placed downstream of T7(1)
of pACYCDuet-1 using PstI + NcoI for the backbone and PstI + NcoI
compatible Eco31I for the inset. The C-terminal His-tag remained from
the substrate of which the pACYC backbone was amplified. His-MrsA
was cloned into pACYC, and MrsA + MrsM was placed in pACYCDuet-1 behind
T7(1) and T7(2), respectively, using suitable Eco31I overhangs. MrsD
was cloned into pBAD using PstI + NcoI for the backbone and PstI +
Eco31I (NcoI) for the inset. An additional plasmid was created in
which the amino acid sequence of MrsM was adjusted to that published
for the native producer. The plasmid pACYC His-MrsA
+ MrsM2 was created using pACYC His-MrsA + MrsM as a template for
three PCRs introducing the required mutations and compatible Eco31I
restriction sites, which were ligated using golden gate assembly. Expressions of His-MrsA,
His-MrsA + MrsM,
and His-MrsA + MrsD were optimized to the following protocol. For
each, an overnight culture was made from several colonies off a plate
of freshly transformed BL21(DE3). The overnight culture was diluted
50 times in fresh medium prewarmed to 37 °C and incubated for
2.5 h at 37 °C and 225 rpm. The culture was then placed at 16
°C and 225 rpm without precooling and directly induced with either
1 mM IPTG (His-MrsA, His-MrsA + MrsM) or 1 mM IPTG + 0.2% Arabinose
(His-MrsA + MrsM + MrsD). After induction, the cultures were incubated
for 24 h, after which the cells were harvested. Optimization
of Mersacidin Expression http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00601/suppl_file/sb0c00601_si_001.pdf Using HPLC spectra
to identify the relative size of the peak containing the activatable
premersacidin, in combination with antimicrobial activity tests, the
expression protocol was optimized. The effect of expression at 16,
18, 28, or 37 °C was studied as well as the effect of inducing
MrsM and MrsD either concurrently or with a 2 h delay to each other.
Additional optimization experiments considered the difference between
expression for 16 or 24 h and using the originally published amino
acid sequence of MrsM from HIL Y-85,54728 (). The expression of MrsT150-His
was done
identically to that of mersacidin, until induction. The expression
culture was induced with 1 mM IPTG and grown for 4.5 h at 37 °C
and 225 rpm, after which the cells were harvested. Peptide Purification
and Analysis The pellet
was washed once in
binding buffer (20 mM HNaPO (Merck), 0.5 M
NaCl (VWR), 20 mM imidazole (Merck), pH 7.4) and then sonicated in
1/100th culture volume binding buffer until visually lysed. The lysate
was centrifuged at 10 000 for 60 min and
filtered through a syringe filter (0.45 μM). The purification
was performed on an open column of 1 mL of Ni-NTA slurry (Qiagen)
per 1 L of expression culture volume. Binding and a first wash were
done with binding buffer; a second wash was done with wash buffer
(20 mM HNaPO, 0.5 M NaCl, 20 mM imidazole,
pH 7.4), followed by elution using 1.8 mL of elution buffer (20 mM
HNaPO, 0.5 M NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, pH 7.4)
per 1 mL of Ni-NTA slurry. The His-tag elution
was supplemented
with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma-Aldrich) until pH 4 and
brought onto an open column containing 1.5 mL of 55–105 μm
C18 resin (Waters), equilibrated to 0% acetonitrile (ACN) (VWR) +
0.1% TFA. After binding, a first wash was done with 0% ACN + 0.1%
TFA and a second wash with 20% ACN + 0.1% TFA. Finally, the sample
was eluted in 7.5 mL of 50% ACN + 0.1% TFA and subsequently freeze-dried. Freeze-dried samples eluted
in Milli-Q water were analyzed by MALDI-TOF or LC-MS as previously
described. Samples to be analyzed by
MALDI-TOF that were cleaved in salt containing buffer were desalted
by adding 2 μL of Milli-Q to a dried, spotted sample on the
MALDI-TOF plate, which was subsequently resorbed quickly with tissue
paper. After this wash step, the matrix was added as described. 75 μL of fresh overnight  culture was added per 100 mL of hand
warm 0.5% LB agar. Of this mixture, 12 mL was added to each 90 mm
diameter Petri dish or 25 mL, to each 140 mm diameter Petri dish.
All samples contained  30 μg of prepeptide,
of which at most 6 μg was active core peptide, and were set
to a 10 μL final volume. For all activity tests, a positive
control of 9 μL of 25 ng/μL nisin was spotted. All activity
tests were performed in triplicate with tested material taken from
at least three different expression batches. In the digests
of His-MrsA variants () with BH072 supernatant, samples contained either 3 μL
of BH072 supernatant or 3 μL of Milli-Q for the negative control.
The samples were incubated at 37 °C for 1 h, after which 9 μL
was spotted. For the activity test with MrsT150-His, a His-premersacidin
sample containing 1.5 μL of MrsT150-His His-tag elution was
incubated for 3 h at 37 °C in duplicate. After incubation, 2
μL of BH072 supernatant was added to one of the duplicates and
to a sample containing undigested His-premersacidin. All three samples
were incubated for another 30 min at 37 °C, after which 9 μL
was spotted. Supernatant for Activity Tests and Mersacidin
Production in
BH072 BH072 was
grown for 96 h, taking samples of the supernatant at 20, 48, 72, and
96 h. The samples were centrifuged, after which the supernatant was
filtered (0.2 μM) and stored for activity tests and MALDI-TOF
analysis. Cleavage of Premersacidin with MrsT150-His The activatable
peak was purified by HPLC from an amount of  1
mg of freeze-dried His-MrsA + MrsM + MrsD from C18 purification. The
HPLC purified sample was freeze-dried and dissolved in 48 μL
of Milli-Q. Of this solution, 2.5 μL was added to 6 μL
of Milli-Q and 1.5 μL of MrsT150-His His-tag elution. The mixture
was placed at 37 °C for 3 h, after which the sample was analyzed
by MALDI-TOF..