Lantibiotics
are antimicrobial
peptides harboring unusual post-translationally modified amino acid
residues such as dehydroalanine (Dha) and dehydrobutyrine (Dhb), lanthionine
(Lan) and methyllanthionine (MeLan), that are introduced by a promiscuous
post-translational modification (PTM) machinery. The
unique biosynthetic pathways and relatively low genetic complexity
of biosynthesis make lantibiotics good candidates for synthetic biology
and bioengineering, to expand the antimicrobial arsenal. Various synthetic and biosynthetic strategies
have been developed to increase the diversity of lantibiotics. The uncommon amino acids (Dha, Dhb, Lan, MeLan) in lantibiotics
play an important role in their biological activity and structural
stability. Other noncanonical amino acids (ncAAs) offer a further
highly diverse pool of building blocks that can introduce unique physicochemical
properties. By incorporating non-natural
functional groups with unique features, we can dramatically expand
the chemical and functional space of lantibiotic structures and enable
the design of novel lantibiotics with enhanced properties (e.g., stability,
specificity, bioavailability, and half-life). The use of this
approach allows for the  production of new
lantibiotics with an expanded amino acid repertoire. Among ncAAs, the analogues of methionine are of particular
interest, as some of them (e.g., azidohomoalanine and homopropargylglycine)
possess unique reactive groups which can serve as chemical handles
to conjugate with fluorophores, glycans, PEGs, lipids, peptide moieties,
and other antimicrobial moieties through click chemistry. Copper(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne
cycloaddition (CuAAC),
referred to as “click chemistry”, was first reported
by Sharpless and co-workers in 2001. It
is a region-selective copper(I) catalytic cycloaddition reaction between
an azide and an alkyne that gives rise to a triazole. Peptide modification
using click chemistry has been the subject of several studies for
the development of target-specific bacterial probes and for expanding
their bioactivity and application. Prompted by these recent reports, we used nisin as a model to explore
the potential of this approach for lantibiotic engineering. Nisin
is the best studied lanthipeptide to date. It is produced by  and has potent
activity against a broad spectrum of Gram-positive bacteria, including
many antibiotic-resistant organisms, such as methicillin-resistant  (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococci
(VRE). Mature nisin, encoded by  as a linear
precursor peptide (57 aa) that consists of a leader peptide (23 aa)
and a propeptide to be modified (34 aa), is released after modification
and cleavage of the leader. Gratifyingly,
the modification machinery of nisin has a broad substrate specificity,
which allows for the divergence from the original core-peptide to
produce variant peptides. Here, we describe the incorporation
of six different methionine
analogues with unsaturated, unique chemical handles and varying side
chain length, , Aha (azidohomoalanine), Hpg (homopropargylglycine),
Nle (norleucine), Eth (ethionine), Nva (norvaline), and Alg (allyglycine),
at four different positions in the lantibiotic nisin by using a methionine
auxotrophic strain of . Previous
studies have shown that with mutations at sites I4, M17, and M21,
nisin can retain or even have enhanced bioactivity. To broaden the structural diversity and test the effects
of single replacements of methionine with respective analogues, four
single methionine nisin mutants, , M17I, M21V,
M17I-M21V-M35, and I4M-M17I-M21V, were constructed. As methionine
is essential for the synthesis of post-translational modification
enzymes, a cross-expression system was developed utilizing separate
promoters, allowing for the separate induction of expression of target
genes and biosynthetic enzymes. The amino acid replacement and incorporation
efficiency of ncAAs into nisin derivatives were determined by matrix
assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight analyzer (MALDI-TOF)
and liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Twelve
nisin derivatives were purified in large scale by HPLC and their antimicrobial
activities were determined. In addition, six Aha- or Hpg-containing
nisin derivatives were coupled either mutually or with nisin ABC-azide
(A, B, and C denoting the first three lanthionine rings of nisin; ), Cy5-azide and
6-FAM-alkyne through click chemistry to obtain six dimeric nisin constructs,
three nisin hybrids, and six fluorescently labeled nisin variants. (A) A
cross expression system with two plasmids. ,
encoding the repressor of P; P, a zinc inducible promoter; , encoding NisA;  and ,
encoding plasmid replication proteins; , chloramphenicol
resistance gene; P, a nisin inducible
promoter; , encoding NisB; , encoding NisT; , encoding NisC; , erythromycin resistance gene. (B) Peptide sequence of nisin and
nisin derivatives. Lipid II binding site (rings AB), pore formation
domain (rings CDE), and hinge region (NMK) are indicated; Positions
17, 21, and 35, which served to incorporate methionine analogues of
nisin are indicated; Dha, dehydroalanine; Dhb, dehydrobutyrine; A-S-A,
lanthionine; Abu-S-A, methyllanthionine; In blue, wildtype Met positions;
In green, Met residues replaced by Ile or Val; In red, Met residues
at novel positions. (C) Structures of methionine and its analogues.
Met, -methionine; Aha, -azidohomoalanine; Hpg, -homopropargylglycine; Nle, -norleucine; Eth, -ethionine; Nva, -norvaline; Alg, -allyglycine. A Cross Expression System
to Incorporate Methionine Analogues
into Nisin by Use of  as a Host Two  approaches have been developed for incorporating
ncAAs into peptides. The first approach
is “site-specific incorporation”. For this method, the coexpression of orthogonal amber suppressor
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (AARS/tRNA) pairs is necessary. Specific
mutations can be introduced into the peptide sequence by reassigning
the amber nonsense stop codon during translation. However, the screening
and development of orthogonal AARS/tRNA pairs is time-consuming and
the production yield of this method is extremely low. Conversely,
“residue-specific incorporation”, the second approach,
that generally does not suffer from such drawback, is a more promising
strategy. This method typically involves
replacing natural amino acids with the ncAAs of interest by using
auxotrophic strains. It is able to generate broad and efficient structural
diversity by directly incorporating ncAAs  translation
into bioactive peptides. Various expression hosts have been
developed for the incorporation of ncAAs. Until now, the Gram-negative  is the only prokaryotic expression host used for the incorporation
of methionine analogues. Here, the Gram-positive expression
host , a methionine-auxotrophic strain,
is used for the incorporation of methionine analogues into the lantibiotic
nisin. After ribosomal synthesis of the precursor peptide with 19
standard amino acids and with variable methionine analogues, the unmodified
prenisin is processed by its dedicated modification machinery (). First, the serine
and threonine residues in the core peptide are Dha and Dhb by the
dehydratase NisB. The dehydrated residues are then coupled to specific
cysteine by the cyclase NisC to form lanthionine rings. Subsequently,
the modified prenisin is transported out of the cell by the ABC-type
transporter NisT, and then the leader is cleaved off by the extracellular
protease NisP to liberate the active peptide. As methionine is essential for the translation of post-translational
modification (PTM) enzymes and transporter, a cross expression system,
which allows for the expression of prenisin derivatives and PTM enzymes
and transporter at different time was used for this study.  NZ9000 was transformed with a plasmid encoding
the expression of NisBTC under the control of the P promoter and the other plasmid encoding the expression of
prenisin derivatives was controlled by the P promoter. The expression of NisBTC was first conducted by
the supplementation of methionine, after which the medium was replaced
by new medium lacking methionine, but containing methionine analogues
to express prenisin derivatives (A). Although the expression of the modification
machinery NisBTC was induced in advance, no effect on the modification
efficiency was observed. Incorporation of
Methionine Analogues into Nisin (1) Cotranslational
modifications,
insertion of methionine analogues into the precursor peptide. (2)
Post-translational modifications, converting the linear precursor
peptide into an active polycyclic peptide. Production of Nisin and Its Derivatives There are two
methionine residues in the core peptide of nisin, which are located
at sites 17 and 21. Previous studies showed that nisin with the mutation
at sites I4, M17, and M21 could retain or even have increased antimicrobial
activity. To test the effects of single
methionine replacement with analogues in bioactive nisin, four single
methionine mutants, , M17I, M21V, M17I-M21V-M35,
and I4M-M17I-M21V were constructed (B). The choice for Ile or Val as substituents
was to retain good antimicrobial activity, since both residues share
the hydrophobic character of Met and are sterically not very different,
though branched. Six methionine analogues, ,
Aha, Hpg, Nle, Eth, Nva, and Alg were selected for the incorporation
(C), and each
combination was tested. The expression level of nisin and its
derivatives is shown in . The protein quantities in the first five lanes showed that
Aha, Hpg, Nle, and Eth can be incorporated into nisin and its derivatives
at varying levels. However, incorporation of Nva and Alg was not observed
at any moment, and addition of these analogues to a culture lacking
methionine led to arrested cell growth. These results strongly indicate
that Nva and Alg cannot be incorporated by . The highest production yield was observed when normal methionine
was supplemented. Effectively, a lower production yield was observed
in the presence of methionine analogues, in particular with Eth, regardless
of the position within the molecule. Methionine analogue incorporation
in nisin, M17I, and M21V gave much higher yields of fully modified
peptides than M17I-M21V-M35 and I4M-M17I-M21V, which may be due to
the intolerance of the modification machinery and/or the transporter
to a change of chemical structures at sites I4 and M35. Surprisingly,
the production yield of fully modified M21V is even higher than that
of WT nisin. To assess the presence of post-translational modifications
and incorporation of ncAAs, all samples were further analyzed by HPLC
and MALDI-TOF. The resulting spectra showed that the production yield
of nisin and its derivatives with Aha and Hpg are much higher than
the ones with Nle and Eth. In addition, we found that Nle and Eth
had a negative influence on the dehydration rate, as large fractions
of 7 times dehydrated peptides were observed. Coomassie-blue stained
Tricine-SDS-PAGE gel. Each well contained
TCA-precipitated prepeptides from 1 mL supernatant. LC-MS Analysis of Nisin Derivatives In order to estimate
the incorporation efficiency of methionine analogues at different
positions, the precipitated precursor peptides were subjected to LC-MS.
The LC-MS data showed that the incorporation efficiency of Aha and
Hpg into mutants M17I, M21V, and I4M-M17I-M21V was more than 91%,
while the incorporation efficiency of Nle and Eth was 88% and 71–73%,
respectively. Remarkably, the incorporation efficiency of Aha and
Hpg into M17I-M21V-M35 was at least 99.5%, and the peaks of peptides
containing methionine were undetectable. However, the incorporation
efficiency of Nle and Eth was only 51 and 71%, respectively. In the
case of nisin, the incorporation efficiency was 88% for Aha, 87% for
Hpg, 77% for Nle, and 56% for Eth. Generally, the incorporation efficiency
of ncAAs declined in the order Aha > Hpg > Nle > Eth (). Incorporation of Aha and Hpg into nisin, M17I, and M21V did not
affect the dehydration efficiency, as peptides with 7 times dehydrated
residues were nearly undetectable, suggesting they are excellent methionine
surrogates. It may be due to the rate of activation of Aha and Hpg
by methionyl-tRNA synthetase (MetRS) during translation, which finally
results in the higher yield and efficient modification. However, introducing
Nle and Eth resulted in a large fraction of peptides with 7 times
dehydration. It may be that the integration speed of Nle and Eth during
translation is relatively slow which leads to a lower yield and insufficient
modification. The dehydration of M17I-M21V-M35 and I4M-M17I-M21V was
dramatically affected by the mutation. Additionally, methionine and
ethionine can be oxidized, and peaks corresponding to oxidized products
were indeed observed. Furthermore, the first methionine of prenisin
is usually cleaved by the enzyme methionine aminopeptidase (MAP).
However, a large portion of precursor peptide produced by this system
contained the N-terminal Met. The molecular weight of both peaks is
shown in . Incorporation Efficiency of Nisin
and Its Derivatives Analyzed by LC-MS >99.5% means
the peak of peptides
containing methionine is undetectable. The incorporation efficiency
indicates the percentage of the produced peptide with methionine analogues
incorporated completely. MS Analysis of Prenisin and Its Derivatives +Met1, with N-terminal Met; −Met1,
without N-terminal Met; −8HO, eight times dehydrated;
−8HO + Oxi, eight times dehydrated and one time
oxidized; −8HO + 2Oxi, eight times dehydrated and
two times oxidized; −7HO, seven times dehydrated;
−7HO + Oxi, seven times dehydrated and one time
oxidized. Antimicrobial Activity
of Nisin and Its Derivatives In consideration of a sufficient
production yield of the fully modified
peptides, 12 peptides containing methionine, Aha or Hpg were purified
in large scale for antimicrobial activity tests ().  was used as a first indicator strain in an agar-well diffusion assay
to assess the antimicrobial activity. The results showed that M17Aha-M21Aha,
M17Hpg-M21Hpg, M21V, M21V-M17Aha, and M21V-M17Hpg have higher antimicrobial
activity compared to WT nisin, and mutant M21V showed the best activity
with any of the three amino acids. However, in all the cases, the
activity of mutants M17I and M17I-M21V-M35 decreased dramatically. The MIC values were determined
for  and six Gram-positive pathogenic
strains. The tested strains included
two Staphylococci, two Enterococci,  and  (). The results showed that the replacement
of Met with Met analogues can alter the antimicrobial activity and
spectrum. Certain peptides retained or even displayed higher activity
against a specific strain, while showing reduced activities against
others, suggesting a possible increase in selectivity. For example,
M17Aha-M21Aha showed improved activity against , but the activity against the other strains was reduced when compared
to nisin. M21V has been reported to have enhanced bioactivity and
specific activity against all tested Gram-positive pathogens including
four VRE strains compared to WT nisin. In our study,
M21V showed reduced activities against two Enterococci strains, but
retained a high activity against others. Improving the antimicrobial
activity of nisin turned out to be difficult. However, engineering
nisin can generate new nisin derivatives that have different properties
and can be used for specific targets. In addition, some nisin derivatives
showed different inhibition activity in solid media tests compared
to the broth MIC test. This phenomenon can be related to the difference
in diffusion ability. Antimicrobial
activity of nisin and its derivatives against . In gray: values that are improved in comparison
to nisin. MIC Values (μM)
of Nisin and
Its Derivatives MIC values that are retained or
improved in comparison to nisin. Production of Dimeric Nisin Constructs and Nisin Hybrids http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00308/suppl_file/sb0c00308_si_001.pdf The mode of action of nisin involves its binding to lipid II, followed
by membrane insertion, which leads to pore formation. The pore-complex
has a uniform and stable structure, consisting out of eight nisin
and four lipid II molecules. In a previous
study, a nisin dimer was prepared by connecting two nisin molecules
at the C-terminus through a linker, which led to slightly increased
pore-forming activity. As the nisin derivatives
contain a clickable group (azide or alkyne) at positions 17, 21, and
35, a setup was devised to investigate how different orientations
and multivalency patterns of nisin dimers affect antimicrobial activity. M17I-M21Aha, M17I-M21Hpg, M17I-M21V-M35Aha,
M17I-M21V-M35Hpg, M21V-M17Aha, and M21V-M17Hpg were coupled either
mutually or with nisin ABC-azide to generate six dimeric nisin constructs
and three nisin hybrids which were characterized by MALDI-TOF (). The antimicrobial activity
of these dimers was tested against  by agar diffusion assays. The resulting growth inhibition halos
indicated the retainment of at least some degree of activity in all
variants. We found that the activity of dimeric nisin constructs increased
in order as reactions are performed at the hinge region (position
21), the C-terminus (position 35), and ring C (position 17). M17I-M21Aha
+ M17I-M21Hpg is the least active dimeric nisin construct (A and B). Coupling at the hinge region may result in increased steric
hindrance and decreased flexibility and therefore hindering its lipid
II binding and pore formation features. It again proves that the flexibility
of the hinge region is important for the activity, which is in accordance
with previous studies. Also M17I-M21V-M35Aha + M17I-M21V-M35Hpg
showed lower activity. Coupling at the C-terminus of nisin gave rise
to a dimeric nisin construct containing two lipid II binding sites.
However, the pore formation ability may be weakened or abolished as
the C-terminus of nisin was involved in the connection since both
C-termini must flip simultaneously and insert in the membrane. This
involves the movement and reorientation of a bulky set of amino acids,
including the intertwined rings DE of each monomer, through the membrane.
M21V-M17Aha + M21V-M17Hpg is the most active dimeric nisin construct.
Coupling at ring C gave the best activity, which may be due to the
fact that rings AB are still able to bind lipid II, while the hinge
region, rings DE and the linear C-terminus keeps their individual
flexibility, allowing the C-terminus of nisin to form pores. Therefore,
position 17 is the optimal site for coupling moieties out of the 3
chosen positions. This study shows the great potential of this strategy
for linking active modules from different peptides. Moreover, nisin
ABC was obtained by enzymatic digestion of nisin using chymotrypsin
and it was subsequently C-terminally functionalized with azidopropylamine
to generate nisin ABC-azide. Coupling M17I-M21Hpg, M17I-M21V-M35Hpg,
and M21V-M17Hpg with nisin ABC-azide showed the same antimicrobial
activity pattern as above; , activity is altered
in ascending order as reactions are performed to the hinge region,
the C-terminus, and ring C, respectively (B). (A) Structure of three representative dimeric
nisin constructs
with reactions performed at the hinge region (position 21), the C-terminus
(position 35), and ring C (position 17). (B) Antimicrobial activity
of six dimeric nisin and three nisin hybrids at equimolar concentrations
against  with nisin as positive control.
M17I-M21Aha + M17I-M21Hpg is the least active dimeric nisin construct
whereas M21VM17Aha + M21V-M17Hpg is the most active. Similarly, M17I-M21Hpg
+ Nisin ABC-azide is the least active nisin hybrid, whereas M21V-M17Hpg
+ Nisin ABC-azide is the most active. Fluorescently Labeled Nisin Variants http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00308/suppl_file/sb0c00308_si_001.pdf Labeling of nisin
with fluorescent probes has greatly contributed to understanding its
mechanism of action as shown in studies by Scherer () and Descobry () The C-terminus of nisin is the common
site for labeling. However, introduction of a tag in this position
poses a considerable perturbation in the structure and activity of
nisin. Here, 6-FAM-alkyne and Cy5-azide (A) were successfully coupled at three different
positions (positions 17, 21, and 35) of nisin, and the resulting compounds
were characterized by MALDI-TOF (). The antimicrobial activity of six fluorescently
labeled nisin variants was retained (B). Coupling 6-FAM-alkyne and Cy5-azide at
different positions of nisin showed the same activity pattern as that
obtained with dimeric nisin constructs. Thus, M21V-M17Aha was found
to be the most suitable derivative for labeling with both 6-FAM-alkyne
and Cy5-azide. The localization of six fluorescently labeled nisin
variants interacting with  were studied
by fluorescence microscopy (C). Fluorescence intensity detection indicated that
the labeled nisin conjugates were all located at the cell membrane.
Cy5-azide labeled nisin variants showed lower activity than their
6-FAM-alkyne labeled counterparts, and no aggregation was observed
in cell division sites. This may be due to the fact that Cy5-azide
would affect the binding of nisin conjugates to lipid II. M21V-M17Aha
+ 6-FAM-alkyne (D) was found to be the most potent fluorescently labeled nisin variant,
as it showed similar activity to nisin. It was located at the septum
of cell division sites where the membrane-bound cell wall precursor
lipid II concentration is maximal. These results are in accordance
with previous studies using fluorescently labeled nisin A and nisin
Z, which indicated that both molecules were accumulating at the cell
division sites of  and  respectively. M21V-M17Aha + 6-FAM-alkyne shows great potential as a tool to further
study the antibacterial mechanism of action of nisin and for understanding
the mechanism of synergy of nisin with other molecules on Gram-negative
strain. Moreover, this strategy can be extended to modify other ribosomally
synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides (RiPPs). While
numerous novel RiPPs have been reported, little is known about the
mechanism of action of these peptides. It would be highly appropriate
to use this method to modify such RiPPs with biomarkers or fluorescence
probes to investigate their mechanism of action. (A) Structure of fluorescent
dyes 6-FAM-alkyne and Cy5-azide. (B)
Antimicrobial activity of six fluorescently labeled nisin variants.
(C) Localization of six fluorescently labeled nisin variants by fluorescence
microscopy. (D) Structure of the most potent fluorescently labeled
nisin variant M21V-M17Aha + 6-FAM-alkyne. In summary, we have demonstrated for the first
time the incorporation
of methionine analogues into RiPPs in . Four methionine analogues were successfully installed at four distinct
positions of the lantibiotic nisin. The genetic code of  can be regarded to be expanded by incorporating methionine analogues.
The structural diversity was enhanced, while retaining or even improving
antimicrobial activity against specific pathogens or Gram-positive
bacteria. In addition, this study underlines that the bio-orthogonal
reactive groups of ncAAs can serve as a platform for post-biosynthetic
modifications, such as conjugating with peptides, or functional labels
(e.g., fluorescence). The insertion of ncAAs during translation along
with the possibility for their subsequent modification (postsynthetic
conjugation) could further expand the chemical and functional space
of RiPPs. Overall, our experiments further exemplify one of the most
important applications of ncAA incorporation, that is, the functional,
structural, and chemical diversification of RiPPs. This study provides
an efficient method for RiPPs engineering by incorporation of ncAAs
and chemical coupling. Bacterial Strains, Plasmids,
and Growth Conditions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00308/suppl_file/sb0c00308_si_001.pdf Strains and plasmids used in this study
are listed in . All  strains were grown in M17 broth supplemented
with 0.5% (w/v) glucose
at 30 °C for genetic manipulation. Five μg/mL erythromycin
and/or chloramphenicol were added when it was necessary. Chemical
defined medium lacking tryptone (CDM-P) was specially used for peptide expression and methionine analogues
incorporation. Construction of Expression Vectors http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00308/suppl_file/sb0c00308_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00308/suppl_file/sb0c00308_si_001.pdf The primers used
in this study are listed in . The molecular cloning techniques were performed following
standard protocols. The preparation of
competent cells and transformation were performed according to Holo
and Nes. Fast digest restriction enzymes
and ligase were used as recommended by the manufacturer. Nisin derivatives
with one mutation in the core peptide (pCZ-nisA-M17I and pCZ-nisA-M21V)
were produced by spice overlap extension PCR. For the construction
of pCZ-nisA-M17I-M21V-M35 and pCZ-nisA-I4M-M17I-M21V, nested PCR of
pCZ-nisA was used to introduce the mutation. The amplification was
performed using Phusion Polymerase (Thermo Scientific) following the
provider’s instructions and the primers are listed in . After amplification and
digestion with NheI and PaeI, it was ligated in pCZ-nisA digested
with the same enzymes. The ligation product was desalted and transformed
into  NZ9000. The plasmid was isolated
and sequenced to check the integrity of the sequence. Methionine
Analogues and Fluorescent Probes The methionine
analogue -homopropargylglycine (Hpg) was purchased from
Chiralix (Nijmegen, Netherlands). -Azidohomoalanine (Aha), -norleucine (Nle), -norvaline (Nva), and -allyglycine (Alg) were purchased from Iris Biotech GmbH (Marktredwitz,
Germany). -Ethionine (Eth) was purchased from Alfa Aesar
(Karlsruhe, Germany). 6-FAM-alkyne and Cy5-azide were purchased from
Jena Bioscience (Thuringia, Germany). Precursor Peptide Precipitation strains harboring pIL3eryBTC and
pCZ-nisA were grown overnight in
CDM-P with 5 μg/mL erythromycin and 5 μg/mL chloramphenicol.
Subsequently, the overnight culture was diluted in 20 mL fresh CDM-P
back to OD = 0.1. When the OD reached
0.4–0.6, 10 ng/mL nisin was added to induce the expression
of NisBTC. Three hours later, the cells were spun down at room temperature
for 8 min at 5000 rpm and then washed three times with CDM-P lacking
methionine and resuspended back in the initial volume of CDM-P lacking
methionine. The medium was supplemented with either methionine (38
mg/L) or 50 mg/L methionine analogues, and 0.5 mM ZnSO was added to induce peptide expression. After overnight growth,
the supernatant was harvested by centrifugation at 8500 rpm for 20
min at 4 °C. The precursor peptides were precipitated by Trichloroacetic
acid (TCA) for further analysis according to Link () Briefly, an ice-cold 100% TCA solution
was added to the supernatant to reach a final concentration of 10%
TCA, and the solution was stored overnight at 4 °C. The precipitated
peptide was pelleted by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 60 min at 4
°C. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed with
ice-cold acetone in half the original culture volume by a second centrifugation
(8000 rpm, 45 min, 4 °C). The acetone was discarded, and the
remaining acetone was evaporated off over several hours at room temperature.
Dried pellets were suspended in 300 μL 0.05% aqueous acetic
acid solution. The precipitated
precursor
peptides were analyzed by Tricine-SDS-PAGE according to Schagger () 15 μL of each
sample mixed with 4 μL loading dye was loaded on the gel. Coomassie
brilliant blue G-250 was used to stain the gel. LC-MS Analysis
of Nisin Derivatives The precipitated
precursor peptides were injected into the LC-MS system consisting
of an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled  a HESI-II
electrospray source with a Q-Exactive Orbitrap-based mass spectrometer
(all Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Three μL of each
sample was loaded onto a Kinetex EVO-C18 column (2.6 μm particles,
100 × 2.1 mm, Phenomenex). The eluents for the LC separation
were (A) water and (B) Acetonitrile both containing 0.1% formic acid.
The following gradient was delivered at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min:
10% B until 1 min; then linear to 40% B in 9 min; linear to 80% B
in 2 min; hold in 80% B for 2 min, after which a switch back to 10%
B was performed in 0.1 min. After 5 min of equilibration the next
injection was performed. The LC column was kept at 60 °C. The
HESI-II electrospray source was operated with the parameters recommended
by the MS software for the LC flow rate used (Spray voltage 3.5 kV
(positive mode)); other parameters were sheath gas 50 AU, auxiliary
gas 10 AU, cone gas 2 AU; capillary temperature 275 °C; heater
temperature 400 °C. The samples were measured in positive mode
from / 500–2000 at a Resolution
of 140 000 @ / 200. The
instrument was calibrated in positive mode using the Pierce LTQ Velos
ESI positive-ion calibration solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford,
USA) (containing caffeine, the tetrapeptide MRFA and a mixture of
fluorinated phosphazines ultramark 1621). The system was controlled
using the software packages Xcalibur 4.1, SII for Xcalibur 1.3 and
Q-Exactive Tune 2.9 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Xtract-algorithm
within Xcalibur was used for deconvolution of the isotopically resolved
data. Purification of Nisin and Its Derivatives To obtain
pure peptides for activity test, the supernatant of 1 L culture was
first incubated with purified NisP at
37 °C for 3 h to cleave off the nisin leader, and then the supernatant
was loaded on a C18 open column (Spherical C18, particle size: 40–75
μm, Sigma-Aldrich). The column was washed and eluted with different
concentrations of buffer B (buffer A, Milli-Q with 0.1% TFA; buffer
B, acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA). The active fractions were lyophilized
and further purified by HPLC using an Agilent 1200 series HPLC with
a RP-C12 column (Jupiter 4 μm Proteo 90A, 250 × 4.6 mm,
Phenomenex). The peak that is the fully modified peptide with the
correct molecular weight was lyophilized and stored as powder until
further use. MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry Characterization One μL
of each sample was spotted, dried and washed with Milli-Q water on
the target. Subsequently, 1 μL of 5 mg/mL a-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic
acid (Sigma-Aldrich) was spotted on top of the sample. An ABI Voyager
DE Pro (Applied Biosystems) matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight analyzer (MALDI-TOF) operating in linear mode using
external calibration was used to obtain mass spectra. Antimicrobial
activity was
tested against  according to protocols
described previously. HPLC purified and
lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 0.05% aqueous acetic acid
solution and the peptide amount was quantified by HPLC according to
Schmitt () 0.15 nmol
of sample was added to each well. The agar plate was incubated at
30 °C overnight, after which the zone of inhibition was measured. Determination of the Minimal Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) For the MIC assay, the indicator strains CAL-MRSA, MW2-MRSA, , , , ,
and  were first streaked on GM17 plate
and cultured overnight. The peptide samples were diluted with 0.05%
acetic acid to a concentration of 4–128 μg/mL (depending
on the estimated activity of the peptide and the strain tested). GM17
broth was used for the activity test against , , and . MHB was used for the activity test against CAL-MRSA, MW2-MRSA, , and . The
MIC value test was performed according to Wiegand () Nisin was digested using
chymotrypsin to generate nisin ABC. The truncated nisin molecule can
be readily purified in accordance with protocols reported previously. Nisin (180 mg) was dissolved in 150 mL Tris
buffer (25 mmol Tris acetate, pH 7.5) and the solution was cooled
on ice for 15 min. Then chymotrypsin (15 mg) was added and stirred
at room temperature for 15 min. The reaction was performed at 30 °C
for 16 h and an extra 15 mg chymotrypsin was added. After 24 h incubation,
another 15 mg chymotrypsin was added and incubated for another 24
h. The reaction mixture was acidified with HCl (1 M) to pH 4.0 followed
by adding 3 mL MeCN and concentrated . The
pure nisin ABC was purified from the mixture by RP-HPLC and lyophilized
to obtain a white powder (20 mg). Nisin ABC (10 mg, 6.5 μmol)
was dissolved in DMF (50 μL) and azidopropylamine (44 μL,
43.2 mg, 432 μmol), PyBOP (Benzotriazol-1-yl-oxytripyrrolidinophosphonium
hexafluorophosphate) (9 mg, 17.2 μmol), and DIPEA (,-diisopropylethylamine) (6 μL, 34.8 μmol)
were added. The reaction was vortexed for 20 min and subsequently
quenched with 5 mL buffer (HO:MeCN, 95:5 + 0.1% TFA).
The reaction mixture was purified by HPLC and pure nisin ABC-azide
was lyophilized to obtain a white powder (8 mg). A stock solution of CuSO (10 mg, 100 mM), BTTAA (2-(4-((bis((1-(-butyl)-1-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl)amino)methyl)-1-1,2,3-triazol-1-yl)-acetic acid) (25 mg, 50 mM), and sodium
ascorbate
(200 mg, 1 M) in ddHO were prepared, aliquoted and stored
at −20 °C for further use. M17I-M21Aha (70 μg, 0.02
μmol) and M17I-M21Hpg (70 μg, 0.02 μmol) were dissolved
in 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0, final reaction volume: 200 μL).
Then, CuSO (4 μL, 0.4 μmol): BTTAA (40 μL,
2 μmol)-premix were added followed by the addition of sodium
ascorbate (20 μL, 20 μmol). The reaction was performed
at 37 °C for 1 h and purified directly by RP-HPLC. M17I-M21V-M35Aha,
M17I-M21V-M35Hpg, M21V-M17Aha, and M21V-M17Hpg were reacted either
mutually or with nisin ABC-azide (40 μg, 0.02 μmol), Cy5-azide
(5 μL, 10 mg/mL), or 6-FAM-alkyne (4 μL, 10 mg/mL) at
the above conditions. The reaction was further scaled up in ratio
to obtain more products. The reaction products were purified directly
by HPLC and the peak with the correct molecular weight was lyophilized
and stored as powder until further use. Cultures of overnight grown  were
diluted 1:100 and incubated in GM17
at 37 °C for about 4 h to reach OD of 0.5. Then,
0.5 mL of culture were centrifuged at 7000 rpm for 3 min. Fluorescently
labeled nisin variants were added into the Eppendorf tube with cells
at desired concentration in 100 μL saline solution and cells
were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. After three other washes
in saline buffer, 0.6 μL bacterial suspensions and 1% low-melting-point
agar were added to a microscopy plate and the localization of nisin
variants were inspected with a Delta Vision Elite inverted epifluorescence
microscope (Applied Precision, GE Healthcare, Issaquah, WA, USA) equipped
with a stage holder, a climate chamber, a seven-color combined set
InsightSSI Solid-state Illumination module and an sCMOS camera (PCO
AG, Kelheim, Germany). Excitation was set to 646 nm and emission to
662 nm to capture Cy5-azide fluorescence. For 6-FAM-alkyne fluorescence,
we employed 490 nm for excitation and emission at 513 nm. Images were
obtained by ImageJ software..