COVID-19 is the pandemic disease caused by a novel coronavirus first isolated in late 2019,
SARS-CoV-2. Belonging to the same family of viruses that caused the
SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) epidemic of 2003 and the MERS (Middle East
respiratory syndrome) outbreak of 2012, SARS-CoV-2 has proven to be highly
transmissible. Just as SARS-CoV and
MERS-CoV have animal reservoirs, SARS-CoV-2 is also thought to be of zoonotic origin,
jumping from an animal to human host. Both a bat and pangolin coronavirus have been
identified as the closest genetic relatives to SARS-CoV-2, but the exact route from animals
to humans has yet to be elucidated. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization designated the outbreak
to be a pandemic, and as of July 2020, there have been over 11.5 M cases
and 500 K deaths spanning the globe in 188 countries, demonstrating that the virus is a
serious threat to global health. SARS-CoV-2 is an RNA virus with a ca. 30 kb genome (NCBI Reference Sequence: NC_045512.2).
The genome encodes four structural proteins: the spike (S) protein, the envelope (E)
protein, the membrane (M) protein, and the nucleocapsid (N) protein. Around two-thirds of
the genome consists of the orf1ab region, which codes for orf1ab polyproteins that are
cleaved into various nonstructural proteins, composed of many proteins important for
replication, such as an RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), replicase–transcriptase
complex, and RNA helicase. SARS-CoV-2 infects by
binding the angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ACE2), present on the surface of a variety of
cell types, with the S protein. The virus is transmitted from person to
person through aerosol droplets from an infected persons’ cough, sneeze, or
saliva. The pathological symptoms of the disease can vary but most
commonly include respiratory illness, dry cough, fever, and cytokine-storm related
complications. Further, many SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals are
asymptomatic and capable of inadvertently spreading SARS-CoV-2, increasing the spread of the
disease. With no available vaccine and high transmissibility, proper detection and containment are
key to helping mitigate the spread and devastation caused by SARS-CoV-2. The current most common diagnostic method used to identify SARS-CoV-2 infection is a
molecular technique for detecting viral RNA through nucleic acid amplification, RT-PCR.
Around the world, a variety of RT-PCR kits are in use, each with varying specificity. RT-PCR
is a ubiquitous method for a myriad of disease detection, but the ability to employ this
method in low resource areas lacking centralized care facilities or at the point of care
(POC) is limited due to equipment and energy needs. Oftentimes, it is required to obtain a
rapid result at the POC, allowing for easier containment of a pathogenic virus such as
SARS-CoV-2. This Review discusses current molecular and serological
methods in use for SARS-CoV-2 detection, with particular interest in isothermal detection
platforms. We discuss their advantages and disadvantages relative to PCR-based and
serological techniques () as well as
isothermal techniques not yet used in SARS-CoV-2 diagnostics that could allow for the
expansion of testing capabilities as a means of supporting safe reopenings of businesses and
schools as well as allowing for routine household testing. Comparison of Different Diagnostic Test Classes current gold standard, ubiquitous in hospital laboratories expensive, time-consuming, and energy-intensive with a requirement for
high-cost instrumentation one-step isothermal amplification/detection lowest resource requirements, amenable to POC and field deployment, fast
processing times false positives and negatives present unique engineering challenges, primer
design may be time-consuming and expensive in some cases isothermal amplification/CRISPR/Cas-based detection dual specificity enhancement afforded by two-step amplification/readout
method challenges associated with isothermal amplification techniques and those of
Cas-based detection, readout is qualitative due to dependence on collateral
activity of Cas enzymes only means of measuring immunity if neutralizing antibodies tested, rapid
positive/negative result patient must mount immune response before testing positive, distinction
between neutralizing and non-neutralizing antibodies PCR-Based SARS-CoV-2 Detection Platforms Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) are the most common diagnostic tests used to
detect pathogens, and many of the current SARS-CoV-2 detection techniques are primarily
based on NAATs. NAATs involve nucleic acid amplification, a process
that initiates with a small quantity of starting nucleic acids and uses primers that target
specific, short nucleic acid sequences in conjunction with enzymes to amplify or increase
the quantity of starting nucleic acids. The most common type of NAAT is
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which amplifies DNA and can be used in reverse
transcription PCR (RT-PCR) for detection of RNA or in quantitative PCR (qPCR) for
measurement of copy number, and reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) for detection of RNA.
Recently, Ellington and coworkers described a single-enzyme approach to RT-PCR detection of
SARS-CoV-2. This approach uses an engineered thermostable reverse transcriptase/DNA
polymerase based on a reverse transcription xenopolymerase (RTX) generated by directed
evolution of Archaeal family-B DNA polymerases (polB). PCR is the current “gold standard” in molecular diagnostics, and the
multiple temperatures employed in the reaction allow for tuning a range of properties,
including primer annealing temperature, denaturation temperature, and extension
temperature. These can be adjusted at each successive cycle (e.g., touchdown PCR), and
instruments exist that can screen a range of temperatures for a given step (e.g., gradient
PCR). Fluorescence-monitored PCR instruments (e.g., real-time PCR instruments) exist,
which can monitor reaction progress by either nonspecific dyes (e.g., SYBR Green) or
dual-labeled probes (e.g., TaqMan). Owing to its requirement for repeated excursions to multiple annealing, extension, and
denaturation temperatures, PCR requires bidirectional temperature control. This
necessitates expensive instrumentation, typically using a Peltier-effect device as
implemented in most thermal cyclers. Similarly, readout requires either electrophoresis
followed by gel readout, requiring a skilled technician, or real-time fluorescence
readout, requiring a real-time PCR instrument with associated excitation source(s),
optics, and emission detectors. This necessarily increases costs. Isothermal SARS-CoV-2 Detection Platforms Isothermal detection platforms make use of isothermal nucleic acid amplification methods
that allow amplification at constant temperatures. This type of NAAT
can avoid the high temperatures associated with thermal cycling in PCR and are thus more
applicable to low-resource environments, field applications, and laboratories lacking
expensive, energy intensive PCR equipment. Isothermal detection techniques can undertake
rapid sample and reagent preparation and can also be coupled with a variety of readouts,
enhancing their ease-of-use and accessibility (, ). Workflow and readout for isothermal detection techniques. (I) Specimen collection from
oropharyngeal swabs or serum collection from blood. (II) Rapid sample preparation and
addition of specific primers and enzymes without the need for nuclear extraction
methods. (III) Amplification of nucleic acids at a constant temperature. (IV) A variety
of readouts are possible; some qualitative readouts only supply a positive or negative
evaluation, while quantitative readouts measure the amount of infectious particles. Comparison among Different Diagnostic Techniques for SARS-CoV-2 pH change, colorimetric paper dipstick reverse transcriptase, DNA polymerase Abbott Laboratories’ ID Now (NEAR) reverse transcriptase, recombinase, ligase, single-stranded binding proteins,
DNA polymerase isothermal techniques with
CRISPR-based detection SARS-CoV-2 DETECTR lateral flow assay reverse transcriptase, DNA polymerase, Cas12 DNA polymerase, recombinase, Cas12b, RNase inhibitor, T7 RNA
polymerase Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (LAMP) The loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) method uses a DNA polymerase enzyme in
conjunction with 4–6 different primers, each recognizing different regions of the
target DNA (). The DNA
polymerase used in LAMP has high strand displacement activity and can be used in conjunction
with multiplexed reactions and reverse transcription techniques to detect pathogenic
agents. Reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification
(RT-LAMP) is useful for detecting RNA-based viruses as it combines conventional LAMP with a
reverse transcriptase enzyme, allowing for simultaneous reverse transcription and
amplification. RT-LAMP is a one-step amplification reaction, allowing all the primers and
necessary enzymes to be incubated isothermally in a single step. The
final readout for LAMP can be real-time detection using fluorescence or absorbance
instrumentation. Loop-mediated isothermal amplification. (I) Production of LAMP starting amplicon:
First, the forward internal primer (FIP) and the backward internal primer (BIP) anneal
to the F2c region and the B2c region in the target DNA strand, respectively. Next, the
primers are extended by a strand displacing DNA polymerase. Primers F3 and B3 hybridize
to regions F3c and B3c, respectively, and are extended by a strand displacing DNA
polymerase generating both double-stranded and single-stranded products. Self-primed DNA
synthesis converts dumbbell-shaped DNA structures to stem-loop structures that are the
starting material for LAMP. (II) Cycling amplification and elongation: Subsequent
hybridization of backward inner primer generates gapped stem-loop DNA, which undergoes
self-primed DNA synthesis, forming further loops for binding of forward inner primers.
Dotted arrows show continuous reactions. Subsequent rounds of elongation and recycling
give rise to multiple stem-loop DNA structures with both double- and single-stranded
products. RT-LAMP was recently shown to detect SARS-CoV-2 in <30 min, using patient samples such
as urine, saliva, and oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal swabs spiked with various
concentrations of synthetic COVID-19 amplicon. The low detection time
is promising for the potential use of this technique in POC applications. This rapid
screening test used Lasergene MegAlign (DNASTAR) and BLAST 2 (Basic Local Alignment Search
Tool) for analysis of 23 COVID-19 strains and other sequence-related coronaviruses to
characterize areas of sequence convergence and design specific primers. Using six
different primers, these investigators tested simulated clinical samples that were spiked
with SARS-CoV-2, Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), betacoronavirus England-1
(BtCoV), or murine hepatitis virus (MHV). The study conducted qRT-PCRs for comparison and
found that RT-LAMP was both specific and sensitive for SARS-CoV-2. By using fluorescence
and gel-based detection techniques, they evaluated that a temperature of 63 °C for 30
min was optimal for amplification and detection. RT-LAMP was successful in detecting 27
different strains of SARS-CoV-2 and specificity was evaluated by ensuring that SARS-CoV-2
spiked samples were the only positive RT-LAMP reactions. Lack of accessibility to clinical
samples limited the ability to test this technique on infected samples, and it was only
tested on synthetic samples. In another report, Lu et al. designed a RT-LAMP assay targeting the 
gene exhibiting a colorimetric readout based on the pH of the sample. This assay has a
limit of detection of 30 copies of RNA and detection takes place in 40 min. Specificity
was tested against clinical samples for other common respiratory illnesses, and no
off-target amplification was seen. A unique adaptation of LAMP was
implemented in a barcoded RT-LAMP method called LAMP-seq that uses three isothermal steps
to barcode amplicons. The protocol incorporates sample-specific
barcodes by inserting barcode sequences into the LAMP primers, followed by pooling of
reactions into batches, which are then subjected to a secondary amplification and
barcoding with PCR. These amplicons are then purified and deep-sequenced, and analyzed
using a software package, LAMP-Seq-Inspector, also reported in the manuscript. With a
limit of detection of 105 RNA molecules/μL and a cost of less than $20 per test,
LAMP-seq has the ability to pool and process these barcoded amplicons through mass
sequencing, making the process scalable for millions of tests every day. This is
especially relevant in combating virus spread through asymptomatic carriers. High-throughput techniques such as LAMP-seq could enable population-scale
testing, which will be beneficial for monitoring cases in areas of SARS-CoV-2 resurgence
and will enhance surveillance, limiting exponential spread. RT-LAMP-based iLACO (isothermal LAMP-based method for COVID-19) is another recently
reported LAMP-based technique developed for detection of SARS-CoV-2.
iLACO is as sensitive as qPCR, with a detection limit of 10 copies of SARS-CoV-2, and a
detection time of between 15 and 40 min. Since DNA polymerase-led nucleotide incorporation
is accompanied by hydrogen ion release, iLACO, like the assay developed by Lu et al.,
combines RT-LAMP with a pH-based readout to enable colorimetric output. iLACO was tested
on viral RNA extracted from patient samples and reverse transcribed using an engineered
reverse transcriptase (SuperScript (III). Primer design involved analysis of a region of
the ORF1ab gene. Using five sets of different primers, samples were tested in both a
thermal PCR cycler and a water bath maintained at 65 °C for 20–40 min. Primer
specificity was ascertained with sequence comparison to other related coronaviruses and
influenza viruses. The colorimetric detection entailed that negative reactions would
remain at higher pH, resulting in the phenol red pH indicator remaining pink, while a
reaction positive for SARS-CoV-2 would decrease in pH, resulting in a color change from
pink to yellow. iLACO is rapid; a signal for positive reactions can be detected in about 20 min. The test
is also sensitive to up to 10 copies of the  gene, and the test
detection time correlated with qPCR cycle number; a qPCR Ct of 37 corresponded to a iLACO
color change point of 37 min. The study also used several alternative detection methods
such as fluorescence detection and gel imaging. Furthermore, the use of 43 clinical
samples that were confirmed positive by RT-PCR methods is promising for the clinical use
of the iLACO system. Forty-two of the 43 known-positive samples were detected successfully
by iLACO within 40 min of incubation, when the RNA concentration in the sample was around
0.2–47 ng/μL. With a short detection time of ca. 30 min, this test shows
efficacy in detecting SARS-CoV-2 in both RNA and cDNA samples. Another recent preprint from Ellington and coworkers uses RT-LAMP and seeks to overcome
potential false positives due to aberrant amplification. This is a problem with
nonspecific read-outs, seen with pH probes or intercalating dyes. To overcome this, they
used oligonucleotide strand exchange (OSD) probes. In the technique described, SARS-CoV-2
LAMP-OSD, fluorescent probes are used that are mostly double-stranded and contain a
fluorescent probe-quencher pair at one end. Strand exchange occurs
when a toehold in the probe base pairs with the product of the LAMP reaction, initiating
branch migration until the probe’s fluorophore and quencher are separated. Bhadra
et al. demonstrates this to work with probes previously designed in assays using
nonspecific read outs. Building on these assays, Bhadra et al. created a one-pot
reaction capable of detecting two targets, the  gene and the
 gene. With primers targeting both regions and probes for each
amplicon, a positive signal was seen with as little as 10 genomic RNA copies/reaction, and
no signal was seen when using 23 ng of human genomic DNA as the negative control. Handyfuge-LAMP was recently developed as an optimized LAMP assay that is especially
suited for POC diagnostics due to its low-cost and electricity-free centrifugation
methods. The group established a hardware system called
“Handyfuge” that is cheap (<$5 per unit) and easily assembled for
achieving the high speed centrifugation needed for separation of inhibitory components
from inactivated saliva samples. The reagents also include a chaotropic salt binding
solution and a silica binding solution that enables viral RNA capture. This allows the
whole procedure of sample processing and amplification to be carried out with an
inexpensive Handyfuge and a water bath, along with LAMP reagents. It is thus able to avoid
multiple-step sample handling and expensive centrifugation machines. The preprint claims a
detection limit of 10–100 copies per μL in saliva, shown by colorimetric
change to indicate presence of synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA. The primary advantage of this rapid detection technique is that it is performed
isothermally and hence is amenable to use with low-cost instrumentation. The use of LAMP
with a pH-based readout showcases the adaptability of this reaction. Another important
advantage is that the detection procedure can avoid the nucleic-acid extraction step, a
procedure that is time-consuming and potentially contamination-inducing. LAMP has been
shown to function with cell lysates. However, extraction steps
concentrates the nucleic acid as well, enhancing overall assay sensitivity. By using
multiple primer sets in a single reaction, LAMP has been shown to be extremely specific
for the target amplicon. Furthermore, LAMP reagent kits are amenable to lyophilization and
have been effective in detection of other RNA viruses such as HIV and the Ebola Zaire
Virus. Due to the number of primers needed, primer design is complicated, making it difficult to
design new assays. It is also important to note that isothermal detection techniques can
exhibit false positives and thus more stringent controls may need to be in place than with
RT-PCR methods. Recombinase Polymerase Amplification Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) is an isothermal amplification technique that
involves two primers binding a double-stranded template with assistance of single-stranded
binding proteins and a recombinase, followed by extension with DNA polymerase, to allow
isothermal amplification on DNA targets of interest. The process
involves recombinase–primer complexes that are able to scan dsDNA, identify a
primer-binding site, and enable strand invasion by the primer. RPA
circumvents the need for thermocycling by employing a recombinase enzyme and a strand
displacing DNA polymerase. Via the use of loading factor proteins, primers anneal to their
complementary region by the recombinase enzyme. Single-stranded binding proteins then
complex the strand displaced by the primer, preventing reannealing and allowing for a strand
displacing DNA polymerase to polymerize a new strand. As in PCR, the amplicon is comprised
of the region spanning the two primers (). Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA). (I) RPA initiates with binding of
recombinase–nucleotide primer complexes to homologous sequences in the target
DNA. (II) The D-loop is stabilized by binding of single-stranded binding proteins to the
displaced strands. (III) Synthesis of new DNA strands is initiated by strand
displacement polymerases. (IV) The parent DNA strands are separated. (V) DNA synthesis
continues until two DNA duplexes are formed. is a novel isothermal POC diagnostic method
that combines the LAMP strategy with RPA. This test incorporates a
nested nucleic acid amplification technique showing higher sensitivity of detection than
LAMP alone and conventional RT-PCR for minimally processed SARS-CoV-2 samples. Penn-RAMP
avoids false negatives by implementing two stages of isothermal amplification - a first
stage of RPA at 37 °C and a second stage of LAMP at 63 °C. In this closed-tube
molecular test, RPA is conducted in the tube cap while LAMP is conducted inside the tube.
The RPA reaction mix has primers, buffers and salts, and this mix is loaded in the tube
cap alongside samples with various target concentrations. After the preliminary
15–20 min incubation at 37 °C for the RPA process, the tube is centrifuged or
inverted multiple times to mix the RPA and LAMP reactions, followed by an incubation at 63
°C for 40 min, and it is compatible with both fluorescent and colorimetric
readout. With primers targeting the  gene in SARS-CoV-2, Penn-RAMP has a
limit of detection of 7 copies per reaction and is highly specific to SARS-CoV-2. With the
use of purified RNA, the authors obtained 100-fold lower detection limits than
conventional PCR for SARS-CoV-2. Specificity was tested using other related coronaviruses
such as ,  and
 as negative controls. For colorimetric detection, a
leuco crystal violet (LCV) solution was used, which can be lyophilized. The LAMP mix contained an aliquot of LCV solution along with the LAMP primers and
polymerase, allowing for colorimetric detection at the end of the RPA and LAMP phases. The
color change can be observed by the naked eye and also monitored in real time using a
camera or smartphone. The Penn-RAMP study used synthesized DNA to mimic the target
sequence for SARS-CoV-2 due to lack of access to real patient samples. Thus, more research
on clinical specimens may be needed to validate the specificity and sensitivity.
Furthermore, a platform for quantification needs to be assimilated into the Penn-RAMP
testing method, enabling quantification in real-time and increased ease of use. Primer design for RPA reactions is similar to PCR, and it is thus fairly straightforward
to design new assays. Due to the reaction’s isothermal nature, the melting
temperature of the primer is not a factor, in contrast to PCR. TwistDx, a United
Kingdom-based company, commercially produces reagents, with lyophilized kits available
making transport of reagents possible without a cold chain. No initial thermal
denaturation step is required for RPA as well. RPA can be coupled to
multiple different types of readout (e.g., fluorescent and colorimetric), allowing for
adaptation to POC diagnostics. For example, a colorimetric readout technique that combines
RPA with cell free transcription-translation systems could be modified for SARS-CoV-2
detection. The Lucks group recently showed successful detection of plant pathogens
following this method by incorporating small transcriptional activators into the
amplification reaction and subsequently activating transcription and translation of
catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (CDO) for the conversion of catechol into hydroxymuconic
semialdehyde, producing a yellow positive signal. Multiple enzymes are needed to perform RPA, including strand displacing polymerase,
single-stranded binding proteins, and recombinase, as well as cofactors and accessory
proteins. This makes RPA more difficult from a manufacturing perspective than other
methods employing fewer enzymes. In Penn-RAMP, RPA was coupled with a
second isothermal amplification (LAMP) reaction to overcome false positives and increase
sensitivity, further complicating primer design, increasing the reaction cost, and adding
an additional isothermal step and temperature. RPA amplicons are typically 100–200
nt, with larger products amplifying more poorly due to the commercially available TwistAmp
RPA kits being optimized for amplification speed. Nicking and Extension Amplification Reaction The nicking and extension amplification reaction (NEAR) system amplifies short sequences of
nucleic acids. The
first use of NEAR was in 2003, and it was later amended for 
diagnostics in 2009. Two primers, a DNA polymerase and a nicking
enzyme, are used. The reaction temperature can vary depending on the polymerase and nicking
enzyme used. Each primer consists of a binding region and a nicking enzyme recognition
region. The first primer can bind the sequence of interest, enabling a DNA polymerase to
extend it, creating a dsDNA product. The nicking enzyme then nicks only a single strand of
the sequence allowing for DNA polymerase to elongate the primer. The second primer can bind
the displaced product of the first strand and undergo extension by DNA
polymerase. This
continues to allow amplification of the region between the two primers, similar to PCR. NEAR
is able to amplify 20–30mers 10 to 10 fold in under 10 min
(). Nicking enzyme amplification reaction (NEAR). (I) The forward and reverse primers bind
to complementary regions on the target amplification template. Polymerase extends the
primers through strand displacement, and two restriction sites are created for nicking
enzyme activity. This creates an amplification duplex for NEAR amplification, with
recognition sites for the nicking endonuclease. (II) Nicking endonucleases conduct
cleavage and allow for strand displacement amplification, forming a complex with a
single-stranded target region, a stabilizing duplex region, and a site for nicking
endonuclease activity. (III) A full-length duplex is formed again, which undergoes
subsequent amplification through rounds of nicking, extension, and primer binding
(IV–V). The Abbott ID NOW COVID-19 test is an automated, instrument-based, POC SARS-CoV-2 test
using a qualitative fluorescence readout technique enabled by NEAR. This test isothermally
amplifies a portion of the  gene. One study found Abbott ID NOW
detected ca. 94% (90 out of 96) known positive samples, whereas
another study found Abbott ID NOW detected only one-third of the positive samples detected
by an RT-PCR method, with dilution associated with the use of viral
transport media providing one possible explanation for the diminished sensitivity. The ID NOW test is rapid and takes place inside the manufacturer’s instrument,
with a reaction time of ca. 5 min, making this the fastest time-to-completion among
approved tests. This speed is in part due to the small size of the
amplicon compared to other NAATs. Fluorescently labeled molecular beacon probes provide a
real-time readout. This reaction can be adapted to different temperatures by the use of
various primers, polymerases, and nicking enzymes. As discussed above, NEAR has exhibited false negatives under some conditions. Some
studies have suggested that dilution associated with the use of viral transport media
prior to amplification could play a role. Isothermal Amplification Coupled to CRISPR/Cas-based Detection Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-based disease detection
methods utilize enzymes with nonspecific DNase or RNase activity, such as Cas12 or Cas13
from the bacterial immune system, along with guide RNAs to direct enzyme binding to specific
target areas on pathogenic DNA or RNA sequences. Addition of
fluorescent reporter sequences to this ribonucleoprotein complex enables readout of enzyme
activity which can be used for pathogen detection. A novel CRISPR-Cas12-based SARS-CoV-2 detection system called SARS-CoV-2 DNA
Endonuclease-Targeted CRISPR Trans Reporter (DETECTR) uses a lateral flow assay for
detection of SARS-CoV-2 in under 40 min with respiratory swab RNA extracts. The technique first uses RT-LAMP for reverse transcription and isothermal
amplification of viral RNA, and then employs the Cas12a enzyme to identify sequences of
SARS-CoV-2, allowing cleavage of a reporter molecule (). SARS-CoV-2 DETECTR uses primers that amplify regions of overlap in the 
gene and  gene of SARS-CoV-2 and takes advantage of the nonspecific
DNase activity of Cas12a for indiscriminate ssDNA cleavage and degradation. This Cas12a activity allows for cleavage and activation of an ssDNA
reporter. Design of the Cas12a guide RNAs (gRNAs) entailed designing three
 gene gRNAs for identification of three SARS-related coronaviruses and
one  gene gRNA that specifically targeted the  gene
for SARS-CoV-2 detection, thus requiring identification of both  and
 genes for detection. The specificity analysis showed that the test
was specific for SARS-CoV-2 and not related coronaviruses such as bat-SL-CoVZC45 and
SARS-CoV. The human  gene was used as a control. The detection
reaction involved an isothermal RT-LAMP phase at 62 °C for 20 min, followed by
Cas12a-gRNA guided detection reaction at 37 °C for 10 min, the output from which
could be visualized using a lateral flow assay in the form of an easily interpretable,
qualitative, visual signal. The limit of detection for this test was found to be 10
copies/μL of reaction, with a 100% negative predictive value and a 95% positive
predictive value. Importantly, this assay has been tested on RNA extracted from SARS-CoV-2
PCR-positive clinical patient samples. Ding et al. recently described the use of RPA with Cas12a to detect SARS-CoV-2 in a
single reaction, which they have termed All-in-One Dual CRISPR-Cas12a, AIOD-CRISPR. This assay exhibits a limit of detection of 1.3 copies of the N gene
synthetically derived from a plasmid in 40 min. The specificity was tested against
SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV control plasmids. This assay was also tested against HIV-1 RNA.
Another CRISPR-Cas12-based assay developed by Lucia et al. uses RPA in conjunction with
reverse transcription and subsequent detection by the Cas12a endonuclease collateral
activity. With primers targeting the 
region, the authors’ test reached a limit of detection of 10 viral copies/μL.
This test was compatible with both fluorescence readouts and a paper-based strip assay.
Furthermore, successful testing on spiked clinical saliva samples shows that the method is
valid for easily obtainable saliva specimens and thus suitable for POC operations. Another study on a CRISPR-based detection system, called the CASdetec (CRISPR-assisted
detection) strategy, shows improved sensitivity compared to
Cas12a-based detection systems owing to the accuracy and specificity of dsDNA
trans-cleavage by the Cas12b enzyme. CASdetec uses reverse
transcriptase recombinase aided amplification (RT-RAA) for a preamplification step,
followed by the use of Cas12b with gRNA targeted to the  gene, with a
limit of detection of 10 SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus copies/mL. The RAA assay is
performed between 37 and 42 °C and employs single-stranded binding proteins, a
recombinase and a DNA polymerase. To simplify the reaction, it was
split within one vessel, with RT-RAA conducted inside the reaction tube while the
Cas-12b-based detection reagents were kept in the cap of the tube, followed by a spin-down
mixing of the reagents and subsequent fluorescent readout with a total reaction time of
about 30 min. The authors demonstrated that their readout was compatible with LED
excitation, increasing usability in POC settings. A novel CRISPR-based diagnostic for COVID-19 detection with recent U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approval is called STOPCovid (SHERLOCK Testing in One Pot
COVID) and uses the SHERLOCK (Specific High Sensitivity Enzymatic
Reporter UnLOCKing) technique. STOPCovid targets the SARS-CoV-2
 gene and aims to be a POC assay, taking about an hour to process
results and needing very little instrumentation. Similar to DETECTR, STOPCovid uses LAMP
for primer-specific isothermal amplification of the target RNA or DNA and follows this
with guide RNA-mediated, CRISPR-based detection using the Cas-12b enzyme, with fluorescent
(40 min) or lateral flow (70 min) readout. The reaction can be
conducted using a water bath or a heat block and uses taurine to confer thermostability to
reaction components. With an LOD of 100 copies of the SARS-CoV-2
genome per reaction, the test has a sensitivity of 97% and a specificity of 100%. Showing
successful detection in healthy saliva samples spiked with standard concentrations of
SARS-CoV-2 RNA, the test is highly amenable to POC assays with easily obtained saliva
samples and does not require trained personnel. Another recent study from Myhrvold and colleagues proposes assay designs for surveillance
of SARS-CoV-2 and other related viruses and uses CRISPR-based nucleic acid
detection. This study is unique in that it addresses common
challenges with virus surveillance such as false positives due to cross-reactivity of
detection assay reagents with related coronavirus species, higher demand for tests than
supply, and the complicating occurrence of coinfections in patients with SARS-CoV-2. The
study developed a machine learning model and concurrent algorithms to evaluate the
comprehensiveness, predicted sensitivity and predicted specificity of nucleic acid
detection techniques. Comparing different SHERLOCK methods, the model identified a
RPA-Cas13a-based SHERLOCK detection system to have the best performance and highest
specificity. The study subsequently conducted this SHERLOCK assay to
show detection of synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA at 10 copies/μL. DNA endonuclease-targeted CRISPR trans reporter (DETECTR). DETECTR is a one-pot
detection method that combines isothermal amplification with CRISPR-Cas-based
detection. The first step is reverse-transcriptase LAMP (RT-LAMP)-based isothermal
amplification of DNA at 62 °C for 20–30 min. This is followed by a Cas12a
detection reaction at 37 °C for 10 min. Upon recognition of a thymine-rich PAM
sequence, Cas12a is able to bind to the double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) template and
becomes catalytically activated. Cas12 then uses its RuvC nuclease catalytic domain to
generate a staggered cut with a 5′-overhang in the dsDNA, downstream of
thymine-rich PAM sequences and complementary to the guide RNA
sequence. Next, Cas12a participates in indiscriminate  cleavage
of ssDNA, and it releases the PAM-distal ssDNA cleavage products of the DNA strand
from the active site of the RuvC. Addition of an ssDNA
fluorescence-quencher reporter (ssDNA-FQ) allows for production of a fluorescent
signal upon cleavage. Advantages of CRISPR-Based Detection Employing the nuclease specificity of the CRISPR system for diagnostic readout allows the
detection system to be designed for single base specificity.
Detecting RNA viruses can be a challenge due to their high rate of evolution and single
nucleotide changes. Being able to detect such changes with CRISPR-based methods would
allow for determining the path of infection a virus takes without the need for sequencing.
CRISPR-based detection uses both primer-specific amplification and guide RNA directed
detection, thus increasing sequence specificity in two different ways. Furthermore, the
current readout for SARS-CoV-2 DETECTR and STOPCovid employs lateral flow detection, which
has numerous advantages for POC applications. CRISPR-based detection
techniques can also be combined with a variety of isothermal detection methods, as
showcased by the described methods using RT-LAMP and RPA with sensitivity compared to
RT-PCR. Disadvantages of CRISPR-Based Detection RT-LAMP or another isothermal amplification method is required to amplify RNA of interest
to generate sufficient signal. Accordingly, any difficulties associated with the chosen
isothermal method would all apply CRISPR-based detection. As these assays rely on
collateral activity of Cas enzymes, their readout is also qualitative. Potential Isothermal Techniques for SARS-CoV-2 Detection Many useful isothermal amplification techniques exist which are not currently adapted to
detect SARS-CoV-2, but have the potential to be beneficial for addressing the global
pandemic. Isothermal amplification techniques such as rolling circle amplification (RCA),
nucleic acid sequence based amplification (NASBA), multiple displacement amplification
(MDA), helicase dependent amplification (HDA), and signal mediated amplification of RNA
technology (SMART) would allow for efficient amplification of nucleic acids, followed by
easily interpretable readouts (). Comparison among Different Isothermal Amplification Techniques in Use for
SARS-CoV-2 Detection or with the Potential to Be Used to Detect SARS-CoV-2 loop mediated isothermal amplification DNA polymerase with strand displacement activity, reverse transcriptase if
required recombinase polymerase amplification recombinase, recombinase loading factor, single-stranded binding proteins,
DNA polymerase fluorescence, gel electrophoresis, flocculation, chemiluminescence, silicon
microring resonator, surface enhanced Raman scattering, lateral flow
dipstick nicking enzyme amplification reaction dependent on nicking enzyme and polymerase used, typically 37 nicking enzyme, DNA polymerase, reverse transcriptase if required Abbott Alere i, influenza A and B, Abbott IDNOW, SARS-CoV-2 colorimetric, fluorescence, nanoparticles nucleic acid sequence based amplification reverse transcriptase, RNase H, RNA polymerase colorimetric, fluorescence, gel electrophoresis, lateral Flow bioMérieux,  and , HPV, HSV, RSV, MRSA, HIV-1 viral load, Coris BioConcept
OligoC-TesT, enterovirus, , helicase dependent amplification 37 or 60–65 with heat stable enzymes helicase, single-stranded binding proteins,  DNA
polymerase (only required for 37 °C condition) gel electrophoresis, fluorescence, electrochemical, lateral flow,
hybridization assays multiple displacement amplification strand displacing DNA polymerase fluorescence, gel electrophoresis, pH change signal-mediated amplification of RNA technology Detectable results with increasing signal over this time. RCA and rolling circle transcription (RCT) techniques developed based upon the discovery
that DNA and RNA polymerases could use small (less than 100 nucleotides) circular
constructs as their template. Polymerases have been shown to work on templates as small as
26 nucleotides; templates that have a smaller diameter than the polymerase’s
footprint suffice for amplification. Only a single primer is needed, and due to the primer
seeding multiple copies of the same sequence, the ratios of template to primer differ
greatly from those in PCR. The primer binds to the circular template
and allows for a strand displacing DNA polymerase to continually elongate the circular
template (). In the case of RCT, the
primer binds, creating a double-stranded promoter sequence capable of recruiting the
selected RNA polymerase. The resulting product is a long, repetitive nucleotide sequence.
With the discovery of highly processive enzymes from bacteria, products can reach greater
than 1000 bases. By adding a ligase and a specifically designed padlock probe, this
technology has been used to detect microRNAs. RCT only amplifies a small part of the
target, accompanied by an easily detectable sequence. The technique has been used in cells
to detect let-7a microRNA, which is associated in regulation of development and tumor
suppression, with femtomolar sensitivity.
Similar to the methods used previously, incorporating a hemin-binding
G-Quadruplex into a rolling circle amplification (RCA) reaction would enable colorimetric
readout for SARS-CoV-2 samples and would be a useful POC diagnostic technique. Rolling circle amplification (RCA). (I) Template-mediated enzymatic ligation
synthesizes a circular DNA template from a linear DNA template. This is followed by
annealing of a primer to a region of complementarity in the circular DNA template.
(II) Phi29 DNA polymerase initiates DNA synthesis by elongation of the annealed
primer. (III) DNA polymerase activity results in a long ssDNA with repeats of the DNA
template sequence. The process of RCA is simpler than other most isothermal techniques due to simple primer
design. The Phi29 DNA polymerase has catalytic activity at 30 °C or room temperature,
making the process energy-efficient without the need for thermostable enzymes. Furthermore, since amplification is preceded by a padlock-probe approach
where specific ligase activity is needed to make the circular DNA template there is a high
degree of specificity associated with RCA. This makes it suitable for scoring
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and for high-throughput assays. RCA requires an additional ligase step, since it amplifies circular DNA templates and the
circularization of the DNA template can be low-yielding if folding is not optimal. Nucleic Acid Sequence Based Amplification NASBA is an isothermal amplification reaction that can use either DNA or RNA as a
template. NASBA employs three enzymes: a reverse transcriptase,
RNase H, and an RNA polymerase. Two primers are used, and in addition to a complementary
region to the sequence of interest, one of the primers also encodes for an RNA polymerase
promoter sequence. Through reverse transcriptase and RNase H activity, a dsDNA is created
with an RNA polymerase promoter sequence. RNA polymerase transcribes this sequence,
creating a pool of product RNA. Primers can bind this product RNA, again generating dsDNA
with T7 promoter sequences through reverse transcriptase and RNase H activity providing
exponential amplification (). Recently, two groups developed a method for tagging NASBA reactions with fluorescent
aptamers, enabling genetically encoded fluorescent readout. Unrau and coworkers recently
demonstrated the use of the Mango aptamer in Nested Mango NASBA, and Engelhart and coworkers showed
multiplexed detection with cell phone camera-based readout using the Broccoli, Corn, and
malachite green aptamers in Apta-NASBA. These techniques enable an
inexpensive fluorogenic real-time readout. NASBA has also been detected by an
aptamer-based molecular beacon approach. Aptamer-detected nucleic acid sequence-based amplification. (I) T7 RNA polymerase
promoter-containing primer binds the amplicon of interest. Reverse transcriptase (RT)
extends the primer, generating a DNA–RNA hybrid composed of the amplicon target
sequence and an antisense DNA copy of the amplicon, with a T7 RNA polymerase (T7 RNAP)
promoter. (III) RNase H degrades the original amplicon RNA of interest. (IV) The
aptamer-coding primer binds and reverse transcriptase extends the aptamer-coding
primer, generating a DNA duplex corresponding to the amplicon, with a T7 RNAP promoter
(red) and an aptamer coding sequence (purple). (V) T7 RNAP generates an RNA fusion
construct that contains the sequence antisense to the target sequence, fused at the
3′ end with the aptamer corresponding to the sequence to the aptamer-coding
sequence (green). (VI) Aptamer-coding primer binds this RNA, which again enters the
RT-RNase H-T7 RNAP cycle. At each step, RNA is generated with multiple turnovers,
enabling exponential amplification. In the conventional NASBA cycle, the aptamer
coding sequence is omitted from the second, nonpromoter-containing primer. NASBA has the capability of starting with either DNA or RNA, with RNA as the main
reaction product, enabling the use of functional nucleic acids such as aptamers and
ribozymes in the reaction product, opening the door to using a variety of detectable
signals. By
applying fluorescent RNA aptamers for the readout, it is possible to obtain comparable
specificity as a fluorescent probe, but with the cost of an intercalating dye such as SYBR
Green. The optimal reaction temperature is 37–42 °C, lower than that of LAMP
or RPA. The reaction is also compatible with lyophilization, mitigating the need for a
cold chain in field applications. False positives, as with many isothermal techniques, can complicate detection. Recently,
Abdolahzadeh et al. mitigated this issue through a nested procedure, and Aufdembrink et
al. used a competitor DNA duplex to do so. As with other multienzyme isothermal reactions, the use
of multiple enzymes necessarily adds complexity to manufacturing processes. Helicase Dependent Amplification HDA mimics the replication process in a cell, which isothermally separates DNA using
helicase enzymes. In HDA, a helicase unwinds dsDNA, allowing for primers to bind,
initiating elongation with a DNA polymerase. Single-stranded binding proteins are
included, as in RPA, to stabilize the ssDNA unwound by the helicase (). Two primers are used to amplify
specific sequences of DNA, but due to the isothermal nature of the reaction, a lower
concentration of primers is typically used compared to PCR to minimize formation of primer
dimers. Altered dNTPs have been shown to be successful in mitigating primer dimers in
self-avoiding molecular recognition systems (SMARS) where, due to the base changes,
primers can only pair with naturally occurring nucleotides and not themselves. Helicase-dependent amplification (HDA). (I) Helicase unwinds dsDNA and ssDNA is
stabilized by single-stranded binding proteins (SSBs). (II) Forward and reverse
primers anneal to complementary sequences on ssDNA. (III) DNA polymerase extends the
primers. (IV) One DNA duplex is amplified to form two DNA duplexes, and the cycle
repeats. HDA has been shown to work on a variety of samples, including genomic DNA, plasmid DNA,
blood samples, bacteria cultures, and fecal samples. It is also
amenable to readouts used with PCR. AmpliVue assays have been commercialized for certain
pathogens with a lateral flow device where the only additional equipment required beyond a
heat source for the reaction is a heated lid. As with most isothermal reactions, false positives are an issue. The use of SMARS, as
described above, helps diminish this. While there are many published methods using HDA for
pathogen detection, there are a limited amount of validated tests. A reverse transcription
reaction must be performed if trying to detect RNA, as is required to detect retroviruses
such as SARS-CoV-2. Multiple Displacement Amplification (MDA) MDA is a technique used in whole genome amplification which has proved useful in
single-cell sequencing. It works by using a strand displacing polymerase and multiple
primers. A denaturing step is used at the beginning to obtain single-stranded DNA. Primers
bind their complementary region and a highly processive, strand displacement-capable DNA
polymerase, typically Phi29 DNA polymerase, synthesizes new DNA
strands. Additional primers bind to the newly synthesized strand, or displaced strand,
allowing for amplification of specific regions (). Based on the primers used, certain sequences have preferential
amplification. By using multiple primers specific toward human
papillomaviruses (HPV), this technique has been used on patient samples to identify novel
HPV and thus has the potential to be used in detecting SARS-CoV-2 and novel mutations in
the SARS-CoV-2 genome. Multiple displacement amplification (MDA). MDA starts with primers annealing to
different regions of the template DNA strand. (I) Phi29 DNA polymerase elongates each
primer to produce a newly synthesized DNA strand. (II) Phi29 DNA polymerase continues
elongation by displacing these new single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) strands. (III) Strand
displacement and elongation reveals new sites for more primers to bind. (IV)
Polymerase extension of newly annealed primers creates branching of the synthesized
strand, allowing for more strand-displacement synthesis and exponential
amplification. MDA is capable of identifying novel viruses in patient samples through the use of many
primers. As in LAMP, the use of multiple primers increases the specificity of the reaction
compared to other isothermal methods. MDA requires a reverse transcription step to detect RNA. Multiple primers are needed for
this reaction, adding complexity to primer design when setting up a new assay. Signal Mediated Amplification of RNA Technology SMART takes advantage of the requirement for T7 RNA polymerase to bind a double-stranded
promoter to transcribe RNA. Targeting RNA, two probes create a three-way junction with the
template of interest. The two probes each contain a sequence complementary to adjacent
regions of the target of interest and a second mutually complementary sequence, enabling
the formation of a three-way junction. The sequence complementarity between the two probes
is not sufficient to allow probe annealing, and the template brings probes together via
three-way junction formation, enabling primer extension. The first
probe, termed the extension probe, is shorter and acts as a primer for elongation using
the second, longer probe, termed the template probe, as the template. The template probe
contains the antisense template sequence, a T7 RNA polymerase promoter, and a sequence
complementary to the sequence to be detected. When sequences hybridize, forming a
three-way junction, DNA polymerase is used to create a dsDNA template for T7 RNA
polymerase to transcribe. T7 RNA polymerase can transcribe many copies of the specified
sequence, giving an amplified signal (). If further sensitivity is required, a third probe can be used for greater
amplification. The third probe contains a single-stranded T7 RNA polymerase promoter
region and complementarity to the product formed via the three way junction transcription.
This product acts as a primer for the DNA polymerase, allowing DNA polymerase to create
another dsT7 RNA polymerase promoter. T7 RNA polymerase is then able to come in and create
multiple copies of a second detectable sequence (). While this step can increase sensitivity, it also increases
complexity and hands on time, as it is done in two separate steps.
This technique has the advantage of being easily amenable to many target sequences by
altering only the sequence complementary to the target. Signal mediated amplification of RNA technology (SMART). (I) An extension probe and a
template probe bind to the target DNA, allowing DNA polymerase to extend the extension
probe. (II) A newly synthesized double-stranded T7 (dsT7) RNA polymerase promoter
region is formed, allowing for RNA polymerase to start transcription. (III) RNA polymerase transcribes multiple RNA transcripts containing
the detectable signal. (IV) For greater sensitivity, a third probe can be added with a
region complementary to step III RNA transcripts, allowing for the RNA transcripts to
bind. (V) DNA polymerase extends the RNA transcript, creating a dsT7 RNA polymerase
promoter. (VI) RNA polymerase transcribes multiple RNA transcripts, amplifying the
detectable signal. This technique has the advantage of being easily amenable to many target sequences. Like
NASBA, RNA is the main product and there is potential for a variety of functional
sequences to be used for varying read outs. SMART lacks an exponential step, making it a linear amplification reaction. The product
produced by SMART does not seed another reaction allowing for increased amplification. Serology-Based SARS-CoV-2 Rapid Detection Platforms Serological tests use serum as a specimen for diagnosing whether an individual has been
affected by a certain disease causing pathogen. In contrast to NAATs,
these tests’ detection modalities are based on recognition of circulating antibodies
in blood serum produced by the immune system in response to an invading foreign pathogen.
Tests for SARS-CoV-2 mainly detect Immunoglobulin M (IgM) and Immunoglobulin G (IgG)
antibodies, where IgM antibodies are first detectable in blood around day 3 of infection,
while IgG antibodies first appear around day 5 of infection. The rapid
diagnostic test (RDT) is a serology test that comes in the form of a POC assay employing a
lateral flow device for testing serum samples or blood samples collected from a finger
prick. These tests are set up to test the presence of IgM and IgG
antibodies in the blood and are not suitable for quantitative results on the levels of these
antibodies. There are currently 12 serological tests with FDA emergency use authorization
that use a variety of lateral flow techniques, chemiluminescent immunoassays, or enzyme
linked immunosorbent assays. Advantages of Serological Tests Most serological tests are easy to use for POC diagnostics. They exhibit rapid results
with high sensitivity and specificity. They are also capable of indicating whether a
person has been infected with SARS-CoV-2 even if no symptoms were ever present, a highly
desirable attribute when transmission is possible from asymptomatic carriers. Disadvantages of Serological Tests Serological tests depend on the response of the infected individual’s immune
system. For each disease, this differs. Thus far, the tests designed for SARS-CoV-2 have
been developed using the disease progression timeline of SARS-CoV. If tests are used too
early in infection, a false positive could be obtained, as sufficient immune response may
not yet have been mounted. Less than a month after the first reported case in Wuhan, China, SARS-CoV-2 was designated
a world health emergency, and now—9 months later—over 850 000 deaths
have been attributed to the virus. Differing approaches taken by countries to contain
SARS-CoV-2 have shown various levels of success. While the response on how to best contain
the virus has varied around the world (strict immediate lockdowns, stay at home orders,
mandated usage of masks in public, ban of international travel, access to testing resources,
etc.), a common theme between countries that have a smaller case
count is the speed with which they responded. A correlation exists between countries that
immediately implemented tactics to stop the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and the total number of
cases reported. Having the ability to detect such diseases quickly is imperative to helping mitigate the
spread of devastating pathogens. The ability to respond swiftly to changing diagnostic
demand is especially critical in the current environment. Reopenings present unique
challenges, in that the spread of infections must be monitored while individuals resume
normal daily activities. Low-cost isothermal technologies such as those described in this
Review provide a uniquely well-suited means of performing large-scale testing, as well as
distributed testing, including by end-users (e.g., CLIA-waived testing in the United
States). Multiple arenas of interaction exist that possess a unique combination of both (1) high
economic and social benefits associated with reopening and (2) increased risk of disease
spread. These include universities, airports, and essential workplaces in which human
contact is difficult, at present, to avoid, such as retail locations and food processing
sites. The use of rapid, frequent, distributed tests to determine infectiousness in these
arenas provides a powerful potential means of realizing these benefits while simultaneously
mitigating associated risks of viral transmission..