Engineered promoters are commonly applied DNA
parts for circuit
design and used to increase titers of heterologous proteins and metabolites.
In eukaryotes, where promoters are longer and more complex than in
prokaryotes, the core or minimal promoter is the crucial region providing
binding sites for general transcription factors and RNA polymerase
II. In addition, transcript stability and efficient translation initiation
depend on the 5′ untranslated region (UTR). In higher eukaryotes
the design of synthetic core promoters has led to strongly improved
synthetic variants. In lower eukaryotes
such as yeasts and fungi, promoter engineering has mostly concentrated
on upstream regulatory sequences (URS), their combination
with natural core promoters and/or random mutagenesis
approaches of selected core promoter regions. In
the model yeast , large scale studies have been used to analyze the sequence/function
relationship of natural core promoters. is a commonly used expression system for the production of biocatalysts
and biopharmaceuticals, as it allows secretion of pure heterologous
proteins to the culture broth and grows to high cell densities. The most commonly used, exceptionally strong,
and tightly regulated methanol inducible promoter of the  gene (p) has been studied
in terms of regulatory sequences and factors. It was also used for the design of synthetic promoter variants providing
a range of expression levels and altered regulatory profiles. These
engineering efforts have focused on URS, random mutagenesis
of core promoter sections or the 5′
UTR. Here we aimed for the first time
to design a fully synthetic core promoter and 5′ UTR for  and to employ such artificial sequences for
p core promoter engineering to obtain a library
of sequence-diversified promoters with different properties. Construction
of Synthetic Core Promoter pCore11 Supplementary Figures S 1, Supporting Information Supplementary
Figures S 1, and Supporting File 1, Supporting Information Supporting File 1 and Supplementary Figures S 1, Supporting Information While promoters in bacteria
can be rationally engineered considering
conserved regions and spacing (e.g., conserved −35, −10
regions), yeast core promoters have only
been engineered by random mutagenesis methods. We
designed a synthetic yeast core promoter by using a consensus sequence
of natural core promoters that was refined by incorporating common
transcription factor binding site (TFBS) motifs (Figure A). The core promoter sequences of four natural, differently
regulated promoters (p p, p, and p) were aligned
using MultAlin to identify a general
minimal consensus (Figure B). Detailed information
on the promoter choices and exact sequence selection is provided in . This first core promoter sequence (pCore1) was successively re-engineered
on the basis of an  analysis for putative
TFBSs (Figure C, ).
We aimed to identify common sequence motifs of the natural promoters
and to integrate them into pCore1. Therefore the natural promoters
used for the consensus design were analyzed for putative TFBSs using
MatInspector. TFBSs predicted in several
natural promoters were incorporated into the pCore1 sequence, while
superfluous sites of pCore1 were removed, resulting in pCore11 (Figure C,D). Detailed information on the putative TFBSs
found and the engineering thereof are provided in . In , these predicted TFBSs are not
necessarily bound by homologues of the factors identified by the MatInspector
analysis, as these factors bind usually further upstream to URSs (except
TATA binding protein, a crucial core promoter factor). As the MatInspector
matrix-based model of TFBSs tolerates also variations in binding motifs,
the motifs found may also constitute degenerate determinants for the
binding of general transcription factors or RNA polymerase II. As core promoters alone provide
either no or only low basal transcription, we fused pCore1 and pCore11 to the upstream
region of p. These fusions were subsequently
assayed with a GFP reporter, established for yeast promoter studies. While pCore1 fluorescence only marginally surpassed background fluorescence,
the re-engineered pCore11 showed tight repression on glucose and upon
methanol induction reached about 10% of the wildtype pCore (Figure B). These results show
that functional synthetic yeast core promoters can in principle be
obtained by complementation of a core sequence elements with additional
nucleotides. This approach is similar to prokaryotic promoter engineering, although conserved, tightly localized sequence
motifs such as the −10 and −35 region of prokaryotic
promoters are not obvious (except the TATA box). Supplementary Figures
S 1 and Supporting File 1, Supporting Information Supplementary Figures S 1, Supporting Information Supporting
File 1, Supporting Information Supplementary Figures S 1, Supporting
Information Supplementary Figures S 2, Supporting Information Supplementary Figures S 1 and Supporting Figure 1, Supporting Information Design steps
of the synthetic core promoter pCore11. (A) Schematic
diagram of the design strategy. Four natural yeast core promoters
were aligned resulting in a consensus sequence/pCore1. TFBSs predicted
in at least two out of the four core promoters were incorporated into
pCore1 resulting in pCore11 (). Sequence
elements and positions are not drawn to scale. (B) Sequence alignment
of the core promoters used for the generation of a consensus sequence.
Detailed information on the sequence selection is provided in . (C) The consensus sequence of the alignment was the basis for pCore1
generation. The four natural core promoters and pCore1 were analyzed
for putative TFBSs using MatInspector (); common TFBSs were incorporated
as described in , resulting in pCore11. The synthetic promoters
fused to the RI site (underlined), Kozak sequence
(in italics) and the start codon (lower case) are shown (see also ). (D) TFBSs prediction of the engineered pCore11 (for detailed information
and analysis of the other core promoters, see ). Supplementary Figures S 2, Supporting Information 2 Engineered p core promoter variants exhibit
a range of expression levels. (A) Design schematic of the variants.
Regions from pCore11 were incorporated into pCore. Insertions for length corrections are indicated in yellow. Detailed
information on the selection process and sequences is provided in . Numbering is relative to the translational start (+1). (B) Expression
levels of the variants. The variants Sync1 to Sync6ins and controls
(wildtype pCore, pCore1, pCore11) were cloned
upstream of a GFP reporter (N.C.: negative control of untransformed
wildtype strain). The strains were grown on glucose and induced with
methanol, and fluorescence was measured as outlined in the methods
section in the . Identification of Variable Sequence Stretches
of pCore Supplementary Note, Supporting
Information Supplementary Figures S 2, Supporting Information Previous studies of the p URS focused either
on systematic deletions, putative TFBSs, or the identification of TFBSs by DNA/protein
interaction studies (see ). However, while URS can be positioned variably
over the promoter sequence (e.g., TFBSs of the methanol master regulator
Mxr1 in p and p, reviewed
in the literature), core promoter recognition
by RNA Polymerase II requires tight interaction with the DNA over
more than 60 bp, and deletions in the
core promoter may interfere with the spacing of regulatory sequences.
Therefore we replaced putative regulatory sequences in pCore with elements of the functional synthetic pCore11.
As opposed to randomized sequences, such sequence transfer promised
functional engineered  core promoters variants.
Since pCore11 is shorter than pCore also insertion
variants have been made. The exact sequence selections for the synthetic
core promoters (Sync1 to Sync6ins) are illustrated in Figure A and described in detail in . As the
natural pCore sequence, all synthetic core promoters
linked to the upstream region of p were repressed
on glucose (Figure B). GFP fluorescence upon
methanol induction of the synthetic variants, including pCore11, ranged
from 10 to 117% percent of the wildtype promoter. Several variants
showed only moderate changes in expression levels, even though key
regions close to the TSS were changed (Sync2, Sync3, Sync3ins). Sync4
and Sync4ins show the strongest decrease of expression (30–40%
of the wildtype promoter activity), suggesting an important region
downstream the TSS in the beginning of the 5′UTR. In general
the length correction by insertions did not cause significant differences. Our results show that the construction of diversified synthetic
core promoters and 5′ UTRs is also possible in yeast. A first
generation synthetic core promoter sequence showing at least some
functionality can be used to recruit suitable sequence stretches for
the design and construction of a next generation library of fully
functional core promoters with varying sequences and strength. By
testing a moderate number of variants, we achieved a range of expression
levels, and these variants can be applied to fine-tune gene expression.
Compared to engineering by random mutagenesis (e.g., error prone PCR),
much fewer constructs need to be tested. However, screening a higher
number of randomly mutated sequences of pCore recently also led to considerably improved variants, while our more rational approach resulted only in moderately
improved variants so far (Sync5 and Sync6). Both kinds of core promoters
might be combined with URS variants of other studies to achieve synergistic effects. It remains to be shown whether the
observed effects are a result of changed transcription or mRNA stability,
or if the translation initiation was influenced. However, the replacement
of parts of natural core promoter sequences also provides a tool for
sequence diversification while maintaining natural expression levels
and regulation. Engineering of URS may also interfere with regulation
of the promoter. For our synthetic core
promoter/p URS fusions, the mode of regulation
remained untouched. Therefore a similar strategy as in prokaryotes,
where ribosome binding sites are modified to fine-tune strong natural
promoters, is feasible by engineering
eukaryotic core promoters and UTRs..