Due to the
global problem of
antibiotic resistant bacteria there is an increasing interest in novel
bioactive natural compounds. A promising source is constituted by
ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides
(RiPPs) which display a broad variety of bioactivities. Within the RiPPs, the class of lantibiotics is
of great interest because of their therapeutic potential and the possibility
to use them as a food preservative. Lantibiotic peptides are naturally
produced mainly by Gram-positive bacteria and harbor dehydrated residues
and (methyl)lanthionine rings, of which the latter is important for
their antimicrobial activity to a broad range of particularly Gram-positive
bacteria. In the case of class I lantibiotics,
the lantibiotic gene cluster
generally consists of a structural gene (), genes
encoding the modification enzymes ( and ), an ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter (), a leader protease (), regulatory
elements () and proteins providing immunity
to the producer organism ( and ). After ribosomal synthesis, the lantibiotic precursor
peptide is composed of a leader and a core peptide of which the N-terminal
leader peptide is important for guiding the precursor peptide to the
modification, transport, and leader protease enzymes and for keeping
the core peptide inactive during maturation. After leader peptide
cleavage, generally by a specific protease, the mature antimicrobially
active core peptide is released. Although genome mining approaches
greatly facilitate the identification
of lantibiotic peptides, further characterization can be hampered
due to difficulties in finding the right conditions for expression
of the lantibiotic peptide by the natural microbial producer. Since
chemical synthesis of lantibiotics has proven to be quite challenging,
heterologous production and modification by a suitable microbial host
in most cases enables researchers to obtain sufficient amounts for
further investigation of potent lantibiotic peptides and their derivatives. Thanks to the heterologous expression systems
that were established in  and , various novel lantibiotic peptides have
been discovered and characterized. Nevertheless, some evident obstacles have
been encountered when using these production platforms. For instance,
a disadvantage of using  as a heterologous
production host is the limited final cell density due to medium acidification
by lactic acid that is produced during the fermentation process. Although pH-controlled fermentations lead to
higher cell densities, this may result in a reduced activity and stability
of the lantibiotic peptide. By employing  as lantibiotic production host, higher cell densities
and thus potentially higher production yields can be reached. However,
heterologous expression in  often requires
additional downstream processing steps due to intracellular accumulation
of the expressed peptide and the herewith associated higher chance
of the formation of inclusion bodies. Another promising lantibiotic
production host that possibly could overcome the previously mentioned
limitations is the industrial workhorse  is already extensively used for the commercial
production of various proteins, but has been left relatively unexplored
as potential microbial chassis for lantibiotics. In addition to having
a GRAS (generally recognized as safe) status like , and being able to grow to higher cell densities without medium
acidification similar to , a great advantage
of using  as production host is its high
natural secretion capacity. Moreover, natural competence
and efficient homologous recombination are features of  that enable genetic manipulation in a relatively
easy and stable manner. Furthermore, the availability of a vast extent
of synthetic biology tools and optimized strains make  an attractive heterologous production host. Several attempts have been made to employ the natural producer
of subtilin  ATCC 6633 or the laboratory
strain  168 as a production host for lantibiotics. For instance, nisin could be produced by  ATCC 6633 after optimizing the leader peptide that was fused to
the nisin core peptide. In addition,
a  168 strain producing antimicrobially
active subtilin was constructed by integration of a 40 kb DNA region,
including the subtilin gene cluster, of  ATCC 6633. Furthermore, Hansen et al.
could diminish the sensitivity of  168
to nisin by overexpression of genes involved in the natural defense
mechanism toward nisin and by introduction of the nisin immunity genes
( and ). Although a 15-fold increase in nisin resistance could be
obtained, Hanssen et al. acknowledge that the nisin level that was
maximally tolerated (600 mg/L) is insufficient to enable commercial
production of nisin by this engineered  strain. The degree of success of the past attempts to use  as a lantibiotic production host likely has
been limited by two
major hurdles: (1) proteolytic processing of the lantibiotic precursor
peptide by native extracellular serine protease activity of the  strains that were employed, which likely caused
product toxicity of the released and activated product to the host
strain, and (2) the lack of a lantibiotic expression system that is
inducible and composed of a minimal set of heterologous genes. While
the benefits of  as a bacterial cell factory
are well-known, the previous studies did not investigate the potential
of  as a lantibiotic production host thoroughly.
Therefore, we reasoned that it would be worthy to explore a lantibiotic
production platform in  in more detail.
Moreover, with the development of several improved  expression hosts in recent years, such as the 8-fold protease-deficient
WB800 strain and the genome-minimized  168 strain PG10, limitations of the parental  strains
might be overcome. Thus, in this study,
we compared various  strains as production
hosts for lantibiotic peptides and investigated different inducible
expression systems. By employing the subtilin modification and transport
machinery (SpaBTC), we show that PG10 is a convenient microbial chassis
for the production of various lantibiotic precursor peptides that
can be activated  at a later stage. Our study provides a versatile platform for the screening and characterization
of potent lanthipeptides that can be used in addition to previously
constructed systems in  and . Production of Processed and Antimicrobially
Active Lantibiotic
Peptides by  ATCC 6633 and  168 Although with restricted success, previous
work demonstrated the production of either nisin or subtilin by  ATCC 6633 or  168,
respectively. However, these studies were quite limited and focused
only on the production of one lantibiotic peptide. With respect to
a more thorough exploration of general lantibiotic production platforms
in , we re-evaluated  ATCC 6633 and  168 as production hosts.  168 was chosen because it is the best-characterized
and most frequently applied  strain. In
contrast,  ATCC 6633 is not commonly used
as expression host, but might provide the most optimal expression
level of the different genes in the lantibiotic gene cluster, since
it is the natural producer of subtilin. Furthermore, genetic engineering
of  ATCC 6633 is still feasible by artificial
expression of the competence transcription factor ComK. To assess  ATCC 6633 as a lantibiotic production host, we replaced the  gene in the subtilin gene cluster by a gene encoding
a hybrid peptide composed of the subtilin leader peptide and the core
peptide of either nisin (NisA) or flavucin (FlaA) (A). Whereas nisin and its biosynthesis
machinery have been thoroughly studied, flavucin has recently been discovered by genome-mining and heterologous
production in  by employing the nisin modification
and transport machinery. For the production
of lantibiotic peptides by  168 (B), we introduced
the transcriptional unit encoding  in the  locus and controlled the expression by a xylose-inducible
promoter. In addition, the structural lantibiotic gene was inserted
in the  locus and regulated by the slightly stronger
and IPTG-inducible hyperspank promoter. By using these two inducible
promoters, we attempted to resemble the relative higher expression
level of  compared to  in  ATCC 6633, while also circumventing the need for introduction of the  genes in  168. As structural
genes we chose the same hybrid peptides as used for  ATCC 6633 as well as the native  gene, since
this might provide the most optimal combination with . With respect to the subtilin-nisin and subtilin-flavucin hybrid
peptides in  ATCC 6633 and  168, we changed the four C-terminal residues (ITPQ)
of the subtilin leader peptide into the NisP cleavage site of the
nisin leader peptide (ASPR) to reduce the chance of leader peptide
removal by general  proteases. Also, this
might allow  leader cleavage by either NisP
or trypsin at a later stage. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00194/suppl_file/sb0c00194_si_001.pdf To test the lantibiotic expression systems in  ATCC 6633 and  168,
mid-to-late exponentially
growing cultures were induced with either supernatant (0.2%) of ATCC
6633 wild type strain (containing subtilin) or with xylose and IPTG,
respectively. The presence of subtilin in the growth medium of  ATCC 6633 should induce the expression of , , and the structural gene
via the two-component system SpaRK. After TCA-precipitation of the
culture supernatant, antimicrobial activity was observed for  ATCC 6633 and  168
expressing the flavucin core peptide as well as for the  168 strain with the native  gene, but not for the strains containing the nisin core peptide
(A,B). Possibly,
modification of nisin by SpaB and SpaC is less efficient compared
to the subtilin and flavucin core peptides resulting in the presence
of an immature subtilin-nisin precursor peptide that is more prone
to degradation. This agrees with the fact that Rintala et al. could
only produce nisin in  ATCC 6633 after
using a subtilin-nisin hybrid leader mainly composed of the nisin
leader, which likely improved the modification efficiency of the nisin
core peptide. Strikingly, we observed
that the antimicrobial activity in the culture supernatant of ATCC
6633  was independent of induction with subtilin, indicating
that leaky expression from the subtilin gene cluster was already sufficient
for the production of antimicrobially active flavucin (possibly due
to some autoinduction by flavucin). Furthermore, leader processing
already occurred fully or to a large extent by  protease activity for both lantibiotic expression systems in  ATCC 6633 and  168.
In the case of  168 containing  processing seemed to have occurred fully, since  incubation with supernatant of  168 did not increase the size of the growth inhibition zone. Protease
activity of both  ATCC 6633 and  168 processed the subtilin-flavucin hybrid peptide
to a large extent but not completely, since the growth inhibition
zone slightly increased upon addition of trypsin. In agreement with
this, MALDI-TOF MS indicated the presence of flavucin without the
leader as well as with one to four of the C-terminal residues (ASPR)
of the leader in the TCA-concentrated supernatant of  ATCC 6633  (). Overview of lantibiotic production platforms
in different  host strains. The genetics
of the different
lantibiotic expression systems and relevant characteristics of each  host strain are shown. Extracellular proteases
and native bioactive peptides (e.g., sublancin, surfactin, and subtilosin)
of  are visualized as red split circles
and blue structures, respectively. (a) Lantibiotic production system
in  ATCC 6633 in which the  gene in the subtilin gene cluster is replaced by a gene encoding
a hybrid peptide composed of the subtilin leader (; containing the NisP cleavage site
“ASPR”) followed by a core peptide of interest (). The expression systems
in  168 (b) and WB800 (c) contain  controlled by the xylose-inducible promoter (), and the lantibiotic
structural gene encoding a hybrid peptide composed of the subtilin
leader peptide and a core peptide of interest regulated by the IPTG-inducible
hyper-spank promoter () integrated in the  and  locus, respectively. (d) Although three different expression systems
were tested in mini PG10, the expression
system in which both the structural gene and  are integrated in the  locus and controlled
by IPTG-inducible promoters ( and ) was
applied for expression of various core peptides. In the case of production
platforms a and b, lantibiotic precursor peptides are processed into
their mature antimicrobially active form by existing extracellular
serine protease activity. Production systems c and d enable the production
of lantibiotic precursor peptides, due to the absence of the five
extracellular serine proteases as a result of either the direct deletion
of eight extracellular proteases or genome-reduction by 36%. PG10
(d) provides a clean secondary metabolic background due to deletion
of genes involved in production of native antimicrobial compounds. Antimicrobial assays to assess the production of lantibiotic peptides
by ATCC 6633 and  168. TCA-precipitated supernatant was analyzed of (a)  ATCC 6633 or (b)  168
strains containing  and various lantibiotic
structural genes: subtilin-nisin hybrid peptide with ASPR as cleavage
site (nis), subtilin-flavucin hybrid peptide with ASPR as cleavage
site (fla), or native subtilin (spa): (+) with induction of the lantibiotic
genes; (−) without induction. The black dots indicate where
TCA-precipitated supernatant samples were pipetted either alone (upper
half of the plate) or in combination with a protease sample (lower
half of the plate); trypsin in the case of ASPR-containing peptides,  168 supernatant in the case of native subtilin.
In image a, “△” represents the TCA-precipitated
supernatant of  ATCC 6633 Δ which was used as a negative control, and “+”
indicates a positive control sample for activation by trypsin. Prevention of Leader Processing by Using  WB800 or mini PG10
as Lantibiotic Production
Host Although functional lantibiotic production platforms
could be established in  ATCC 6633 and  168, a clear disadvantage of these host strains
is the occurrence of leader processing by existing and ubiquitous
extracellular serine protease activity. Leader processing causes the
modified lantibiotic core peptide to become antimicrobially active.
Concomitantly, this hampers the application of  ATCC 6633 and  168 as lantibiotic production
hosts due to potential product toxicity when expressing mutant or
novel lantibiotics. To circumvent the need for specific immunity genes
and to achieve the production of inactive lantibiotic precursor peptides
of various nature, we introduced a lantibiotic expression system in
the 8-fold protease-deficient strain WB800 and the  168 derived mini PG10 of which the genome has been reduced by 36%. Both WB800 and PG10 lack all the five extracellular serine
proteases of which at least AprE, WprA, and Vpr have been suggested
to be involved in leader processing of presubtilin. Moreover, PG10 does not secrete other antimicrobial compounds
(e.g., sublancin, surfactin, and subtilosin) and thereby provides
a cleaner secondary metabolic background. First, we assessed
whether WB800 and PG10 could be used for the production of the precursor
peptide of subtilin, presubtilin (C,D). For WB800, the same integration vectors
were applied as used previously for 168 with the expression of  regulated by the xylose-inducible promoter. Since
the xylose operon including the xylose repressor (XylR) had been deleted
in PG10, and because PG10 is a cleaner host compared to WB800, we
chose to test three different expression systems in PG10. For the
first system, we reintroduced  under control
of its own promoter in the  locus to reestablish
the inducible expression of  from  ( locus) and
to combine this with the expression of  from
the hyperspank promoter ( locus), similar to
the expression systems in  168 and WB800.
As a second option, the expression of  was
controlled by the  promoter and this operon was inserted downstream of the  gene in the  locus (D). The  promoter is also inducible with IPTG,
but is about six times less strong compared to  which should again allow for
a relative higher expression level of  compared
to . Furthermore, we tested whether the subtilin-regulated
expression (SURE) system could be used
for the production of presubtilin. In this case, the two-component
regulatory system  with its natural promoter
was inserted in the  locus, while the  locus contained  and  controlled by their natural promoters. The addition
of subtilin to the growth medium should lead to activation of SpaRK
followed by induction of gene expression of  and . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00194/suppl_file/sb0c00194_si_001.pdf As visible in A, the TCA-precipitated culture
supernatant of both WB800 and the
different PG10 strains showed antimicrobial activity when mixed with
supernatant of  168, indicating the presence
of presubtilin in the supernatant of these strains. In agreement with
this, the production of presubtilin was confirmed by tricine SDS-PAGE
(B) and MALDI-TOF
MS (). As expected,
tricine SDS-PAGE shows substantially less proteins in the culture
supernatant of PG10 compared to WB800 thereby providing a cleaner
production platform for lantibiotic peptides. This advantage of PG10
was also supported by the MALDI-TOF MS spectrum of WB800 by the relatively
high abundance of sublancin compared to the heterologously produced
presubtilin. Among the three different expression systems in PG10,
the IPTG- and subtilin-controlled expression systems yielded similar
amounts of presubtilin, while the system in which  expression is controlled by the xylose-inducible promoter showed
the least production of presubtilin. For the latter system, the production
of presubtilin was likely limited by lack of the AraE transporter
in PG10 which normally facilitates transport of xylose in . Therefore, low
intracellular levels of xylose in PG10 probably caused insufficient
derepression of  thereby limiting modification
and export of presubtilin. Nevertheless, by using the IPTG- or subtilin-controlled
expression system in PG10, similar production yields could be obtained
as with the lantibiotic production system in WB800. Taken together,
these results show that both WB800 and PG10 are suitable  hosts for the production of lantibiotic precursor
peptides from which the antimicrobially active core peptide later
on can be released . An additional advantage
of PG10 over WB800 is the cleaner secondary metabolic background which
simplifies purification of the lantibiotic precursor peptide of interest. Production
of presubtilin by  WB800
and PG10. Production of presubtilin by WB800 (W) or PG10 (P1–P3)
containing  and  under
control of inducible promoters, assessed by (a) antimicrobial activity
assay with or without added protease for processing and (b) tricine
SDS-PAGE. TCA-precipitated supernatant was obtained from strains cultured
with (+) or without induction (−) of the lantibiotic genes.
P1–P3 represents three different lantibiotic expression systems
in PG10: P1,  controlled by  and  regulated by  by
reintroduction of  in PG10; P2,  controlled by  and  regulated by ; P3, concerns the SURE-regulated
expression system. In image a, black dots indicate where TCA-precipitated
supernatant samples were pipetted either alone (upper half of the
plate) or in combination with  168 supernatant
for proteolytic activation of presubtilin (lower half of the plate).
In image b, the expected mass of mature presubtilin is 6074 Da. Production of Various Lantibiotic Precursor
Peptides by PG10 Since the production yield of presubtilin
seemed comparable between
WB800 and PG10, we decided to assess PG10 in more detail as a lantibiotic
production host because of its cleaner secondary metabolic background.
Therefore, we expressed  in combination with
various hybrid precursor peptides composed of either the native subtilin
leader peptide or ASPR-containing subtilin leader peptide fused to
the core peptide of subtilin, nisin, or flavucin (). Production and secretion
of all the various precursor peptides into the growth medium of PG10
was observed, including the precursor peptides containing the nisin
core peptide (A). Herewith the advantage of a lantibiotic production system in
a  strain that lacks extracellular serine
protease activity is clearly demonstrated since even peptides can
be produced that could not be obtained by using  ATCC 6633 or  168 as production host.
Along with a greater variety of peptides, higher production yields
can be obtained with the production of lantibiotic precursor peptides.
Furthermore, MALDI-TOF MS showed that the detected masses of the various
precursor peptides correlated to the theoretical masses of fully or
almost fully modified precursor peptides (B). This indicates that SpaB and SpaC display
a broad substrate specificity, resulting in a high degree of modification
of the various precursor peptides. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00194/suppl_file/sb0c00194_si_001.pdf Next, we assessed whether the various precursor peptides could
be processed by protease activity of either a supernatant of a  168 or a  ATCC 6633  overnight culture, NisP, or trypsin ( and ). Whereas supernatant of  168 could release antimicrobially active subtilin
from both types of leader peptides as well as nisin from the native
subtilin leader peptide, it could not activate the precursor peptides
containing flavucin as core peptide. Strikingly, the proteolytic activity
in the supernatant of the  ATCC 6633  overnight culture could only release antimicrobially
active subtilin from the native subtilin leader peptide. These observations
agree with previous speculations indicating
that the substrate specificity of extracellular serine proteases of  is affected by the N-terminal residues of the
core peptide, in addition to the residues that constitute and precede
the cleavage site. In agreement with this, the first two N-terminal
residues of subtilin are a tryptophan and lysine, while both nisin
and flavucin core peptides start with isoleucine followed by threonine.
Possibly, the N-terminal tryptophan of the subtilin core peptide plays
an important role in presubtilin processing by  extracellular proteases. In addition, our data suggest that extracellular
serine proteases of  ATCC 6633 rely more
on the native cleavage site in presubtilin for release of the subtilin
core peptide compared to extracellular serine proteases of  168. However, the  conditions
used in this experiment might not have been optimal for the extracellular
serine proteases of both  168 and  ATCC 6633 in order to process the various precursor
peptides. By varying pH and salt concentration a broader substrate
tolerance might be observed, since these factors affect the substrate
specificity of proteases. In addition to the  release of mature
subtilin by proteolytic activity of  supernatant,
we could release each of the three core peptides from the ASPR-containing
subtilin leader peptide by using NisP or trypsin. While antimicrobially
active subtilin or nisin could be obtained by using either NisP or
trypsin, flavucin could only be released by treatment with trypsin.
The inability of NisP to release flavucin might be related to the
slight positive charge on the N-terminal part of the flavucin core
peptide compared to the rather neutral N-terminal part of the subtilin
and nisin core peptides. Again, different reaction conditions might
allow the  release of flavucin from the ASPR-containing
subtilin leader peptide by NisP. Production of various lantibiotic precursor
peptides by  PG10. Production of lantibiotic
precursor peptides
by PG10 strains containing -regulated  and a particular lantibiotic
precursor peptide controlled by  (integrated in the  locus), assessed
by (a) tricine SDS-PAGE and (b) MALDI-TOF MS. The lantibiotic precursor
peptide is either composed of the native subtilin leader peptide (spa) or the ASPR-containing subtilin leader peptide (spaASPR) and fused to the core peptide of subtilin (spaS), nisin
(nisA), or flavucin (flaA). In image a, “neg.” represents
a negative control sample derived from PG10 containing  and  cultured without induction. In part b,
spectra show the detected mass (in Da) of the highest peak for each
of the six different precursor peptides. The theoretical mass of fully
dehydrated precursor peptides without the first methionine is mentioned
in parentheses. Lantibiotic precursor
peptides expressed
in mini PG10 WKSESLCTPGCVTGALQTCFLQTLTCNCKISK WKSESLCTPGCVTGALQTCFLQTLTCNCKISK ITSISLCTPGCKTGALMGCNMKTATCHCSIHVSK ITSISLCTPGCKTGALMGCNMKTATCHCSIHVSK ITSKSLCTPGCITGWMMCNTVTKGCSFTIGK ITSKSLCTPGCITGWMMCNTVTKGCSFTIGK spa indicates the original
subtilin leader peptide, whereas spaASPR is the subtilin
leader peptide containing the NisP cleavage site (ASPR). Leader peptide
sequences are displayed in bold. Processing of Various Lantibiotic
Precursor Peptides Produced by mini PG10 http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00194/suppl_file/sb0c00194_si_001.pdf The agar diffusion test was performed
with TCA-precipitated supernatant of PG10 strains producing various
lantibiotic precursor peptides. TCA-precipitated supernatant was mixed
with culture supernatant (depicted as ) of  168,  ATCC 6633 Δ, or PG10 protease overexpression strains, NisP, trypsin,
or cell lysate of PG10 overexpressing WprA (depicted as ). Processing abilities of the different protease samples were assessed
by observation of growth inhibition zones, which were divided in three
categories: no growth inhibition zone (diameter <1 mm; indicated
by −), growth inhibition zone with a diameter between 1 and
10 mm (indicated by ±), and growth inhibition zone with a diameter
>10 mm (indicated by + ). See  for exact diameters of growth inhibition zones. Overexpression of  Extracellular
Serine Proteases as  Leader Processing Tool The successful heterologous production of presubtilin and other
precursor peptides in PG10 allowed us to gain more insight in the
proteolytic abilities of the five extracellular serine proteases (AprE,
WprA, Vpr, Bpr, Epr) of . Also, this might
provide a neater way for the  processing
of presubtilin and allow application of these proteases for  processing of other precursor peptides. Therefore,
we overexpressed each of the proteases, using the coding sequences
of  ATCC 6633, in PG10. After induction
of protease expression in PG10, we analyzed whether protease activity
in the culture supernatant could activate the various precursor peptides
produced by PG10. Although WprA was previously detected in the culture
supernatant of  168, we also analyzed the cell lysate of PG10 overexpressing
WprA, since it is a cell wall-associated protease. Our results show that the supernatant of PG10 overexpressing
AprE and Bpr as well as the cell lysate of PG10 WprA could activate
presubtilin and presubtilin containing the NisP cleavage site (). In contrast, Epr-
and Vpr-containing supernatant could not process any of the precursor
peptides, including the native subtilin precursor peptide. Hereby,
we provide for the first-time direct evidence for a prominent role
of AprE, WprA, and Bpr in leader peptide cleavage of presubtilin.
Although the proteolytic ability of AprE and WprA to process presubtilin
agrees with the study of Corvey et al., we did not find a role for Vpr in presubtilin processing in comparison
to the findings of Corvey et al. Rather, our study reveals Bpr as
the third extracellular serine protease capable of activating presubtilin.
Although we provided direct evidence for the proteolytic ability of
AprE, WprA, and Bpr to cleave presubtilin, we cannot rule out a role
for Vpr and Epr in presubtilin processing since factors for maturation
into their active forms might have been lacking in PG10. With these
PG10 strains at hand, future experiments could provide even more insight
in the substrate specificities of the five extracellular serine proteases
of  and assess whether they can be used
for the  activation of other lantibiotic
peptides. Although various lantibiotic
peptides have been successfully identified
via their heterologous production in  or , two beneficial traits of these bacterial hosts
can be combined by employing  as an expression
host: high cell density cultures and direct secretion of lantibiotic
peptides into the culture medium. Our study demonstrates that these
benefits indeed can be met and that  can
serve as an excellent lantibiotic production host by choosing a  strain that lacks extracellular serine protease
activity. In this way, leader processing during expression of the
lantibiotic genes is prevented, thereby circumventing the major obstacle
of  as a production host for lantibiotics.
The NisP cleavage site can be used conveniently in most cases, but
if inefficient also a factor Xa site can be engineered instead, or
an extracellular serine protease of  can
be attempted. By employing WB800 or mini PG10,
lantibiotic precursor peptides can efficiently be produced and secreted.
The production of lantibiotic precursor peptides prevents toxicity
to the production host and alleviates the need of immunity genes.
Furthermore, PG10 provides as additional advantage a clean secondary
metabolic background which might simplify downstream processing and
characterization of the produced lantibiotic precursor peptide. Thus, by using the subtilin modification and transport enzymes
the established lantibiotic production platform in mini PG10 allows a convenient way to characterize potent lantibiotic
peptides. Furthermore, this opens possibilities for investigation
of  as an expression host for other classes
of antimicrobial peptides, thereby accelerating the identification
of novel natural products that potentially can be applied to combat
antimicrobial resistance. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00194/suppl_file/sb0c00194_si_001.pdf Bacterial strains and plasmids
used in this study are listed in .  strains were cultured
in LB-Lennox medium (Formedium) at 37 °C with aeration.  (MC1061, DH5α or Top10) used as cloning host
and  used as indicator strain were grown
in LB at 37 °C with aeration. When required, antibiotics were
added to the growth media of  at the following
concentrations: 100 μg/mL spectinomycin, 0.5 μg/mL erythromycin,
12.5 μg/mL lincomycin, or 5 μg/mL kanamycin. Half of the
concentration of antibiotics was used in the case of liquid cultures
of PG10. For  100 μg/mL ampicillin
or 100 μg/mL kanamycin was used. Growth media was supplemented
with agar (1.5%) for solid medium. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00194/suppl_file/sb0c00194_si_001.pdf Conventional cloning techniques
were applied for construction of all plasmids.  genes and extracellular serine protease genes were taken from  ATCC 6633 (NCBI Reference Sequence: NZ_ADGS00000000.1).
Oligonucleotides are listed in  and were purchased from Biolegio. Restriction enzymes, T4
DNA ligase, and Phusion-HF DNA polymerase were obtained from Thermo
Fisher Scientific. PfuX7 DNA polymerase (purified in our lab) was
used for cloning purposes and colony PCR. Unless otherwise mentioned,
standard restriction–ligation was used for construction of
plasmids. Quick-Fusion ligation was performed according to manufacturer’s
descriptions (Bimake.com). All constructs were verified by sequencing.  168, WB800, and pGSP12-containing  ATCC 6633 were transformed in Spizizen’s
minimal medium as described before, except
that 2.5 μg/mL erythromycin was added to the culture medium
in the case of ATCC 6633. For transformation of  168 PG10 carrying the competence genes () under the control of the mannitol-inducible promoter (), competence
was induced by adding 0.5% (w/v) mannitol. Lantibiotic Gene Expression
Constructs To construct
pDG1664-P-spaBTC the  genetic
sequence was obtained from the genomic DNA of  ATCC 6633 by PCR amplification using primer pairs ASRo254 + ASRo255,
followed by  and  digestion
and T4 ligation into similarly digested pDG1664. To construct
pDR111-P-spaS,  was
amplified from the genomic DNA of  ATCC
6633 by using primer pair ASRo256 + ASRo257. The  PCR product was digested with dIII and  and ligated into dIII--digested pDR111 yielding pDR111--. Overlap extension PCR was used in order
to obtain the pDR111 constructs with different types of lantibiotic
core peptides fused to the native subtilin leader sequence or the
subtilin leader sequence containing the NisP cleavage site (ASPR).
Primer pairs ASRo298 + ASRo241, ASRo290 + ASRo291, and ASRo294 + ASRo291
were used to amplify the , , and  core peptide sequences from pDR111-P-spaS, pNZE3nisA, and pNZE3-flaA,
respectively. To obtain the ASPR-modified  leader
sequence for the  core peptide constructs, primer
pair ASRo224 + ASRo297 were used. Primer pairs ASRo224 + ASRo289 and
ASRo224 + ASRo288 were used to amplify the native  leader sequence or the  leader sequence containing
the ASPR cleavage site respectively for the  core
peptide constructs. To obtain the analogous constructs for the  core peptide sequence, primer pairs ASRo224 + ASRo293
and ASRo224 + ASRo292 were used. In all cases, pDR111-P-spaS was used as template DNA for amplification of the subtilin
leader peptide sequences. To create PCR fusion products of a particular
leader and core peptide sequence, the PCR products of the particular
leader and core peptide were mixed together in a PCR reaction and
a primer pair was added allowing for amplification of the fusion product.
To generate - primers, ASRo224 and ASRo241 were used. To obtain , , , and - primers ASRo224 and ASRo291 were used. The PCR fusion
products were digested with RI and  and ligated into similarly digested pDR111 yielding the pDR111 vectors
containing  and the various structural genes. To insert - into the
various pDR111 vectors, pDR111-P-spaS and
pDR111-P-spaASPR-spaS were linearized
by PCR via primer pair 333-pDR-Eco_fw and 334-pDR-Eco_rv, whereas
the four pDR111 vectors containing either  or  were linearized using primer pair 375-pDR-Phs-bb-fw-Eco
and 376-pDR-Phs-bb-rv-Eco. The  insert was amplified from pDG1664-P-spaBTC using primer pair 291_fw_Pspank and 335-pDG-Ps-BTC-Eco-rv. -digestion of the pDR111 precursor backbones and - yielded the pDR111 vectors containing - downstream of one of
the six different precursor peptides. The plasmids obtained were named
pDR111-P-spaS-P-spaBTC,
pDR111-P-spaASPR-spaS-P-spaBTC, pDR111-P-spa-nisA-P-spaBTC, pDR111-P-spaASPR-nisA-P-spaBTC, pDR111-P-spa-flaA-P-spaBTC,
and pDR111-P-spaASPR-flaA-P-spaBTC. To construct pDR111-P-spaBTC-P-spaS,
pDR111 was linearized and  was removed by PCR amplification with primers 145-pDR111-QF-F
and 146-pDR111-QF-R. The  and  coding regions including their native promoters were PCR amplified
from the genomic DNA of  ATCC 6633 by
using primer pairs 147-spaBTCS-F and 148-spaBTCS-R. Quick-Fusion ligation
resulted in pDR111-P-spaBTC-P-spaS. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00194/suppl_file/sb0c00194_si_001.pdf To construct the four different pJOE8999 vectors for deletion of , replacement of  by  or  (in  ATCC 6633), or for reintroduction of  in  (in PG10), a specific single guide RNA
(sgRNA)-encoding sequence () was designed by using the CRISPR Guide Design Software of
Benchling and cloned into pJOE8999 via  digestion.
To allow homologous recombination, up- and downstream flanking regions
to construct pJOE_ΔspaS were obtained from the genomic DNA of  ATCC 6633 using primer pairs ΔspaS_up-fw
+ ΔspaS_up-rv and ΔspaS_down-fw + ΔspaS_down-rv. -digestion of PCR products followed by ligation into
the similarly digested pJOE vector containing the  spacer sequence yielded pJOE_ΔspaS. To construct pJOE_nisA
and pJOE_flaA, flanking regions were obtained from the genomic DNA
of  ATCC 6633 via primer pairs 209-spaS_up-F-SfiI
+ 210-spaS_up-R-SfiI and 211-spaS_down-F-SfiI + 212-spaS_down-R-SfiI,
respectively. The  and  inserts were amplified from pDR111-P-spaASPR-nisA and pDR111-P-spaASPR-flaA by using 206-spaL-F-SfiI as forward primer
and 207-nisA-R-SfiI or 208-flaA-R-SfiI as reverse primer, respectively.
To obtain the final vectors of pJOE_nisA and pJOE_flaA, flanking regions
and inserts were digested with  followed by ligation
into the similarly digested pJOE vector with the  spacer sequence. To construct pJOE_xylR, primer pairs 275-sacA1-Fw-Eco
+ 276-sacA1-Rv-Eco and 279-sacA2-Fw-Eco + 280-sacA2-Rv-Eco were used
for amplification of the flanking regions, while  with its natural promoter was amplified from the genomic DNA of  168 using primers 277-XylR-Fw-Eco + 278-XylR-Rv-Eco.
After linearization of pJOE with the spacer sequence for recognition
of  via PCR with primers 281-pJOE_sacA-Eco and
282-pJOE_sacA-Eco, -digestion of the PCR products
followed by ligation yielded the final pJOE_xylR vector. Protease Gene
Expression Constructs The genetic sequences
of , , , , and  were PCR amplified
from the genomic DNA of  ATCC 6633 by
using the following primer pairs: 77-wprA-F-I
+ 79-wprA-R-PaeI, 81-aprE-F-I + 83-aprE-R-PaeI,
86-vpr-F-NheI + 87-vpr-R-PaeI, 105-epr-F-I + 106-epr-R-NheI,
and 108-bpr-F-I-RBS + 109-bpr-R-NheI, respectively.
PCR products were digested according to the restriction sites introduced
by PCR amplification and ligated into similarly digested pDR111, yielding
the various pDR111 protease overexpression vectors. Production
of Lantibiotic Peptides and Proteases For
the heterologous expression of the lantibiotic or protease genes by
various  strains, overnight cultures were
diluted to a final OD of 0.075 into 50 mL of fresh LB
and grown at 37 °C and 220 rpm. Cultures were induced at midexponential
phase with either 0.2% (v/v) of culture supernatant from  ATCC 6633 (containing subtilin), 1% xylose, and/or
1 mM IPTG. After 3 h, the growth medium was separated from the cells
by centrifugation, and in case of the lantibiotic gene expression
strains the culture supernatant was concentrated (125-fold) by trichloroacetic
acid (TCA) precipitation. For this purpose, peptide pellets were obtained
by centrifugation (1 h, 9000 rpm, 4 °C), washed with ice-cold
acetone (1 h, 8500 rpm, 4 °C), air-dried, and solubilized in
0.05% acetic acid. The cell lysate fraction of PG10 WprA was obtained
by bead beating of cells resuspended in 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 containing
0.5% -dodecyl β-maltoside (DDM). For tricine SDS-PAGE, a 16% separating
gel was used. After separation of proteins, proteins were visualized
by using Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (Bio-Rad, Hercules, United
States). For MALDI-TOF MS, a 1 μL sample of TCA-precipitated
culture supernatant was spotted and dried on the target. Subsequently,
1 μL of matrix solution (4 mg/mL α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic
acid from Sigma-Aldrich dissolved in 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic
acid) was spotted on top of the sample. Mass spectra were collected
by using a Voyager DE PRO matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time-of-flight
(MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems). For analysis of
the mass spectra “Data Explorer” software version 4.0.0.0
(Applied Biosystems) was used. To assess antimicrobial
activity, indicator plates were prepared composed of LB agar and 0.2%
(v/v) of an overnight culture of . An 8
μL aliquot of the TCA-precipitated culture supernatant was pipetted
on the plate, and if desired, combined with 2 μL of purified
NisP or trypsin (0.1 mg/mL), 4 μL of  168 supernatant, or 4 μL of supernatant or cell lysate derived
from the PG10 protease overexpression strains. For , diameters of growth inhibition
zones were measured to assess the ability of various protease-containing
samples to activate lantibiotic precursor peptides..