Metabolic
engineering is the
enabling technology to rewire cellular endogenous metabolism for the
optimal production of native metabolites, or endow cells with the
capacity for synthesizing nonnative chemicals. To date, there are numerous studies of engineering microbes for
production of commodity chemicals and natural products, including
the production of cannabinoids, artemisinin, taxol precursors, branched-chain
alcohols, ornithine, arginine, advanced biofuels, and so on, from different host
organisms. The primary goal of metabolic engineers is to achieve high
titer, yield, and productivity (TYP) with improved cost-efficiency
and process economics. In the past decades, a number
of prominent metabolic engineering strategies and methodologies have
been adopted to balance or redirect metabolic flux, such as modular
pathway engineering, dynamic pathway
regulation, cofactor engineering, and scaffold-guided
spatial colocalization of metabolic enzymes, The spatiotemporal or ratiometric control
of enzyme expression have been proven as efficient strategies to relieve
metabolic burden and improve the TYP index. However, the complex
and lengthy synthetic routes from the starting
carbons, such as glucose, commonly generate low yield and suboptimal
productivity of desired products, which could be attributed to that
complex biosynthesis requires the coordinated supply of precursors,
ATPs, and reducing equivalents (NADPH/NADH) to maintain both cell
metabolism and product formation. Substrates
with different entry points into the metabolic network have different
energetic and redox statuses, which leads to pathway-dependent
product yields that critically affect cost-efficiency. Thus, providing
microbes with multiple carbon sources can potentially mitigate these
metabolic constraints, since it adds an additional degree of freedom
to cellular systems that can be leveraged for product formation (namely,
cosubstrate feeding). One recent example
is to use the acetate-driven acetyl-CoA metabolic shortcut to bypass
the lengthy and highly regulated glycolytic pathway for efficient
polyketides and lipids production. Such substrate doping strategy may present a
metabolic advantage over a single substrate and lead to metabolic
optimality beyond what can be achieved in single substrate fermentations.
In other words, single substrate strategies may not be suitable for
particular metabolic engineering applications. Instead, metabolite
doping or cosubstrate feeding can overcome intrinsic pathway limitations
and achieve high carbon conversion efficiency and cost-efficiency. 2-Phenylethanol (2-PE) is a high-value compound widely used in
the food, fragrance, and flavor industries. High-quality 2-PE is primarily
extracted from the volatile oil components of rose flower, with a
marketed price ranging from $150/kg to $200/kg, which suffers from
economics and scalability issues for sustainable production. Chemically synthesized 2-PE, despite its low-cost
and high conversion rate, is largely rejected by consumers and IFF
society (International Flavors & Fragrances) due to safety and
health issues. As a result, heterologous
production of 2-PE from microbial host is considered as an economically
viable alternative to plant extraction. Herein,  was chosen as the host strain because of its strong acetyl-CoA flux
and high TCA metabolic activity and the ease of genetic toolbox, as demonstrated by its superior performance
for production of advanced biofuels and oleochemicals. In addition,  is
also a “Generally Regarded As Safe” (GRAS) organism
in the food and nutraceutical industry. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00468/suppl_file/sb9b00468_si_001.pdf To demonstrate the utility of substrate cofeeding, we harnessed
the Ehrlich pathway of  to optimize
the biosynthesis of 2-phenylethanol (2-PE), with glucose and -phenylalanine as the cosubstrates. The bioconversion process involves
deamination, decarboxylation, and aldehyde reduction (), with several aromatic byproducts
branched out from this pathway (). In particular, the deamination is an α-ketoglutarate
(aKG)-coupled amino transfer reaction and aldehyde reduction is a
NADH-dependent reduction reaction (). Both the aKG and NADH, as cofactors, are
derived from glucose. To improve the precursor flux and maximize 2-PE
production, we have applied a stoichiometric model to determine the
pathway yield and predict engineering targets (). To improve the overall pathway specificity,
we characterized and reconfigured all the biochemical reactions in
Ehrlich pathway by stepwise pathway refactoring more than 20 enzymes,
and further blocked the competing pathways to eliminate any byproducts.
On the other hand, cytosolic 2-oxoglutarate (aKG) is the cofactor
to complete the amine transfer reaction. But aKG is derived from the
oxidative decarboxylation of isocitrate that is primarily compartmentalized
in mitochondria, creating a bottleneck for efficient assimilation
of -Phe, which limits 2-PE production. To improve metabolite
trafficking across the mitochondria membrane, we constructed an artificial
aKG source pathway in the cytosol, by coupling a cytosolic aconitase
with the overflowed citrate from mitochondria. In addition, we further
improved the aKG supply and 2-PE production by mitigating fatty acid
synthesis. As a result, the engineered strain ) produced 2669.54 mg/L of 2-PE with 0.702 g/g conversion yield from -Phe, representing about 4.16-fold and 2.07-fold increase over
the starting strain (641.59 mg/L of 2-PE production with 0.339 g/g), respectively. Taken together,
refactoring critical enzymes and increasing metabolite trafficking
as well as mitigating competitive pathways are effective strategies
to improve the efficiency of overall pathway yield. Central carbon metabolism
and Ehrlich pathway for synthesizing
2-PE in . -Phe, -phenylalanine; PPY, phenylpyruvate; PAH, phenylacetaldehyde; , -phenylalanine specific permease; , -phenylalanine transaminases; , 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase; , prephenate dehydratase; , phenylpyruvate
decarboxylase; , phenylacetaldehyde reductases; , aldehyde dehydrogenase; G6P, glucose-6-phosphate;
F6P, fructose 6-phosphate; GAP, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate; 3PG, 3-phospho-glycerate;
PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; aKG, 2-oxoglutarate; DAHP, 3-deoxy-arabino-heptulonate-7-phosphate;
SHIK, shikimate ; S3P, shikimate-3-phosphate; -Tyr, -tyrosine; -Typ, -tryptophan; , 3-deoxy-7-phosphoheptulonate synthase; ,
2-oxodicarboxylate carrier; , cytosolic isocitrate
dehydrogenase; , aconitate hydratases; , diacylglycerol acyltransferase; Characterization of Ehrlich Pathway for 2-PE
Synthesis in Microbially produced
2-PE is mainly
obtained by two routes, namely, the  pathway
from glucose and bioconversion from -phenylalanine by the
Ehrlich pathway. Owing to the hard-wired, tightly complex feedback
regulation and lengthy reaction steps
(>20 steps) of the  pathway, bioconversion
by the Ehrlich pathway is considered as the preferred biological route
to synthesize 2-PE. In the Ehrlich pathway
(), -phenylalanine is converted to 2-PE through four enzyme-dependent
processes: (i) extracellular -phenylalanine is internalized
by amino permeases; (ii) -phenylalanine is transaminated
to phenylpyruvate by amino transferase with 2-oxoglutarate (aKG) as
the amine-receptor; (iii) phenylpyruvate is further decarboxylated
to phenylacetaldehyde by phenylpyruvate decarboxylases; (iv) and finally,
phenylacetaldehyde is reduced to 2-PE by alcohol dehydrogenases or
phenylacetaldehyde reductase with NADH as cofactor. In , transaminases and the phenylpyruvate decarboxylase
are ylARO8 (encoded by gene ) or ylARO9
(encoded by gene ) and ylARO10 (encoded
by gene ), respectively. However, the
specific -phenylalanine permease and phenylacetaldehyde
alcohol dehydrogenases have not been characterized. To determine the
ability of  in producing 2-PE,  po1g (leu) harboring an
empty plasmid pYXLP′ (strain ) was used as control to incubate with different concentrations of -phenylalanine (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 g/L) in shake flasks.
Our results (a) indicate that the highest titer of 2-PE reached 720.43 mg/L with
0.342 g/g yield by adding
10 g/L -phenylalanine, accompanying with 197.59 mg/L of
byproduct phenylacetate. Considering economic efficiency (incomplete
conversion of -Phe), 4 g/L of -phe was able to
support 641.59 mg/L (b) of 2-PE production with 0.339 g/g yield (c).
Thus, in the following work, 4 g/L of -phe was determined
for bioconversion. Initial assessment of using  to produce
2-PE from -phenylalanine  the Ehrlich
pathway. (a–c) 2-PE and phenylacetate titer, time profiles
of cell growth, and 2-PE yield of adding different concentrations -phenylalanine (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 g/L). (d–f) 2-PE
titer, yield, and cell growth of respective overexpressing genes , , and . All experiments were performed in triplicate and error bars show
standard deviation (SD). The * indicates  < 0.01,
and ** indicates  < 0.05 (two-tailed test). Refactoring the Upstream Ehrlich Pathway
to Improve 2-PE Yield http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00468/suppl_file/sb9b00468_si_001.pdf -Phenylalanine + 2-Oxoglutarate → Phenylpyruvate
+ -Glutamate (catalyzed by YlARO8) -Phenylalanine + Pyruvate → Phenylpyruvate
+ -Alanine (catalyzed by YlARO9) As suggested by the mathematical model
(), improving the catalytic efficiency of the Ehrlich
pathway and increasing aKG supplementation are the key determinants
to improve 2-PE yield from -phenylalanine. To refactor the
Ehrlich pathway, we adopted a stepwise pathway engineering strategy.
First, the native , , and  genes in Ehrlich pathway were overexpressed
in  po1g under the control of strong
constitutive TEF-intron promoter. Shaking flask cultivation (d, and e,f for cell growth and 2-PE
yield) indicates that overexpression of  and  (strain  and ) has little effect on the 2-PE production. However, overexpression
of  (strain ) increased
2-PE titer to 922.86 mg/L, about 33% higher than the control strain
(d), suggesting
that the reaction catalyzed by phenylpyruvate decarboxylase ylARO10
is a limiting-step in Ehrlich pathway. Thus, the ineffectiveness of
overexpressing downstream genes ( or ) is likely due to the limited performance of the
upstream ylARO10. Specifically, ylARO8 and ylARO9 are both transaminases,
which catalyze the transamination of -phenylalanine with
different amine-receptors: Apparently, different amine-receptors (that is 2-oxoglutarate
and pyruvate) will lead to distinct outcomes (that is -glutamate
and -alanine) that may affect 2-PE production. Therefore,
we next constructed strains carrying pYLXP′- and pYLXP′- to identify the
optimal transaminases, and obtained  and . However, screening of these two strains showed no
significant differences in 2-PE production (b, and c,d for cell growth and 2-PE yield). We also overexpressed
a transcriptional activator (encoded by YALI0C18645) to up-regulate
the expression of  or . However, cultivation of this strain
() showed deteriorated 2-PE production (b). With this, we
speculated that cellular uptake of -phe might be the bottleneck
limiting 2-PE titer. To facilitate the cellular uptake for -phe, we assessed
a number of -phe permease, including BAP and Gap1 from , PheP from , and three  native
Gap1 homologues, encoded by  (named as ),  (), and  (), respectively.
Beyond our expectation, all the tested -phe permeases showed
decreased 2-PE production compared with control  and  when coupling with expression of  or  (e). Noticeably, abundant
residual glucose was detected at 96 h (f), suggesting the central carbon metabolism
of these strains was strongly inhibited. This result is consistent
with the finding that high level of endogenous -phe induces
a strong down regulation of cellular metabolism in . We reasoned that a similar effect
might exist in . Thus, we dropped out
all other amino acids and only used YNB-glucose with 4 g/L -phe as the nitrogen source. As a result, the highest 2-PE titer
reached 1632.73 mg/L with 0.547 g/g yield in strain  (a,b) after 144 h cultivation, indicating
GapY3 is a potent -phe permease. Nevertheless, differences
of 2-PE titers in strains  and  (1607.46 mg/L with 0.533 g/g) were insignificant, which may be attributed to the poor substrate
specificity of transaminases ylARO8 and ylARO9. Characterization of upstream module of the Ehrlich pathway: -phenylalanine specific permeases and -phe: 2-oxoglutarate
transaminase. (a) Flow-chart of shake flask cultivations of engineered
strains. (b–d) 2-PE titers, cell growth, and 2-PE yield of
respective overexpressing genes  and ,  and , and  and . (e,f)
2-PE titers and 96h residual glucose of screening -phenylalanine
specific permeases with CSM fermentation medium in shake cultivations.
All experiments were performed in triplicate and error bars show standard
deviation (SD). The * indicates  < 0.01, and
** indicates  < 0.05 (two-tailed test). Characterization of the
downstream module of the Ehrlich pathway:
phenylacetaldehyde reductases and alcohol dehydrogenases. (a,b) 2-PE
titers and yield by rescreening -phenylalanine specific
permeases. Red 1, strain ; Red 2, strain ; Red 3, strain ; Red 4,
strain ; Red 5, strain ; Red 6, strain ; Black 1, strain ; Black 2, strain ; Black 3, strain ; Black 4, strain ; Black
5, strain ; Black 6, strain . (c) Manipulations of whole-cell biocatalytic conversion of phenylacetaldehyde.
PAH, phenylacetaldehyde. (d–g) 2-PE titers, cell growth and
yield of screening and identifying the optimized phenylacetaldehyde
reductases or alcohol dehydrogenases. P8–1, strain ; P8–2, strain ; P8–3,
strain ; P8–4, strain ; P8–5, strain ; P8–6,
strain . All experiments were performed
in triplicate and error bars show standard deviation (SD). Refactoring the Downstream Ehrlich Pathway to Improve 2-PE Yield To refactor the optimal alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) or phenylacetaldehyde
reductase (PAR), we screened the entire genome of  with putative rose phenylacetaldehyde reductase PARL as the template,
and identified eight PARs with high similarity (>70%), encoded
by  (),  (),  (),  (),  (),  (),  (), and  (), respectively. We also codon-optimized and
synthesized
the rose-derived  as a positive control. The
resulting 9 strains, with overexpression of , , , , , , , , and , were incubated with 1 g/L phenylacetaldehyde (c), leading to 2-PE
titers of 762.71, 703.62, 759.37, 786.58, 435.61, 437.33, 399.11,
501.10, and 379.28 mg/L (d), respectively. The highest 2-PE titer was produced
by strain  (). Interestingly,
the rose-derived PARL performed worst in our test. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/ https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/ Similarly,
we also investigated the performances of alcohol dehydrogenases (ADHs)
in . Nine  ADHs annotated by Genbank () and GRYC () were tested, including  (),  (),  (),  (),  (),  (),  (),  (), and  (). The resulting strains were tested and only
suboptimal level of 2-PE were detected in these strains compared to
the strain harboring the optimal PARs (d), and the best strain (ADH2) produced 723.74
mg/L 2-PE, which is about 10% lower than strain . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00468/suppl_file/sb9b00468_si_001.pdf After analyzing the downstream PAR and ADH modules, we chose six
efficient candidates for further investigation, including ADH2, ADH3,
PAR1, PAR2, PAR3, and PAR4. These PARs and ADHs were combined with
the optimal upstream module ,
leading to strains , , , , , and . When tested
in shake flask with YNB-glucose media and 4 g/L -phenylalanine,
these strains produced 2-PE at 1126.62, 902.12, 1109.89, 1166.23,
960.96, and 1378.98 mg/L, respectively (), representing no improvements in 2-PE titer compared
to control  (ylARO10-ylARO8-GapY3, 1610.76
mg/L). We speculated that simultaneous overexpression of four genes
(>16 000 bp) may lead to genetic instability (loss of plasmid
or unequal distribution/propagation of plasmid) in . To test this hypothesis, we linearized these plasmids and integrated
the long DNA cassettes at the pBR docking site of po1g chromosome,
leading to strains , , , , , and , respectively.
Shake flask screening indicates that  produced
1750.46 mg/L of 2-PE with 0.534 g/g yield (f,g, and e for cell growth), the highest titer obtained,
indicating PAR4 is the optimal downstream module that reduces phenylacetaldehyde
to 2-PE. So far, the four steps of the Ehrlich pathway (permeation,
transamination, decarboxylation, and reduction) have been fully refactored,
and the refactored pathway represents 2.4-fold increase in 2-PE titer
over the starting strain (∼710 mg/L). Blocking Competing Pathways
to Improve 2-PE Titer To
further improve 2-PE yield, we attempted to delete the competing pathways.
For the convenience of the genetic manipulations, we first knocked
out gene  in po1f (named )
to inhibit nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) and improve the frequency
of homologous recombination. As mentioned above, the major byproduct
is phenylacetate, which is the oxidized product of phenylacetaldehyde
catalyzed by aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALD2 and ALD3). Thus, we sequentially
knocked out both  () and  () in , obtaining strain . Then the optimal
upstream and downstream Ehrlich module  was integrated at the genome pBR docking site of , obtaining strain . Although shake flask cultivation
of  showed no improvement in 2-PE titer, the byproduct
phenylacetate was significantly decreased to 124.49 mg/L (b, 532.48 mg/L phenylacetate
in ). In addition, prephenate dehydratase PHA2 catalyzes
the anaplerotic
reaction from phenylpyruvate to prephenate (). Deletion of gene  in strain  generated strain . Chromosomally integrated (integrated at pBR docking site) Ehrlich
module () in po1fk2 (strain ) leads to an improved 2-PE titer of 1809.65 mg/L with
the yield at 0.570 g/g compared
to  (b,c, 1735.78 mg/L with yield at 0.550 g/g), but a significant decrease in biomass
was observed in  (a). On the other hand, 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate
dioxygenase (encoded by gene y) could convert
phenylpyruvate to 2-hydroxyphenylacetate. Therefore, we further knocked
out y in strain , obtaining
strain . However, the chromosomally integrated
(integrated at pBR docking site) Ehrlich module in po1fk3 (strain ) leads to decreased 2-PE production and increased
phenylacetate titer, which were 1432.43 and 226.17 mg/L (b), respectively.
This result suggests that y cannot be knocked
out in this scenario. It is not clear why the deletion of gene  has a negative result, possibly due to the incorrect
annotation of the reaction directionality of . We have refactored the Ehrlich pathway and blocked the byproducts
synthesis, and integrated the optimal gene module  to the pBR docking site of the triple knockout strain (, ALD2, ALD3, and PHA2 were knocked out). In previous work, our group
has established a 26s rDNA/Cre-P-based iterative
gene integration and marker-curation method. With more than 200 copies of ribosome DNAs in , this technique allows genes of interests to be randomly integrated
into the genome with multiple copies. Thus, we next sought to apply
this method and further optimize the Ehrlich pathway, including genes , , and . To obtain a productive strain, we screened 144 genome-integrated
transformants by 24-well deep plate cultivation in glucose-YNB medium
with 4 g/L -phenylalanine (d). About 45% of the genome-integrated produced
2-PE at 900–1000 mg/L, less than 5% of the screened strain
produced 2-PE over 1200 mg/L. Then the top-performed strains were
further validated in shake flasks (e,f). Strain  produced the highest 2-PE of 1817.46 mg/L with the yield at 0.590
g/g. Blocking competitive pathways and integration
of the Ehrlich pathway
in 26s rDNA sites to improve 2-PE production. (a–c) Cell growth,
2-PE titers, phenylacetate titers, and 2-PE yield of blocking competitive
pathways. (d) Screening of the productive strains based on 24-well
deep plate cultivations. (e,f) 2-PE titer and yield by further validating
productive strains with integration of the Ehrlich pathway in flask
cultivations. 1, strain ; 2, strain ; 3, strain ; 4,
strain ; 5, strain ; 6, strain ; 7, strain ; 8, strain ; 9, strain ; 10, strain ; 11, strain ; 12, strain . All experiments were
performed in triplicate and error bars show standard deviation (SD). A Nonnative 2-Oxoglutarate
(aKG) Shuttle to Improve Metabolite
Trafficking http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00468/suppl_file/sb9b00468_si_001.pdf As suggested by the mathematical model (), we next sought to improve
the precursor (2-oxoglutarate, aKG) flux. Noteworthily,  is known for the strong TCA metabolic activity. Indeed, we detected 4.84 g/L of citrate at 72
h of cultivation in strain  (b). Thus, rewiring
the overflowed citrate flux to cytosolic aKG is a feasible strategy
to increase precursor (aKG) supply and improve 2-PE production. Nevertheless,  lacks the cytosolic aconitate hydratase and
isocitrate dehydrogenase. To construct the cytosolic pathway from
citrate to aKG (a), we introduced two aconitate hydratases, including CitB from  and AcnA from , and a cytosolic isocitrate dehydrogenase ScIDP2 from . Additionally, by
searching the genome of  with ScIDP2
as template, we retrieved a putative cytosolic isocitrate dehydrogenase
ylIDP2 (encoded by gene ). Subsequently,
four nonnative aKG source pathways, including -, -, -, and -, were introduced into  by plasmid pYLXP′. The resulting strains , , , and  produced 1733.45, 2146.45, 1737.58, and 1842.85 mg/L of 2-PE with
yield of 0.574, 0.606, 0.597, and 0.591 g/g in shake flasks (c,d,e), respectively. It indicates the coexpression of  and  could effectively convert
cytosolic citrate to aKG. In addition, we also overexpressed the mitochondrial
2-oxodicarboxylate carrier ylODC1 (encoded by gene ) to export 2-oxoglutarate (aKG) out of the mitochondrial matrix
to the cytosol (strain ,  harboring plasmid pYLXP′--). As expected, the 2-PE titer and yield in  were further increased, reaching 2269.08 mg/L and 0.632 g/g (a,b,c), respectively. On the other hand,  is known to accumulate
up to 30–60% dry cell weight as lipid. As shown in b, production of 1 mol of fatty acids (stearic acids C18:0) will
consume 16 mol of NADPH and 9 mol of citrate (acetyl-CoA). As a result,
the synthesis of lipid competes with aconitase (aconitate hydratases)
and PARs for cytosolic citrate and NADPH. Specially, diacylglycerol
acyltransferases have been identified as the rate-limiting steps to
lipid synthesis  the Kennedy pathway in . Thus, we pursued further
to knock out the diacylglycerol acyltransferases, encoded by  () and  (), to mitigate fatty acid synthesis.
Shake flask cultivation of the resulting strain  (po1fk4–2  harboring
pYLXP′--),  (po1fk4–2  harboring pYLXP′--), and  (po1fk4–2  harboring pYLXP′--) all led to significant improvements
in 2-PE titers and yield (a,b,c). Specifically, strain  produced
2669.54 mg/L of 2-PE with yield at 0.702 g/g (a,b,c),
which was 1.11-fold and 1.18-fold higher than strain . Furthermore, to validate the impacts of  and  deletion on lipid production, we measured
the lipid titer in strains , , , and  (d), reaching 3.93, 2.06, 2.08,
and 1.84 g/L, respectively. These results confirmed that fatty acid
synthesis was indeed mitigated by deleting genes  and . In conclusion, by constructing a cytosolic
aKG pathway and expression of the dicarboxylic acid transporter (ylODC)
as well as mitigating fatty acids synthesis, we efficiently improved
the aKG flux and 2-PE tier and yield. Overcoming cellular compartmentalization
of 2-oxoglutarate (aKG)
to increase aKG availability. (a) Construction of cytosolic source
for 2-oxoglutarate synthesis by coupling bacterial aconitase with
the overflowed citrate from Krebs cycle. (b) Citrate titers of strain . (c–e) 2-PE titers, cell growth and
yield of strains , , , and . All experiments were
performed in triplicate and error bars show standard deviation (SD). Improving 2-oxoglutarate trafficking across the mitochondria
membrane
by overexpressing the mitochondrial 2-oxodicarboxylate carrier ylODC1
and improving 2-PE titer by blocking fatty acid synthesis. (a–d)
2-PE titers, cell growth, yield, and lipid titers of strains , , , and . All experiments were performed in triplicate and
error bars show standard deviation (SD). The * indicates  < 0.01 (two-tailed test). Efficient
microbial synthesis of chemicals necessitates systematic
debottlenecking, refactoring and optimization of the native or nonnative
metabolic pathways. With 2-PE as a tested molecule, we analyzed the
stoichiometric constraints of the Ehrlich pathway toward efficient
synthesis of the target molecules in . The proposed metabolic model reveals potential engineering targets
for high yield production of 2-PE with cosubstrate feeding of glucose
and -phenylalanine. Specifically, guided by the model, we
identified that the catalytic efficiency of the Ehrlich pathway and
the precursor 2-oxoglutarate (aKG) supplement might be the rate-limiting
steps. Stepwise refactoring the Ehrlich pathway and overcoming the
cellular compartmentalization of precursor (aKG) significantly improved
2-PE production. By blocking the precursor-competing pathways and
mitigating fatty acids synthesis, the engineered strain produced 2669.54
mg/L of 2-PE with yield at 0.702 g/g in shake flasks, which were 4.16
and 2.07-fold of the starting strain, respectively. The strategies
reported in this study should be adding value and guide us to engineer
other complex metabolic pathways for various biomanufacturing applications. Further investigations on relieving 2-PE toxicity and promoting
cell fitness are viable solutions to improve 2-PE production. Major
considerations should include 2-PE tolerance/toxicity, medium composition,
and optimal fermentation processes. In general, mutagenesis coupled
with high throughput screening is an efficient and convenient way
to evolve tolerance phenotype. In addition,
small amounts of organic nitrogen sources, such as peptone and yeast
extract, benefit cell growth without inhibiting the Ehrlich pathway. Moreover, it was found that both Ca and Mg salts protect the cell and facilitate 2-PE production
by increasing membrane stability and integrity. Besides, by adding organic solvents as overlays during
fermentation, 2-PE titer could be increased to 12.6 g/L in the concentrated
organic layer. These strategies will
enable us to build a sustainable 2-PE platform at low cost and high
efficiency. Strains, Plasmid, Primers, and Chemicals http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00468/suppl_file/sb9b00468_si_001.pdf All strains
of engineered , including the genotypes
of manipulations, recombinant plasmids, and primers, have been listed
in . Chemicals
used in this study include phenylacetaldehyde, -phenylalanine,
phenylacetate, 2-phenylethanol, 2-oxoglutarate, and citrate, which
were all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Shake Flask and 24-Wells
Deep-Plate Cultivations Yeast Transformation and Screening
of High-Producing Strains All
engineered strains were underwent optimal screening before shake flask
cultivations (see , a). For shake flask cultivations, seed culture
was carried out in the shaking tube with 2 mL seed culture medium
at 30 °C and 250 r.p.m. for 48 h. Then, 0.8 mL of seed culture
was inoculated into the 250 mL flask containing 35 mL of fermentation
medium and grown under the conditions of 30 °C and 250 r.p.m.
for 144 h. One milliliter of cell suspension was sampled every 24
h for OD, glucose, 2-PE, -phenylalanine, and
penylacetate measurements. For performing 24-well deep-plate cultivation,
engineered  strains were first cultured
in 96-wells pales with 150 μL seed culture medium at 30 °C
and 1000 r.p.m. for 36 h. Sequentially, 40 μL of seed culture
was inoculated to the 24-well deep plate with 2 mL fermentation medium
at 30 °C and 1000 r.p.m. for 96 h, and finally, 1 mL of cell
suspension was sampled for 2-PE, -phenylalanine, and penylacetate
measurements. The seed culture medium used in this study was
the yeast complete synthetic media regular media CSM containing the
following: glucose 20.0 g/L, yeast nitrogen base (without ammonium
sulfate) 1.7 g/L, ammonium sulfate 5.0 g/L, and CSM-Leu or CSM-Ura
0.74 g/L. Two types of fermentation medium were used in our work,
including nitrogen-limited media CSM and YNB. The nitrogen-limited
media CSM contained the following: glucose 40.0 g/L, yeast nitrogen
base (without ammonium sulfate) 1.7 g/L, ammonium sulfate 1.1 g/L,
CSM-Leu 0.74 g/L, and appropriate -phenylalanine. The nitrogen-limited
media YNB contained the following: glucose 40.0 g/L, yeast nitrogen
base (without ammonium sulfate) 1.7 g/L, leucine or uracil 0.2 g/L,
and appropriate -phenylalanine. Whole-Cell Bioconversion
of Phenylacetaldehyde To prepare
the whole-cell biocatalyst, cells were harvested during the exponential
growth phase (48 h) from the shake flask cultivation. Then, cells
were washed twice with 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0), and resuspended
to an OD of 4 in the same buffer. Next, whole-cell biocatalytic
conversion of phenylacetaldehyde was performed in 20-ml glass tube
containing 1 mL of cell suspension (OD = 4) and 1 mL
phenylacetaldehyde–water solution (2 g/L phenylacetaldehyde)
at 30 °C and 250 r.p.m. for 4 h. One hundred microliters of cell
suspension was sampled every 1 h for 2-PE and penylacetate measurements. Yeast Transformation and Screening of High-Producing Strains http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00468/suppl_file/sb9b00468_si_001.pdf The standard protocols of  transformation
by the lithium acetate method were described as previously reported. In brief, 1 mL of cells was harvested during the exponential growth
phase (16–24 h) from 2 mL YPD medium (yeast extract 10 g/L,
peptone 20 g/L, and glucose 20 g/L) in the 14 mL shake tube, and washed
twice with 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0). Then, cells were resuspended
in 105 μL transformation solution, containing 90 μL 50%
PEG4000, 5 μL lithium acetate (2 M), 5 μL boiled single
stand DNA (salmon sperm, denatured), and 5 μL DNA products (including
200–500 ng of plasmids, lined plasmids or DNA fragments), and
incubated at 39 °C for 1 h, then spread on selected plates. It
should be noted that the transformation mixtures needed to be vortexed
for 15 s every 15 min during the process of 39 °C incubation.
The selected markers, including leucine and uracil, were used in this
study. All engineering strains after genetic manipulations were performed
optimized screening by the shaking tube cultivations, and the optimal
strain was used to perform shaking flask (these data have been shown
in ). Expression
Vectors Construction and Pathway Assembly The YaliBrick plasmid
pYLXP′ was used as the expression vector
in this study. Plasmid constructions were performed
by using preciously described methods. In brief,
recombinant plasmids of pYLXP′- (a single
gene expression) were obtained by Gibson Assembly method using linearized pYLXP′ (digested by  and I) and the appropriate PCR-amplified
DNA fragment. Multigenes assembly was achieved by restriction enzyme
digestion subcloning based on the application of isocaudamers  and . All genes were respectively expressed by the TEF promoter with intron
sequence and XPR terminator. The modified DNA fragments and plasmids
were sequenced by Quintarabio. The endonucleases used in this research
were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific or NEB. Gene Knockout
and 26s rDNA Genomic Integration of Ehrlich Pathway A marker-free
gene knockout method based on Cre- recombination
system was used as previously reported. For performing gene knockout, the upstream and
downstream sequences (both 1000 bp) flanking the deletion targets
were PCR-amplified. These two fragments, the  cassette (digested from plasmid pYLXP′- by  and ), and the residual
plasmid backbone of pYLXP′- were joined
by the Gibson Assembly method, obtaining the gene knockout plasmids
pYLXP′- The obtained plasmids
were sequenced by Quintarabio. Next, the gene knockout cassettes were
PCR-amplified from construction plasmids pYLXP′-, and further transformed into . The
positive transformants were determined by colony PCR. Next, plasmid
pYLXP′- was introduced into the positive
transformants and promoted the recombination of  sites, which recycle the selected marker. Finally, the intracellular
plasmid pYLXP′- was evicted by incubation
at 30 °C for 48 h. loxp-URA-ylARO10-ylARO8-GapY3-PAR4 loxp-URA-ylARO10-ylARO8-GapY3-PAR4 loxp-URA-ylARO10-ylARO8-GapY3-PAR4 The standard protocol of 26s rDNA genomic
integration also has been described in previous reported. For 26s rDNA genomic integration of the Ehrlich
pathway, the expression plasmid pYLXP′- was digested by  and , and the fragment containing the Ehrlich pathway was inserted into
linearized pYLXP′- digested by  and , getting pYLXP′-. The homologous arms
of 26s rDNA, including 26s rDNA 1s and 2s, were PCR-amplified by appropriate
primers. And next, these two homologous-arm fragments, Ehrlich pathway
with the  cassette (digested from plasmid
pYLXP′- by  and ), and the residual plasmid
backbone of pYLXP′- were joined by Gibson Assembly method, obtaining the 26s rDNA genomic
integration plasmids prDNAloxP Then, the 26s rDNA genomic integration cassette of the Ehrlich pathway
was gotten by digesting prDNAloxP with  and , and the integration
cassette was further transformed into . In addition, the manipulation of recycling the selected marker
was similar to gene knockout. Quantification of Cell
Density, 2-PE, Penylacetate, -Phenylalanine, Glucose, Citrate,
Fatty Acid, and Y Calculation Cell
densities were monitored by measuring
the optical density at 600 nm (OD). The concentrations
of 2-PE, penylacetate, and -phenylalanine were measured
by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) through Agilent HPLC
1220 equipped with a ZORBAX Eclipse Plus C18 column (4.6 × 100
mm, 3.5 μm, Agilent) and a VWD detector. The analysis was performed
at 215 nm under 40 °C column temperature with a mobile phase
comprising 50% (v/v) methanol in water at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min.
The concentrations of glucose and citrate were also measured by Agilent
HPLC 1220 equipped with a Supelcogel Carbohydrate column (Sigma, USA)
and a refractive index detector. HSO (5 mM)
was used as the mobile phase at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min at 40 °C.
The method of quantification of fatty acid was used as previously
reported. Y is
the 2-PE yield relative to the consumption of -phenylalanine..