Lanthipeptides are (methyl)lanthionine
ring-containing ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified
peptides (RiPPs). Many natural lanthipeptides
show potent antimicrobial activity against human pathogens and even
against antibiotic-resistant human pathogens. Importantly, the lantibiotics
duramycin and NVB-302 and the lanthipeptide MOR107 have already been
tested in the clinic. The ribosomal synthesis and enzymatic modifications
of lanthipeptides provide excellent opportunities for the discovery
of lanthionine-stabilized and target-specific therapeutic peptides. The nisin biosynthetic machinery has been well-studied and
is widely
used. This system allows us to engineer and heterologously produce
novel lanthipeptides. It comprises the NisB dehydratase, which is
responsible for serine/threonine dehydration in the core peptide,
the NisC cyclase, which couples the dehydroresidues to cysteines yielding
(methyl)lanthionine rings, and the transporter NisT, which secretes
modified peptides. The peptidase NisP
is responsible for cleaving off the leader peptide, thus yielding
mature lanthipeptides. NisB is a fascinating
enzyme whose mechanism is glutamyl-tRNA-dependent. The
crystal structure of NisB, in complex with its natural substrate peptide
NisA, reveals two separate domains, one domain that catalyzes the
Ser/Thr glutamylation and another domain that is responsible for glutamate
elimination. Its Ser/Thr dehydration activity
depends in part on the amino acids that directly flank the dehydratable
Ser/Thr. In that light, some substrates appear unsuitable
for wild-type NisB-mediated dehydration. As a consequence,
the substrate specificity of wild-type dehydratase NisB can be a limitation
for engineering novel lanthipeptides. Cell surface display is
a powerful method for high-throughput screening
of genetically encoded peptides with desired properties. Surface display
on phage, yeast, and Gram-positive bacteria has been successfully
applied in high-throughput screening. Also lanthipeptide display
systems for phage, yeast, and Gram-positive bacteria have been developed
and applied. A lanthipeptide cell surface
display system has been devised in  NZ9000. This bacterial display system
contains a plasmid-encoded linear lanthipeptide precursor fused to
the N-terminus of the  surface protease
PrtP C-terminal domain and a second plasmid that encodes the NisBTC
enzymes. Many cyclic His-Pro-Gln
(HPQ) motif-containing peptides showed
up to 3 orders of magnitude higher affinities to streptavidin than
linear HPQ motif-containing peptides. In this study,
we exploited this high affinity of cyclic streptavidin ligands compared
to linear unmodified streptavidin ligands. We employed the NisBC enzymes
to introduce a thioether cross-link into a designed strep ligand (SHPQFC),
which showed higher affinity for streptavidin than the linear strep
ligand. Subsequently, a strep ligand was designed where the Ser to
be dehydrated residue is preceded by an Asp residue (SHPQFC), which is an unsuitable substrate for NisB. By lack of dehydration,
this peptide would never be subject to NisC-catalyzed or spontaneous
cyclization, thus having lower affinity to streptavidin than the cyclized
variants. For high-throughput screening of tailored NisB variants
from a genetically encoded NisB library, the unsuitable SHPQFC substrate was genetically fused to the display scaffold and coexpressed with a plasmid encoding NisCT
and a mutant NisB library. By use of streptavidin-coupled magnetic
beads, cyclized strep ligand displaying bacteria were selected aiming
at mutant NisB-catalyzed dehydration of SHPQFC. The
results demonstrate that selection of mutant modification enzymes
from genetically encoded libraries can be based on cell surface display
of mutant-enzyme-modified products. Lanthionine-Cyclized
HPQF-Containing Peptides Have Enhanced
Capacity to Bind Streptavidin Compared to Linear HPQF Peptides http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf Previous studies demonstrated that thioether cross-linked HPQ-containing
cyclic peptides show up to 3 orders of magnitude higher streptavidin
affinities than linear peptides. In this study,
a cyclic HPQF-containing strep ligand fused to the C-terminus of nisin
fragments was used. To form the cyclic HPQF-containing strep ligand
by lanthipeptide synthetases, a Ser and a Cys were added at the N-
and C-terminus of HPQF, respectively (SHPQFC). The N-terminus of the
designed SHPQFC strep ligand was engineered at the C-terminus of nisin,
nisin(1–22), or nisin(1–12) (). Asn-Lys or Lys was engineered at the C-terminus
of the designed SHPQFC strep ligand, since these residues are favorable
for the NisC-catalyzed cyclization. Five
peptides (CS1, CS2, CS3, CS4, and CS5) were designed by following
this setup ().  NZ9000 with pTLR-BTC was transformed with plasmids
encoding the designed peptides, respectively. Following the induction
and purification, the mass of the produced peptides was checked by
MALDI-TOF MS. Of the designed five peptides, only the construct CS5
was fully dehydrated (). The formation of the potentially three NisC-formed thioether cross-links,
two in nisin(1–12) and one in the designed streptavidin ligand
of CS5, was investigated using 1-cyano-4-dimethylaminopyridinium tetrafluoroborate
(CDAP), a compound that reacts with unmodified cysteines in peptides.
CDAP reaction to cysteine results in an increase of 25 Da in the peptide’s
molecular weight. CDAP treatment was executed under
reducing conditions followed by trypsin cleavage and LC-MS/MS analysis.
Very little 25 Da adduct was observed for the CS5 main product (a), indicating that
no unmodified cysteines were present. This implied that most thioether
cross-links in CS5 were formed, including the intended thioether cross-link
for the strep ligand (a). Subsequently, a trypsin-mediated cleavage demonstrated
that the cyclic strep ligand was correctly formed (). Furthermore, LC-MS/MS for CS5(13–20)
confirmed the presence of the designed cyclic strep ligand in CS5
(c). These
results proved the CS5 structure (a), a lanthipeptide composed of N-terminal
nisin followed by a cyclic strep ligand. Subsequently, CS5 was expressed
in the presence of only NisT for production of linear strep ligand.
After purification, the streptavidin binding capacity of cyclic and
linear CS5 peptides was investigated by using a streptavidin column.
After elution, the fractions were analyzed by Tricine-SDS gel (b, lanes 3 and 4).
The cyclic strep ligand containing CS5 bound to the streptavidin column,
since a clear band appeared from the elution fraction of cyclic strep
ligand containing CS5 (b, lane 3). However, no band was observed from the elution
fraction of linear HPQF-containing CS5 (b, lane 4), indicating that under the used
conditions linear HPQF-containing CS5 had no or too low binding affinity
to streptavidin. These data confirm that the cyclic strep ligand containing
CS5 peptide has significantly higher affinity to streptavidin than
the linear one. (a) MALDI-TOF MS data of CS5 before (blue) and after (red)
treatment
with CDAP and hypothetical structure of CS5. (b) SDS-Tricine gel of
CS5 coexpressed with NisBTC or NisT before (&) and after (#) streptavidin
column purification. (c) LC-MS/MS data of CS5(13–20). The observed
fragments demonstrate that the cyclic strep ligand was formed. Cyclic HPQF-Containing Peptide Displayed
on the Cell Surface
by an Improved Display Scaffold http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf A previous study demonstrated
a PrtP protease-based cell surface display system in . To display the cyclic HPQF strep ligand
of CS5 on the cell surface of , the CS5
was genetically fused to an extension-improved  display scaffold described in  (peptides are fused to a cell wall bound part of PrtP protease via
an LPXTG motif). A human rhinovirus (HRV)-3C protease cleavage site
(sequence LEVLFQGP) was introduced between CS5 and the improved scaffold
(stalk and cell wall spacer, LPxTG domain and TMS domain) (BD-CS5, ). To investigate whether
the cyclic HPQF strep ligand of CS5 was also formed within the  displayed BD-CS5, a streptavidin column binding
experiment was performed. Briefly, BD-CS5 was expressed in the presence
of either NisBTC (modified) or NisT (unmodified). After purification
of expressed modified and unmodified BD-CS5 proteins, their streptavidin
binding capacity was investigated by using a streptavidin column.
After elution, the fractions were investigated by Tricine-SDS gel
(a, lanes 3
and 4). After the streptavidin column, the fraction corresponding
to BD-CS5 coexpressed with the NisBTC enzymes showed a band on the
tricine gel (a, lane 3). In contrast, the fraction corresponding to BD-CS5 coexpressed
with NisT showed no visible band (a, lane 4). These results indicated that
the thioether cross-link between Ser and Cys in SHPQFC had been installed
by NisBC (b).
Subsequently, a whole cell ELISA assay was performed using horseradish
peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated streptavidin to investigate whether the
cyclic HPQF strep ligand was displayed on the surface of . c clearly shows cell surface display for induced  with plasmids pTLR-BTC and pBD-CS5, whereas only background level
was observed in uninduced and NisBC lacking . Together, these results clearly demonstrate that cyclic HPQF strep
ligand was successfully formed and displayed on the surface of . (a) SDS-Tricine gel of BD-CS5 coexpressed with NisBTC
or NisT before
(&) and after (#) streptavidin column purification. (b) Structure
of BD-CS5 with a cyclic strep ligand. (c) Whole-cell ELISA on  NZ9000 cells demonstrates that cyclic HPQF is
displayed on the cell surface; each column represents the mean ±
SD of three independent experiments; the statistical significance
of differences was evaluated by Pearson , ns,  > 0.05; * < 0.05
vs  NZ9000 cells (without plasmid). Directly Serine-Flanking Amino Acids Affect
NisB-Catalyzed Dehydration
of SHPQFC http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf Rink et al. demonstrated
that some amino acid residues directly flanking Ser or Thr can inhibit
or even abolish the dehydration of these Ser and Thr residues by NisB. A subsequent study demonstrated that essentially
all hydrophobic flanking amino acids favor dehydration of Ser and
Thr, whereas hydrophilic amino acids, Asp, Glu, and Arg, and also
Gly disfavor hydration. Based on these
studies, three NisB-unfavorable (Asp, Glu, Arg) and
four favorable (Ala, His, Met, Trp) amino acid codons were genetically
inserted in front of SHPQFC of CS5 (CS5D, CS5E, CS5H, CS5M, CS5R,
CS5W, and CS5A, ).
Plasmids encoding the designed peptides were transformed into  NZ9000 with pTLR-BTC. After the induction and
purification, the mass of the produced peptides was checked by MALDI-TOF
MS. Insertion of hydrophobic amino acids, Ala, Met, or Trp, or insertion
of His resulting in the sequences ASHPQFC, MSHPQFC, WSHPQFC, or HSHPQFC
allowed full dehydration (a, ). On the other hand, NisB-unfavorable Glu, Asp, and Arg residues
reduced the extent of dehydration (a, ). Moreover, insertion of a NisB-unfavorable Asp residue
before SHPQFC completely abolished the dehydration of the resulting SHPQFC (CS5D) (a,b, ). Therefore,
it would be interesting to find a NisB variant that can fully dehydrate
CS5D. Hence, CS5D was selected for further studies (b). CS5D was fused to the display
scaffold (BD-CS5D, ) and coexpressed with NisBTC enzymes. After purification, BD-CS5D
was applied to a streptavidin column for testing its binding capability
as described above. BD-CS5D, which contained DSHPQFC, showed no streptavidin
column binding capability under the conditions used (data not shown),
indicating that the Asp residue also blocked the dehydration of Ser
in DSHPQFC within BD-CS5D. After removal of the his6 tag of pBD-CS5D,
a pBDD vector (c) was constructed for selecting NisB variants that can dehydrate
Ser when preceded by an Asp residue in a DSHPQFC sequence. (a) Dehydration
of the designed peptides. Green, full dehydration;
red, only four dehydrations. (b) Hypothetical structure of CS5D, which
has no cyclic HPQF. (c) BDD construct for selecting NisB variants
that can dehydrate Ser when preceded by an Asp residue in a DSHPQFC
sequence. Selected NisB Dehydrates DSHPQFC http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf High-throughput selection is a robust
approach to improve properties
of enzymes or proteins. To find NisB enzyme variants with the ability
to dehydrate Ser preceded by Asp in the strep ligand context used
here, a full NisB mutant library was constructed by error-prone PCR,
which involved about 100 000 NisB variants according to colony
counting and gene sequencing. After transformation of the NisB library
into a pBDD plasmid-containing ()  NZ9000 strain, streptavidin-coupled
magnetic beads were used in panning rounds to select cyclic strep
ligand displaying  (). After three panning rounds, the cells
were plated on GM17 agar with antibiotics. After overnight growth,
20 colonies were randomly picked, followed by sequencing of . Strikingly, the NisB appeared
18 times out of 20 randomly picked colonies (NisB and
NisB appeared in the remaining two colonies). Subsequently,
the dehydration capability of the three obtained NisB variants was
evaluated by dehydration of CS5D and CS5A. The MALDI-TOF MS showed
that fully dehydrated main products of CS5A were obtained in all three
NisB variant containing strains, which means that the NisB variants
obtained still kept the function of NisB (b). NisB and
NisB showed low-efficiency dehydration of Ser preceded
by Asp (CS5D) (data not shown). In contrast, the NisB variant showed significant improvement in the dehydration of Ser
preceded by Asp (CS5D) and produced a fully dehydrated main product
(a). To investigate
whether this improvement also appeared in the displayed proteins,
a HRV-3C protease was used to release the N-terminal part of the displayed
proteins. NisB almost completely dehydrated the
Ser of SHPQFC preceded by either NisB-favorable Ala or NisB-unfavorable
Asp (c,d).
These results demonstrate that a NisB enzyme with tailored substrate
specificity was discovered by selection of a bacterially displayed
cyclic HPQF sequence. Schematic diagram of selection mutant NisB with improved
dehydration
capacity. Cyclic strep ligand has higher affinity to streptavidin
than linear strep ligand, allowing the use of streptavidin-coupled
magnetic beads to fish out the bacteria with NisB that
can dehydrate Ser preceded by Asp. MALDI-TOF
MS data of peptides modified by NisB (blue)
or NisB (green). (a) CS5D; (b) CS5A; (c) N-terminal
part of BDA, which was released by HRV-3C protease from cell surface;
(d) N-terminal part of BDD, which was released by HRV-3C protease
from cell surface; (e) nisin; (f) nisin; (g) nisin(1–22); (h) nisin(1–22); (i) nisin(1–22); (m) nisin(1–22). NisB Improves the Dehydration of NisB Unfavorable Substrates http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf Supplemental Figures S6g,h and S7c,d,e,f,g,h http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf Supplemental Figures S6c,d,e,f and S7a,b In order to investigate
the dehydration capacity of the selected NisB, six NisB unfavorable substrates were designed and
coexpressed with NisB and NisTC. MALDI-TOF MS
results showed that NisB improved the dehydration
of all six designed nisin variants with respect to NisB (e,f,g,h,i,m, ). Moreover, NisB showed capacity to dehydrate nisin comparable to
NisB (, ). Considering
that NisB is an enzyme with two mutations, single
mutant NisB and NisB were constructed
and used to modify both NisB favorable and unfavorable
substrates. Both NisB and NisB improved
the dehydration of nisin, nisin(1–22), nisin(1–22), and nisin(1–22) with respect to NisB (, ). In addition, both NisB and NisB showed dehydration capacity comparable
to NisB for nisin and CS5A (, ). However, both NisB and NisB showed less dehydration than NisB for CS5D,
nisin(1–22), and nisin (a,e, , ). These results demonstrate that,
in contrast to NisB, NisB shows
significant dehydration of Ser/Thr that are flanked by Asp/Glu. Furthermore,
NisB has better dehydration capacity than the
single mutant enzymes NisB or NisB. Dehydration of Designed Peptides by
Different NisB Mutations observed
mass (Da, main product)/dehydrations predicted
mass (Da)/dehydrations Nisin, the second
amino acid of nisin was changed from Thr to Asp; nisin, the second amino acid of nisin was changed from Thr to Glu; nisin(1–22), the 12th amino acid of nisin was changed from Lys to
Asp; nisin(1–22), the 12th amino acid of nisin
was changed from Lys to Glu; nisin(1–22), the
14th amino acid of nisin was changed from Gly to Asp; nisin(1–22), the 14th amino acid of nisin was changed from Gly to
Glu. The major products
with less dehydration
than predicted are in italic. The major products with predicted dehydration
are in bold. Although  cells containing NisB have
been frequently used for the discovery of lanthionine-stabilized and
target-specific therapeutic peptides, unsuitable NisB substrates constitute a limitation in engineering
lanthipeptides. The overall structure of the dehydratase NisB was revealed by crystal
structure analysis in 2015, and some residues
of the dehydratase NisB have been proven to be important for the dehydration
activity. However, to
the best of our knowledge, up to now no LanB variant has been generated
with modulated or tailored substrate specificity. Here, we show a
valuable approach for  selection of tailored
intracellular NisB dehydratase by screening of a cell surface displayed,
high-affinity strep ligand that was intracellularly modified by mutant
NisB. Directed evolution has arguably become the most effective
strategy
for improving or altering the activity of enzymes, but the success of this strategy
is dependent on the library size and the efficiency of the selection
method. Focused mutagenesis and random mutagenesis are commonly used
approaches for gene diversification. A
focused mutagenesis approach requires phylogenetic information on
enzymes, and even if the essential data are available, deducing the
determinants of enzyme function at the amino acid level can be challenging. Moreover, the small library size of focused
mutagenesis may be responsible for the low success rate for selecting
enzymes with desired activity. Therefore, in this study, a random
mutagenesis approach was used to construct the NisB library, and  containing this library was subjected to cell
surface displayed product screening. The traditional screening
approaches, which are based on agar plate
or microplate assays, would require robotics to handle such large
libraries. In the absence of robust screening methods, it seems difficult
or even impossible to identify enzyme variants with desired properties. If screening approaches are not amenable to automation, only about
1000 to 2000 of the mutants can be screened for desired properties. Cell surface display combined with target-displaying magnetic beads
for panning rounds has been widely used in antibody and drug discovery. In this study, a lanthipeptide  display system was applied. A NisB dehydratase mutation with the capacity to dehydrate
substrates that could not be dehydrated by wild-type NisB was successfully
discovered (, ). These
results raise the hope that the here-used principle can be widely
applied. In previous cell surface display studies, protein libraries,
which
were used for screening protein variants with desired properties,
were usually fused to a display scaffold and thereafter displayed
on the cell surface. Subsequently,
the selections were based on higher target affinity. In contrast, in our present study, the enzyme library
itself was not displayed on the cell surface, but the corresponding
aimed-for product was (c and ). This constitutes a powerful
strategy for high-throughput selecting of intracellular enzyme variants
with desired properties. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf NisB is a glutamyl-tRNA-dependent lantibiotic dehydratase,
and the function of each domain has been revealed in previous studies (a). The dehydration process of NisB involves glutamyl-tRNA to activate Ser or Thr residues. Therefore, glutamyl-tRNA plays a vital role in the
NisB-catalyzed dehydration of Ser and Thr residues. In the present
study, the NisB mutation was discovered by the
herein developed method. Both of the mutation points of NisB are located in the glutamyl-tRNA binding site of NisB
(b). Also the
single mutation points of NisB and NisB are located in the glutamyl-tRNA binding site of NisB
(). For further characterization,
an amino acid sequence alignment of LanB protein sequences was performed. The results show that all four mutation positions
are nonconserved positions ().
Moreover, the mutated amino acid residues of NisB and NisB increased the probability value of the
corresponding positions. These results suggest that the improved substrate
tolerance of NisB is caused by the mutations
in NisB that promote a slightly different and more productive positioning
of the glutamyl-tRNA, allowing a more efficient transfer of the glutamyl moiety. In addition,
a silightly different positioning of the peptide substrate in the
NisB mutant may also led to a more efficient glutamyl-tRNA-catalyzed activation of the respective amino acid residues for dehydration.
The findings thus open the way for exciting follow-up studies aimed
at understanding the exact underlying mechanistic aspects. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that a tailored NisB
dehydratase
was selected from an intrabacterial mutant NisB library by selecting
a bacterial cell surface displayed, high-affinity NisB-modified strep
ligand in panning rounds with streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads.
These results open a new window for high-throughput selection of lanthipeptide
synthetases with modulated capacity to modify specific substrate peptides. (a) Overall
structure of the NisB dehydratase and the functions
of each domain. (b) Glutamyl-tRNA binding site. Amino acids are shown in green that are known
to be important for glutamyl-tRNA binding; mutation
points of NisB are shown in red. Microbial Strains Used and Growth Conditions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf Strains
and plasmids used in this study are listed in .  XL-10 Gold
ultracompetent cells were used for construction of the NisB library.  stains were grown in LB medium or LB medium solidified
with 1% (w/v) agar at 37 °C. For plasmid selection, 250 μg/mL
erythromycin (Sigma) was added. NZ9000
was used for plasmid construction, plasmid maintenance, and protein
expression.  was grown at 30 °C in
M17 broth (Oxoid) or M17 broth solidified with 1% (w/v) agar, containing
0.5% (w/v) glucose (GM17) when necessary, supplemented with chloramphenicol
(5 μg/mL) or erythromycin (5 μg/mL) for plasmid selection.
For protein expression, stationary-phase cultures were inoculated
(20-fold diluted) on GM17 broth and induced with nisin (5 ng/mL) at
an optical density at 600 nm (OD) of about 0.4. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00130/suppl_file/sb0c00130_si_001.pdf Lists of oligonucleotide
primers used for PCR, cloning, and sequencing in this study are provided
in , and all
the oligonucleotide primers were purchased from Biolegio B.V. (Nijmegen,
The Netherlands). Constructs coding for mutants of peptides or display
proteins were made by amplifying template plasmid using a phosphorylated
downstream sense (or upstream antisense) primer and an upstream antisense
(or downstream sense) primer with a peptide-encoding tail. The DNA
amplification was carried out using phusion DNA polymerase (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Self-ligation of the resulting plasmid
encoding linear leader peptide was carried out with T4 DNA ligase
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The electrotransformation
of  was carried out as previously described
using a Bio-Rad gene pulser (Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA). Correctness of all genetic constructs was verified by sequencing.
The peptide mutations were verified by sequencing using the forward
primer PS1 or the reverse primer PS2, and the NisB variants were verified
by sequencing using primers PS3–PS8. Plasmid Cloning for Lanthipeptide
Surface Display PrtP
protease C-terminal domain (1586–1962 aa), here designated
stalk and anchor, was amplified from  SK11
cells using primers Pbd1 and Pbd2. A DNA fragment encoding the NisA
promoter, NisA leader peptide, and CS5 core peptide was amplified
from the pCS5 plasmid with primers Pbd3 and Pbd4. Part of the structure
gene of pCS5 encoding an I cleavage site was amplified
from pCS5 with primers Pbd5 and Pbd6. The different amplification
products were spin column-purified, and joined by PCR fusion. The
full-length amplification product was amplified using oligomers Pbd3
and Pbd6. After spin column purification, the full-length amplification
product, and plasmid pCS5 were digested with II
and I. After collection of the digested fragments,
T4 ligase was used to ligate the two fragments and thereafter electroporated
to  NZ9000. The resulting plasmid was designated
pBD-CS5 and encoded the NisA promoter, NisA leader peptide, pCS5 core
peptide, stalk, and cell wall anchor domain. To construct a NisB library,
an error-prone PCR was performed by using the GeneMorph II Random
Mutagenesis Kit (Agilent). Plasmid backbone of pTLR-BTC was amplified by using high fidelity PCR with
primers Ptlr1 and Ptlr2. The  gene was amplified
by error-prone PCR with primers Ptlr3 and Ptlr4. The error-prone PCR
of the  gene was performed using 50, 250, and
750 ng of template to obtain a low, medium, and high rate of mutation.
In order to remove the template plasmids, a I
(FastDigest, Thermo) digestion was performed. After that, the error-prone
PCR products were mixed at the same concentration (50 ng) that was
used as template for a second generation of PCR amplification by using
the enzyme pfu×7. For the ligation,
various concentrations of insert ranging from 1 to 6 with respect
to the backbone (200 ng) were performed. After dialysis, the ligation
mixes were transformed into  XL-10 Gold chemo-competent
cells. After growth overnight at 37 °C, the efficiency of the
transformation was calculated. Cells were harvested from the plates,
and NisB library plasmids were isolated by using the NucleoSpin Plasmid
EasyPure kit (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany). Gene sequencing
verified that the NisB library was obtained as expected. Expression
and Purification of His6-Tagged Peptides and Proteins NZ9000 cells containing pTLR-BTC for
expression of the NisBTC enzymes were electroporated with His6-protein
plasmids (50 ng), plated on M17 agar plates containing 0.5% (w/v)
glucose supplemented with chloramphenicol (5 μg/mL) and erythromycin
(5 μg/mL), and grown at 30 °C for 20–24 h. A single
colony was used to inoculate 50 mL of GM17 supplemented with chloramphenicol
(5 μg/mL) and erythromycin (5 μg/mL) (GM17EmCm), and the
culture was grown for 15–18 h at 30 °C. After that, the
culture was used to inoculate 1 L (20-fold dilution) of GM17EmCm.
Cultures were grown at 30 °C to an OD of 0.4. Protein
expression was induced by the addition of nisin to a final concentration
of 5 ng/mL, and cultures were grown overnight at 30 °C. Purification
of Secreted Peptides After centrifugation
at 15 000 ×  for 15 min, supernatants
were collected. The pH of supernatants was adjusted to 7.4, and then
supernatants were filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane. Supernatants
were applied to a HisTrap Excel column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated
with 50 mM NaHPO, 300 mM NaCl, and 10 mM imidazole,
pH 8.0. The flow-through was discarded, and the column was subsequently
washed with 16 column volumes (CV) of wash buffer (50 mM NaHPO, 300 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, pH 8.0). The peptide
was eluted with 15 CV of elution buffer (50 mM NaHPO, 300 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole, pH 8.0). The eluted peptide
was then applied to a SIGMA-Aldrich C18 silica gel spherically equilibrated
first with 8 CV of MeCN containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid followed
by 8 CV of 5% aq. MeCN containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The column
was washed with 8 CV of 5% aq. MeCN containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic
acid to remove the salts. Peptide was eluted from the column using
up to 8 CV of 50% aq. MeCN containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Fractions
containing the eluted peptide were freeze-dried, and the peptide was
subsequently dissolved in PBS containing an appropriate amount of
NisP and incubated at 37 °C for 2 h to cleave off the leader
peptide. The insoluble material was removed by filtration through
a 0.2 μm filter, and the supernatant was purified on an Agilent
1260 Infinity HPLC system with a Phenomenex Aeris C18 column (250
mm × 4.6 mm, 3.6 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size).
Acetonitrile was used as the mobile phase, and a gradient of 20–30%
aq. MeCN over 35 min at 1 mL/min was used for separation. Peptides
eluted at 27–29% MeCN. Purification of Displayed
Bacterial Proteins After
centrifugation at 15 000 ×  for 15 min,
cells were collected. After treatment with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl,
2 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, pH 8.5) containing 10 mg/mL
lysozyme at 37 °C for 1 h, cell homogenates were sonicated for
12 min in total. The insoluble material was subsequently removed by
centrifugation at 10 000 ×  for 20 min,
and supernatants were filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane. The
supernatants were applied to a HisTrap Fast Flow column (GE Healthcare)
equilibrated with 50 mM NaHPO, 300 mM NaCl,
10 mM imidazole, pH 8.0. The flow-through was discarded, and the column
was subsequently washed with 16 CV of wash buffer (50 mM NaHPO, 300 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, pH 8.0). The proteins
were eluted with 15 CV of elution buffer (50 mM NaHPO, 300 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole, pH 8.0). After filtration
through a 0.2 μm membrane, the eluted proteins were purified
on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system with a Phenomenex Aeris C18
column (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 3.6 μm particle size, 100 Å
pore size). Acetonitrile was used as the mobile phase, and a gradient
of 20–70% aq. MeCN over 60 min at 1 mL/min was used for separation.
Proteins were eluted at 59–61% MeCN. Whole-Cell
ELISA for Detection of Surface-Displayed Cyclic HPQF NZ9000 cells containing plasmids pBD-CS5
and pTLR-BTC/pTLR-T and  NZ9000 cells were
grown with or without nisin (5 ng/mL) for induction of modification
enzymes and protein expression. After production, cells were collected
by centrifugation, washed three times with MES buffer (0.1 M, pH 7.4)
plus 20 mM Cacl (MES-Ca), and then resuspended to an OD of 20. Aliquots of OD = 3.0 from these cell
suspensions were incubated with a 4000-fold diluted horseradish peroxidase
(HRP)-conjugated streptavidin solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, MA) in a final volume of 1 mL of MES-Ca plus 0.2% Tween 20
and 1% BSA at room temperature for 1 h under rotation. After three
washes with MES-Ca-T-BSA, the displayed cyclic HPQF was visualized
by the addition of 1 mL of 1-Step ABTS horseradish peroxidase substrate
solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The absorbance was
determined at 410 nm after a suitable time period, which is a measure
for the displayed cyclic HPQF. One microliter of sample was spotted
and dried on the target. Subsequently, 0.7 μL of matrix solution
(5 mg/mL α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid from Sigma-Aldrich dissolved
in 50% acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) was spotted
on top of the sample. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time-of-flight
(MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a 4800
Plus MALDI TOF/TOF Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) in the linear-positive
mode. Evaluation of (Methyl)lanthionine Formation After the
freeze-dried samples were dissolved in 18 μL of 0.5 M HCL (pH
= 3), the samples were treated with 2 μL of 100 mg/mL tris[2-carboxyethyl]phosphine
in 0.5 M HCL (pH = 3) for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently,
4 μL of 100 mg/mL 1-cyano-4-dimethylaminopyridinium tetrafluoroborate
(CDAP) in 0.5 M HCL (pH = 3) was added to the samples. After incubation
at room temperature for 2 h, the samples were desalted with a C-18
ZipTip (Millipore) and analyzed by MALDI-TOF MS. To gain insight into the
lanthionine bridging
pattern, we performed MS/MS. LC-MS was performed using a Q-Exactive
mass spectrometer fitted with an Ultimate 3000 UPLC, an ACQUITY BEH
C18 column (2.1 mm × 50 mm, 1.7 μm particle size, 200 Å;
Waters), a HESI ion source, and an Orbitrap detector. A gradient of
5–90% MeCN with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) at a flow rate of 0.35
mL/min over 60 min was used. MS/MS was performed in a separate run
in PRM mode selecting the doubly and triply charged ion of the compound
of interest. Library Screening by Streptavidin-Coupled
Magnetic Bead Assisted
Cell Sorting An aliquot of the NisB library transformed cells
(∼5 × 10 cells) was inoculated in 50 mL of
GM17EmCm. The culture was grown at 30 °C until an OD of about 0.4. At this point, protein and enzyme production was induced
by adding nisin at a final concentration of 5 ng/mL. Incubation was
continued overnight. Library-containing cells were collected by centrifugation,
washed three times with 0.1 M MES-Ca, and resuspended in 2 mL of MES-Ca-T-BSA.
To reduce the number of nonspecifically binding peptides from the
initial library, a 1 mL of library cell suspension was incubated for
30 min at room temperature with 200 μL of biotin-saturated streptavidin-coupled
magnetic beads (Dynabeads and MyOne Streptavidin T1; Invitrogen).
The unbound cells in the supernatant were collected and resuspended
in 1 mL of MES-Ca-T-BSA. For the first round of selection, 200 μL
of streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads was added and incubated under
rotation at room temperature for 1 h. Streptavidin-binding cells were
collected by magnetic-bead assisted cell sorting (MACS), washed 3
times with MES-Ca-T-BSA, resuspended in 50 mL of GM17EmCm, grown overnight
at 30 °C, and used to produce cells for the next round of selection.
Two additional selection rounds were performed. After three rounds
of MACS, the cells were plated, and individual clones were picked
for sequencing analysis. Protease Induced Removal of Displayed Peptides
from the Cell
Surface and Peptide Purification surface display vectors pBDA and pBDD were used to compare the dehydration
ability of selected NisB mutation and wild-type NisB. The produced
proteins containing the HRV 3C protease recognition sequence (PreScission
protease; GE Healthcare) to release the N-terminal part of proteins
from the  cell surface.  NZ9000 cells displaying BDA or BDD was subjected to 16% trichloroacetic
acid (TCA) for 1 h on ice. Cells were washed three times with 10 mL
of acetone, dried in a Speed Vac, and washed three times with PBS.
The cells were resuspended in 5 mL of PreScission protease cleavage
buffer (GE Healthcare) containing 200 U of PreScission protease (GE
Healthcare) and incubated at 4 °C for 48 h under rotation. After
protease digestion, the supernatant was collected, and the N-terminal
parts of the BDA and BDD peptides were purified by HPLC, and subsequently
mass spectrometry was performed..