For biological, biophysical,
and biochemical studies of the cell it is essential to temporally
and spatially control protein function. While drugs have been traditionally
used with great success to temporally control protein activity, they are dependent on diffusion and are inherently
a bulk technique, which limits temporal control and does not allow
for spatial control. In contrast, light offers very precise spatial
and temporal control. Hence, optical control of protein function will
expand the range of applications already achieved by drug control. In general, two concepts have been explored for activity control
of proteins with light. One concept makes use of inhibiting a protein’s
active site by splitting it into two parts, masking it with a caging
group, or blocking it in a particular protein conformation. Light-triggered
protein dimerization, caging group removal, or conformational change
induction, respectively, activate protein function. The second method is more indirect and relies on initial mislocalization
of the protein, preventing its activity and activation of the protein
through optochemical translocation to a specific cellular compartment. Blocking the active site of a protein is very specific to the particular
protein of interest and often involves optimization via trial and
error before it can be adapted to other proteins. Nature controls
a multitude of processes in cells via mislocalization and translocation
to the active region of a protein (e.g., the cell membrane, the mitochondria,
or the nucleus). In many signaling pathways, exclusion from the nucleus
keeps key proteins inactive, and they are activated by nuclear import.
Guided by Nature’s design, we use the nucleus as compartment
and mislocalize proteins by retaining them in the cytoplasm, leading
to protein inactivity, followed by optochemical translocation into
the nucleus and subsequent protein activation. We hypothesize that
this represents a more general approach to the conditional control
of a wide range of proteins using light as an external trigger, since
the same caged nuclear localization signal (NLS) can be readily adapted
for various applications. Here, we show two entirely different applications
of modifying proteins with spatiotemporal control based on the same
mechanism of optochemically triggered nuclear entry. First, we control
transcription: nuclear entry of the transcription factor FOXO3 is
inhibited by a caged NLS until light-triggered decaging of the NLS
releases the transcription factor into the nucleus and switches on
transcription and protein expression (Figure a). Second, we apply the mechanism to protein cleavage: nuclear entry
of TEV-protease is triggered by decaging of the NLS. The protease
then translocates into the nucleus, where it cleaves proteins with
a TEV-cleavage site. Proteins containing an NLS remain in the nucleus,
but others diffuse throughout the cell after cleavage by TEV (Figure b). We believe that these initial applications lay
the foundations for broad usage of the presented optochemical NLS
control. Schematic drawing of the applications: in both cases, light induces
nuclear entry of a protein admitting it to its region of activity.
(a) A transcription factor (red) is kept in the cytoplasm. Photoactivation
releases it to the nucleus where it initiates expression of proteins
(green). (b) TEV-protease (blue) is kept in the cytoplasm and enters
the nucleus after photoactivation. Proteins in the nucleus (green/red)
with a TEV cleavage site will remain intact until the protease enters
the nucleus and starts cleavage. Upon cleavage of the protein, its
part containing the NLS will remain nuclear (green) whereas the other
part (red) will distribute all over the cell. Construction of Optochemically Controlled
Nuclear Import System In order to realize these applications
through controlling protein
function by optochemically triggered translocation into the nucleus,
a tight photoactivatable nuclear entry mechanism is needed. The absence
of any background activity or leakiness is very important, since a
single transcription factor in the nucleus could start protein expression.
Similarly, with time a single protease in the nucleus can cleave a
detectable amount of proteins. Recently, we have reported a technique
that employs site specific-genetic encoding of a photocaged lysine
(NPMK, nitropiperonylmethyloxycarbonyl lysine) into a bipartite NLS
to allow for nuclear entry upon illumination and decaging. Although the system shows prompt import after
photoactivation, leakage into the nucleus before activation is significant.
These properties render the method useful for nuclear import studies
but not for protein manipulation. However, the rapid response upon
illumination encouraged us to further investigate this approach. A
less promiscuous NLS that is completely deactivated by mutation of
one single amino acid combined with the photocaged amino acid could
yield tight optical control of nuclear entry and provide the basis
for a wide range of applications. Canonical NLSs like bipartite
or SV40 are all fairly promiscuous. Out
of the manifold of native NLSs of proteins that of the transcription factor SATB1 has properties that appear promising for successful photocaging.
It is a single 20 amino acid domain that lacks the clusters of basic
residues associated with the classical NLS (Figure a). Furthermore, it can be prepended
to heterologous proteins such as GFP to control their nuclear import
indicating its potential multifunctional use for import of a variety
of proteins. Most importantly, Nakayama et al. demonstrated that upon
mutation of one single lysine to alanine in SATB1s NLS no nuclear
import was detectable (Figure b), whereas
the native NLS without mutation led to almost complete nuclear import. This discovery was further validated by us.
The sensitivity of the SATB1 NLS to a single amino acid change at
position 29 makes it a good candidate for leakage-free photocaging
as needed for applications of protein activity control. Thus, we constructed
a plasmid that encodes both parts needed for the site-specific incorporation
of photocaged lysine, the engineered pyrrolysyl tRNA synthetase and
its cognate tRNA from . Furthermore, we
altered the SATB1 gene by mutating Lys29 in the SATB1 NLS to the TAG
amber stop codon and flanked the peptide-coding region with sequences
for eGFP and mCherry. Without amber suppression, only eGFP should
be expressed, whereas upon successful suppression, photocaged lysine
should be incorporated, yielding an eGFP-K29NPMK-SATB1-mCherry fusion
protein. The chosen experimental design ensures that full-length SATB1
is only expressed in the caged form, since the stop codon is located
at the very beginning of SATB1’s coding sequence. For simplicity,
we will refer to the SATB1-derived K29-NPMK-NLS as the “OptoNLS”. Supporting Information Figure S1 As shown in Figure c, transfected
cells
display an mCherry signal, denoting successful incorporation of photocaged
lysine and expression of eGFP-OptoNLS-SATB1-mCherry. Most importantly,
eGFP-OptoNLS-SATB1-mCherry is restricted to the cytoplasm and no leakage
into the nucleus is detectable. As expected, eGFP can be found in
the cytoplasm as well as in the nucleus, since the truncated eGFP
protein (28 kDa) resulting from incomplete suppression of the TAG
codon is below the size cutoff for passive diffusion into the nucleus
(). Irradiation with UVA light of about 350 nm (DAPI
filter cube) decaged the lysine, generating the native SATB1 sequence,
which then entered the nucleus (Figure c).
The amount of nuclear SATB1 transport was dependent on the illumination
time, and there was no import without illumination (Figure d). After sufficient illumination and reaction time,
the fraction of nuclear SATB1 was almost that of the protein with
a native NLS as displayed in Figure c, which
was imaged 7 h after a 120 s UV exposure. Since we could not detect
any leakage but could recover nuclear import with illumination, the
OptoNLS seemed to represent a good basis for our applications of optochemical
protein function control through protein mislocalization. The only
drawback of the SATB1 NLS was that SATB1 import took several hours
to saturate post illumination. Other import cargoes with a canonical
NLS usually take only minutes. The slow import does
not necessarily need to originate from the NLS though—it could
also be due to the protein’s properties. Photocontrol
of SATB1 transcription factor nuclear import. (a)
Schematic of light-activated nuclear translocation. The protein of
interest is excluded from the nucleus by the photocaged NLS. Upon
photorelease of the caging group, the protein enters the nucleus.
Lys29 in the SATB1-NLS (aa 20–40) is replaced by alanine or
lysine, which is photocaged by the nitropiperonylmethyloxycarbonyl
group, blocking nuclear import. For comparison the sequence of the
bipartite NLS is shown. (b) SATB1 with wildtype NLS (wt) is located
in the nucleus (nuclear signal fraction: 0.950 ± 0.087). eGFP-Lys29Ala-SATB1
and eGFP-OptoNLS-SATB1-mCherry are excluded from the nucleus (nuclear
signal fractions: 0.037 ± 0.037 and 0.049 ± 0.026, respectively).
(c) Before photolysis, eGFP-OptoNLS-SATB1-mCherry is restricted to
the cytoplasm (upper panel). Seven hours after illumination (lasting
120 s) with 350 nm UV light, SATB1 is found predominantly in the nucleus.
(d) Dose dependence of the optically gated nuclear import. Difference
of nuclear intensity of eGFP-OptoNLS-SATB1-mCherry before illumination
and 2 h after a range of UV illumination times. Optochemically
Controlled Transcription Factor Activity Supporting Information Figure S2,
Movie S3 First, we designed
an optochemical control of transcription. We chose
FOXO3, a forkhead transcription factor implicated in regulation of
apoptosis and in tumorigenesis, as a target for OptoNLS control. A well-established GFP reporter system for detecting FOXO3 activity
exists, based on a minimal promoter and tandem repeats of the FOXO
transcriptional response element. We
replaced FOXO3’s native NLS with the OptoNLS and fused mCherry
to FOXO3’s C-terminus, ensuring that mCherry is expressed only
after successful incorporation of the photocaged lysine (Figure a). As shown in Figure b,
suppression and incorporation of photocaged lysine was achieved and
OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry was efficiently excluded from the nucleus before
irradiation. Importantly, brief illumination of the cells with UV
light led to rapid entry of OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry into the nucleus
(Figure b). Hence, the photocaged SATB1-NLS
retains its desirable properties when prepended to heterologous proteins.
The import of OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry took only ∼5 min to fully
equilibrate (), showing that the origin of OptoNLS-SATB1’s
slow import was indeed the SATB1 protein and not an inherent deficiency
of the OptoNLS. Next, we tested whether OptoNLS-FOXO3 retained its
ability to activate transcription and thus light-control of the activity
of FOXO3 could be obtained. We transfected cells with OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry
and the GFP transcription reporter system that leads to GFP expression
upon FOXO3 activity. A functional optochemical control of FOXO3 transcription
activity should thus lead to cytoplasmic FOXO3 and absence of GFP
expression before illumination and nuclear entry followed by GFP expression
after illumination (Figure a). As expected,
the OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry was cytoplasmic before illumination (Figure b, left panel). Without illumination, even >50
h
after transfection, no GFP expression was detected, showing that the
OptoNLS allows tight control of gene expression. After illumination,
FOXO3 entered the nucleus (Figure b), and
about 15 h later, GFP expression was detected (Figure c). This demonstrates the successful application of the OptoNLS
for photochemical control of the transcription activity of FOXO3.
The fraction of GFP expressing cells is fairly low due to the fact
that only cells, which received all three plasmids, (NPMK-pylRS/pyltRNA,
OptoNLS-FOXO3, and the FOXO3-driven reporter) express GFP. However,
in future applications, this can be improved by constructing stably
expressing cell lines. Photocontrol of transcription factor FOXO3. (a) The construct
of
OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry has the OptoNLS inserted at the site of the
native NLS. (b) OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry (left) is initially excluded
from the nucleus but efficiently enters the nucleus after photorelease
(right, 120 s illumination, mean nuclear signal fractions: 0.06 ±
0.03 and 0.64 ± 0.16, respectively). Photocontrol of FOXO3-mediated transcription. (a) Schematic drawing:
A transcription factor (red) is kept in the cytoplasm. Photoactivation
releases it to the nucleus where it initiates expression of proteins
(green). (b) Nuclear import of OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry (red). Before
photorelease, OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry is excluded from the nucleus.
Inset, zoom of single cell. Dashed line denotes nuclear envelope;
inset colorscale cropped from 0 to 255 to 0–100 to emphasize
absence of detectable leakage into nucleus. After photorelease, OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry
is actively transported into the nucleus. Inset at  = +15 h: zoom of single cell showing accumulation in nucleus. Dashed
line denotes nuclear envelope; inset colorscale cropped as before.
(c) Transcriptional activation of a FOXO3-driven GFP reporter (green)
upon optically triggered nuclear import of OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry.
The GFP signal is readily detectable at  > 17
h
after photorelease of OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry. Each trace in the intensity
vs time plot represents one nucleus. The images in parts b and c are
the mCherry- and GFP-channel of the same image. The inserts in the
last image are a control without UV illumination, where even after
39h no GFP could be detected. Optochemically Controlled Protease Cleavage Since the
OptoNLS allowed for tightly controlled transcriptional activity showing
no leakage, we designed another application: optochemically controlled
protease cleavage. This allows specific target complexes in the nucleus
to be cleaved upon optically triggered protease translocation. We
employed TEV as the light-triggered protease and SATB1 as the target.
To construct the photocontrolled protease, we prepended the OptoNLS
to TEV protease (Figure a). Then, we appended
two CFP proteins to increase its molecular weight beyond the passive
diffusion limit and thus reduced potential
leakage of TEV into the nucleus prior to decaging. Next, we generated
the target. We introduced a TEV cleavage site into SATB1 immediately
following its PDZ-like domain, the region of natural sumoylation-triggered
SATB1 cleavage. Additionally, we flanked
SATB1 with GFP and mCherry (Figure a). Thus,
before optochemical activation the TEV protease should remain cytoplasmic
and the mCherry-SATB1-GFP fusion protein should be localized
in the nucleus. Upon illumination, TEV should enter the nucleus and
cleave SATB1. The part of SATB1 fused to GFP retains its NLS and should
stay nuclear whereas the mCherry part without NLS will be distributed
all over the cell via passive diffusion from the nucleus (Figure b). As shown in Figure c, the GFP-SATB1-mCherry target responded to optical decaging and translocation
of the OptoNLS-TEV as expected. Before photorelease of TEV, both GFP
(green) and mCherry (red) were colocalized in the nucleus, yielding
a yellow signal. No cleavage of SATB1 could be detected, demonstrating
that the OptoNLS offers background-free protease cleavage. After light-induced
translocation of OptoNLS-TEV, mCherry (red) was increasingly detected
in the cytoplasm, whereas the GFP (green), which is attached to the
NLS containing part of SATB1, remained confined to the nucleus. This
successful optochemical trigger of TEV protease activity can now be
used to spatiotemporally control cleavage of any nuclear protein that
can be constructed with a TEV cleavage site. It allows for switching
off protein function in the nucleus for cell biology studies as well
as releasing protein parts that show cytoplasmic activity into their
active compartment. Furthermore, the light-triggered system can be
used to create well-defined conditions for studies of the effect of
cleavage by enzymes such as caspases by inserting a TEV cleavage site
into the cleaved target protein at the original cleavage site. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the optochemical control of
two different processes—gene transcription and protease cleavage—through
the application of tightly regulated light-controlled nuclear import.
We used a genetically encoded photocaged lysine at position 29 of
the SATB1 NLS to control nuclear import of proteins that were originally
mislocalized to the cytoplasm. The developed methods should leverage
studies in developmental, stem cell, and cancer biology. They can
be used to trigger expression or cleavage of a manifold of proteins.
The small size of the OptoNLS (20 amino acids) minimizes its impact
upon insertion and promises use of the system for nuclear entry control
of a wide range of proteins. The OptoNLS approach should also function
in transgenic animals such as worms and flies, since their genetic
code has recently been expanded with unnatural amino acids. Photocontrol of intranuclear SATB1 cleavage. (a) Photocontrolled
delivery of the TEV protease into the nucleus of MCF10A cells and
subsequent specific cleavage of a transcription factor. The TEV protease
has a prepended OptoNLS and two attached CFPs, to block passive diffusion
into the nucleus. A TEV protease site was engineered into the SATB1
transcription factor, which was also flanked by two fluorophores to
allow intranuclear cleavage to be visualized. (b) TEV-protease (blue)
is kept in the cytoplasm and enters the nucleus after photoactivation.
SATB1 in the nucleus (yellow) containing a TEV target site will remain
intact until the protease enters the nucleus and starts cleavage.
Upon cleavage of the protein, its part containing the NLS will remain
nuclear whereas the other part (red) will distribute all over the
cell. (c) Fluorescence images: before photorelease of the TEV protease,
GFP (green), and mCherry (red) are colocalized and fully contained
in the nucleus (left panel), confirming that an intact SATB1 is expressed
and localized in the nucleus. After photorelease of TEV, it enters
the nucleus and there it cleaves SATB1. The green N-terminal fragment
stays in the nucleus since it has a functional NLS; the red C-terminal
fragment transitions to the cytoplasm (middle). (right) Images split
into single color channels. The PCKRS-PyltRNA plasmid
was constructed from
PCKRS and PyltRNA plasmids using NheI-MfeI
and SpeI-RI, respectively. The two fragments were
then religated. Mutants of Lys29 in the SATB1 NLS were generated with
the QuikChange method introducing either the TAG or alanine codon.
GFP-SATB1 was a gift from the T. Kowhi-Shigematsu lab. FOXO3 (Addgene
plasmid 14937) was obtained from the J. Massagué lab eGFP-OptoNLS-SATB1-mCherry, OptoNLS-FOXO3-mCherry,
OptoNLS-TEV-CFP-CFP, and GFP-SATB1-mCherry with a TEV cleavage site
in a Cumate expression vector were generated using the SLIC technique. Transfection and Tissue Culture Hek 293T cells were
grown in DMEM with 10% FBS and plated on 35 mm dishes (MatTek corporation).
Transfection was performed with Lipofectamine (Invitrogen) according
to manufacturer’s instructions using 4 μg of each plasmid
required for the specific experiment. After transfection, caged lysine
was added yielding a final concentration of 2 mM. Cells were incubated
for 24 h until imaging. For the TEV cleavage experiment, MCF10A cells
stably selected for the Cumate inducible expression system (System
Biosciences) were grown in growth medium and transfected using the neon electroporator (Invitrogen) with
3 μg of each plasmid. Cumate was added for the first 10 h to
allow for SATB1 expression. After ∼10 h, caged lysine was added
yielding a final concentration of 2 mM to allow for TEV expression
and Cumate was removed to stop SATB1 expression and avoid premature
cleavage in the cytoplasm before import into the nucleus. Cells were
then incubated for another ∼6 h. Before imaging, in all experiments,
medium was replaced with DMEM containing no caged lysine. Nuclear
import of the FOXO3 transcription factor was monitored with the Cignal
FOXO GFP Reporter system (CCS-6022, ), which consists of the GFP gene under the control of a minimal
(m)CMV promoter and tandem repeats of the FOXO transcriptional response
element. Confocal imaging was performed
on an Axiovert 700 (Zeiss) using 488 and 555 nm lasers and a 63×
oil immersion objective (NA = 1.4, Zeiss). Time lapse imaging and
photolysis were performed on an inverted epifluorescence microscope
(Olympus, IX81) at an intensity of about 50 μW in the back aperture
of the objective. Photorelease was performed using a 20× objective
(Olympus, AchN) and a DAPI filter (Ex: 350/50 nm, Chroma), and imaging
was conducted with a GFP filter (Ex: 470/40 nm. Em: 525/50 nm, Chroma)
and an mCherry filter (Ex: 560/40 nm, Em: 630/75 nm, Chroma). Image
analysis was performed using ImageJ and Matlab..