BioBricks
are DNA sequences
of defined structure and function. BioBricks
share a common interface that allows easy enzymatic manipulation,
such as assembly of two or more parts together, creating a composite.
Standardization of biological parts facilitates automation and part
reuse. The BioBrick collection, available to researchers through the
BioBrick Foundation, currently lists more than 3400 BioBricks. A portion
of that collection are small parts (<150 bps), such as ribosomal
binding sites (RBSs), promoters, operators, and terminators that are
used to assemble efficient coding BioBricks and to regulate their
expression. While there are several BioBrick assembly standards, standard
10 (RFC10) (originally developed at MIT in 2003) is the most utilized as it is geared toward enzymatic
assembly. As such, it is quite reliable even in novice hands, but
relative time-consuming. On the other hand, methods such as Overlap
Extension PCR cloning are fast, but handicapped
by the necessity of designing and synthesizing a new set of primers
for each individual BioBrick. While there have been numerous efforts
to simplify the BioBrick assembly processes, they were either too complicated or did not get significant traction
within the synthetic biology community. Here, we present a universal
method that maintains compatibility with the standard 10 assembly,
while delivering the simplicity and convenience of Overlap Extension
PCR cloning. There are
many BioBricks that code for the protein parts but do
not have any controlling elements such as ribosomal binding sites,
promoters, or terminators fused to them. There are several benefits
of having BioBricks in such a format. First, it helps to eliminate
unwanted selection during the vector maintenance due to the low background
expression of the protein. Second, it provides a choice to combine
BioBricks with any desirable controlling elements, thus giving the
opportunity to express the coded protein at just the right level.
Those advantages come with the caveat—it may take a novice
researcher days, if not weeks, to combine such BioBricks with small
controlling elements before the results of the working BioBrick expression
are seen. During the 2013 iGEM competition, we found that the success
rate of 3A assembly for small parts, such
as a ribosomal binding site, was significantly lower for the parts
with a size of less than 150 bp (data not presented). We have calculated
that we have spent approximately 70% of our wet lab time attempting
to fuse the RBS site (BBa_B0034) with different coding parts. This
was significant motivation to develop a reliable technique for BioBrick
assembly of the small regulatory parts with the protein coding parts.
Our design parameters were (1) the technique should be compatible
with the RFC10 standard assembly and (2) the assembled product should
be indistinguishable from one obtained through 3A assembly. A closer look at the BioBrick sequences revealed that a 7 bp CTAGATG
region is consistent among all coding BioBricks that start with ATG
(Figure A; underlined). CTAGATG duplex melting
temperature () is −1.64 °C,
which makes it practically impossible to use it as a sole priming
region for the forward primer during the PCR. We have speculated that
the addition of the distant complementation region at the 5′
end of the primer should increase the probability for the 3′
end CTAGATG sequence to prime. We have also incorporated the RBS sequence
(BBa_B0034) and scar region TACTAG in the final design of the forward
primer (Figure A). Standard VR primer 5′-GTATTACCGCCTTTGAGTGA-3′
was used as a reverse primer for the PCR reaction (Figure C). The result of the PCR
reaction with 24 randomly selected coding
BioBricks from the iGEM 2013 kit (Table )
are presented in Figure D. Twenty-one out
of twenty-four BioBrick parts were successfully PCR amplified. Attempts
to verify the sequences for the three missing PCR amplifications (BBa_K648028;
BBa_K538004; and BBa_K530000) revealed that DNA for those clones was
either missing on the plate (no clones generated after transformation)
or did not contain the standard BioBrick prefix. We have used standard
BioBrick assembly with the pSB1C3 backbone provided with the iGEM
kit and freshly generated PCR product to obtain the clones. The inclusion
of the RBS was verified via sequencing of the constructs with the
VR and VF2 primers. The majority of the BioBrick parts delivered with
the iGEM kit
are on the pSB1C3 vector backbone. To simplify the addition of the
RBS even further, we have attempted to use rbs_B0034 primer duplex
in a whole plasmid site directed mutagenesis-like protocol (Figure ). The list of targets is presented in Table . All seven targets were successfully modified.
Inclusion of the RBS was verified via sequencing. Traditional
standard BioBrick assembly as well as 3A BioBrick assembly
involves multiple enzymatic reactions and purification steps. The
overall success for both techniques is relatively high in novice hands
when specific attention is paid to the details and parts used in the
assembly larger when 150 bp. However, assembly of parts smaller than
150 bp presents a significant challenge even for the experienced researcher
and may result in substantial project delays. To address this challenge
we have devised a simple, reliable, and universal protocol for the
RBS assembly that can potentially also be applied to other small parts
assembly. We have first demonstrated that we can add the RBS
sequence to
any coding BioBrick through the use of the standard rbs_B0034 primer
by PCR. We then simplified this approach one step further demonstrating
the incorporation of RBS into the BioBrick containing vector via whole
plasmid site directed mutagenesis. The resulting protocol is simple
and reliable even in novice hands and is suitable for automation.
The final product is indistinguishable from one obtained with either
standard or 3A BioBrick assembly. Design and application of the universal primer, rbs_B0034,
for
the PCR assembly with any coding biobrick. (A) Anatomy of the pSB
vector with cloned BioBrick. Alignment of the rbs_B0034 primer to
the vector containing BioBrick is demonstrated. (B) Anticipated product
of the assembly that is indistinguishable from one obtained via enzymatic
assembly. (C) Location of the alignment sites for the forward rbs_B0034
primer and reverse VR primer on pSB1C3-Bba··· vector,
where Bba··· is any coding standard 10 BioBrick. (D)
Results of the PCR amplification with the primers rbs_B0034 and VR
for 24 BioBriks listed in the Table. 0.8%
agarose gel electrophoresis; Unmarked first lane has loaded 1 kb marker
(NEB) 1–24 correspond to positions 1–24 in the Table. Schematics of the one-step
RBS (BBa_B0034) BioBrick assembly with
the use of rbs_B0034 and rbs_B0034rc primers. The procedure is overall
similar to the whole plasmid site directed mutagenesis. The starting
material could be any coding BioBrick containing vector and universal
rbs_B0034 and rbs_B0034rc primers. List of the BioBricks
Used in the
Study with the PCR Amplification/Standard Assembly Approach FsC: cutinase PET cleaving
enzyme tphC: terephtalate periplasmatic
binding proteine of the tripartite transporter family tctB_162: small
subunit
B1 of the tripartite tricarboxylate transporter family tphB: reaction
from DCD
to protocatechuate tphA3: catalyzes together
with tphA2 TPA to DCD Cro λ repressor that
activates the lytic cycle enhanced lumazine
synthase
(ELS) thioesterase (TesA from ) with 8-His Tag GFP regulated
by 3OC12-HSL
and LasR List of the BioBricks Used in the
Study with the Site Directed Mutagenesis Approach blue fluorescent protein
(mTagBFP) engineered cyan fluorescent
protein derived from  GFP engineered mutant of red
fluorescent protein from  (coral) enhanced yellow fluorescent
protein derived from  GFP Bacterial Strains,
Plasmids, Growth Conditions, and Transformation
Procedures Chemically competent  XL1-Blue
cells were used for all the transformations. For each transformation,
one microliter of either ligation product or PCR product was used
to transform 20 μL of competent cells. Transformants were grown
at 37 °C in 225 μL of SOC medium for 1 h before spread
on Luria–Bertani medium (LB) agar plates supplemented with
34 mg/L of chloramphenicol. Linearized pSB1C3 backbone was used for
all cloning, and was obtained as a part of iGEM 2013 DNA Distribution
Kit. PCR, Cloning, and Site Directed Mutagenesis Reactions Phusion DNA polymerase (NEB, Ipswich, MA) and chimeric primer rbs_B0034
5′-TGGAATTCGCGGCCGCTTCTAGAGAAAGAGGAGAAATACTAGATG-3′
with the reverse standard VR primer 5′-GTATTACCGCCTTTGAGTGA-3′
were used to PCR amplify different protein coding BioBricks from the
iGEM 2013 DNA Distribution kit plates. Each PCR was subjected to a
temperature regimen similar to the following: initial denaturation
at 100 °C for 2 min, denaturation at 94 °C for 30 s, annealing
at 55 °C for 30 s, extension at 68 °C for 1.5 min/kb for
30–32 cycles, with a final extension of 68 °C for 10 min.
All PCR amplified inserts were cloned into pSB1C3 vector backbone
in accordance to the BioBrick standard assembly protocol (see BioBrick
Assembly Manual (NEB, Ipswich, MA) for details). For site-directed
mutagenesis RBS insertion procedure acceptor plasmid pSB1C3-“BioBrick”
(30 ng) was mixed with 15 μL of 2 μM solution of rbs_B0034
primer and 15 μL of 2 μM solution of rbs_B0034 reverse
compliment primer 5′-CATCTAGTATTTCTCCTCTTTCTCTAGAAGCGGCCGCGAATTCCA-3′
in a total 50 μL volume containing Phusion DNA polymerase reaction
mixture containing dNTPs, buffer and the enzyme. The insert and vector
were denatured (98 °C for 30 s), annealed (55 °C for 30
s), and polymerase-catalyzed extension (68 °C for 12 min) for
18 cycles. The DpnI endonuclease works well in Phusion HF buffer.
We typically
add 10 units of the enzyme directly to the PCR tube right after the
final extension is done and incubate the reaction for 1 h at 37 °C.
Restriction endonuclease DpnI targets methylated DNA sequences and
thus can cleave the DNA template isolated from most  strains but not the PCR product..