Lipid bilayer
membranes define
the boundaries of virtually all living cells. The creation of artificial
phospholipid vesicles gave insights into the biophysical properties
of cellular membranes and led to the development of new drug delivery
systems. Giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs),
in particular, have become increasingly popular model systems in bottom-up
synthetic biology, since they match the dimensions of eukaryotic cells
and can conveniently be monitored with light microscopy on the single-compartment
level. They serve as biomimetic compartments for the encapsulation
and reconstitution of cellular components , shedding light on their function in a well-defined environment
isolated from the complexity of a living cell. While several
key milestones toward the assembly of a synthetic cell have been accomplished, there is a key problem to be addressed for the
full flourishing of the field: Increasingly complex cell-like systems
require methods for efficient encapsulation of multiple components
inside compartments at high yield. Despite the widespread use of GUVs,
for synthetic biology as well as biomedical applications, there are
still challenges regarding their formation. Initially, the gentle
hydration approach was proposed for
GUV formation. A dried lipid film was
exposed to an aqueous solution for hours and days at temperatures
above the phase transition temperature of the lipids. A major improvement to this protocol was suggested by Angelova
and Dimitrov: By applying an external electric ac-field to the lipid
solution, larger GUVs could be obtained (above 30 μm diameter)
and the formation process was sped up. This so-called electroformation approach is still the most commonly
used method for GUV formation. It is well characterized and was developed
further to increase its versatility, e.g., to improve compatibility
with charged lipids. Nevertheless, the
yield is optimal for uncharged lipids and nonphysiological salt concentrations,
as charges usually interfere with the process. Natural cell membranes,
however, typically include a significant amount of negatively charged
lipids (around 30%). Additionally,
the encapsulation efficiency of biomolecules is low, making it difficult
to assemble complex synthetic cells. Alternatives have been proposed,
including solvent evaporation, osmotic
shock, gel-assisted swelling, and inverted emulsions. A good overview of these techniques and potential artifacts can
be found elsewhere. Notably, the water-in-oil emulsion
transfer method greatly improved the
encapsulation efficiency, which led to the successful reconstitution
of protein expression systems in GUVs. Recently, different methods for the microfluidic formation of GUVs
were demonstrated. These methods received increased attention for the bottom-up assembly
of synthetic cells, as they feature high-yield and homogeneous size,
and most importantly, encapsulation of biomolecules  the aqueous inlet is straightforward. However, establishing microfluidic technologies may be time-consuming
and, in the case of PDMS-based microfluidics, requires clean room
facilities. While glass-capillary microfluidics circumvents the need for a clean room, this method uses
a relatively expensive capillary preparation technology. Alignment
of the capillaries and their sealing is a laborious process. Moreover,
in both cases, when there are interactions between the microfluidic
channel walls and the species for encapsulation, forming stable GUVs
can be challenging. Here, we propose a simple and cost-effective
one-pot method to
produce GUV-based single- and multicompartment systems for synthetic
biology and biomedical applications. Like the microfluidic method
proposed by Weiss , it relies on the charge-mediated fusion of SUVs or proteoliposomes
inside surfactant-stabilized droplets yet circumvents the need for microfluidic technologies. The developed
method requires only the most basic equipment and produces GUVs on
the milliliter scale within minutes, making it suitable for high-throughput
testing and well-plate formats. It is compatible with a broad range
of buffer conditions, such as buffers with high ionic strength and
cell medium, and offers a flexible choice of lipid compositions, including
high molar fractions of charged lipids. Most notably, the GUV formation
method features a straightforward reconstitution of membrane proteins
and formation of multicompartment systems as well as high encapsulation
efficiency. Shaking Strategy for the Formation of GUV-Based
Synthetic Cells http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_002.avi illustrates
the one-pot formation of multicomponent GUV-based synthetic cells
step by step. To this end, we prepare an aqueous buffer solution containing
SUVs and/or proteoliposomes as well as all compounds for encapsulation
in the GUVs. We layer this aqueous solution on top of a mixture of
fluorinated oil and a PEG-based fluorosurfactant (Step 1, A). Vigorous vortexing
or manual shaking induces the formation of surfactant-stabilized water-in-oil
droplets, encapsulating the SUVs and the other components in the aqueous
phase. Under appropriate conditions as described in the next paragraph,
it is possible to trigger the charge-mediated fusion of the SUVs at
the droplet periphery leading to the formation of a spherical supported
lipid bilayer (Step 2, A). We hence obtain a GUV inside the water-in-oil droplet,
which we will refer to as “droplet-stabilized GUV” (dsGUV,
consistent with the terminology used in earlier work where dsGUVs
were obtained by means of microfluidics). If the outer
aqueous phase is not required, dsGUVs may already be sufficient for
further experimentation. To form freestanding GUVs and to release
the GUVs from the droplet’s surfactant shell and the oil phase,
we add the desired aqueous buffer and a droplet-destabilizing agent
(Step 3, A).
As a droplet-destabilizing agent, we use perfluoro-1-octanol (PFO),
a surfactant with a shorter chain-length that is displacing the stabilizing
surfactants at the droplet periphery. This leads to the fusion of
the droplets at the interface between the oil and the aqueous buffer.
Once the surfactant shell is opened up, the intact GUVs are released
into the aqueous buffer. Note that successful release is only possible
if the droplets encapsulate an appropriate amount of SUVs, providing
full coverage of the droplet interface with a lipid bilayer. We calculated
the required lipid concentration for different droplet sizes and plotted
it in the Supporting Information (). Detailed step-by-step instructions with tips for troubleshooting
and a video protocol of the entire GUV formation process are also provided
in the Supporting Information (, ). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf Functional modules for
synthetic cells have different prerequisites
in terms of lipid compositions and buffer conditions. To ensure compatibility
of our method with a diverse range of applications, we set out to
form GUVs from SUVs composed of different types of charged and uncharged
lipids under diverse buffer conditions. It is important to consider
that with out method, the GUV formation process initially requires
the formation of a supported lipid bilayer (SLB) at the droplet periphery
(B). SLB formation
on solid state supports has been studied in detail. It is driven by
van der Waals and electrostatic interactions between the SUVs and
the support, in our case the surfactant layer. Therefore, for
successful GUV formation, one needs to consider the interplay of the
charges present in the system: 1, charged lipids; 2, ions in the buffer;
and 3, charged surfactants presented at the droplet interface. In
the absence of charged surfactants at the droplet interface, e.g.,
if the droplets are stabilized by inert PEG-based fluorosurfactants,
no fusion of the SUVs is observed (see the Supporting Information, ). Also when using a sufficient amount
of negatively charged surfactants, e.g., Krytox, negatively charged SUVs remain homogeneously distributed
inside the droplet as visible in the confocal image and the illustration
in B,i. Note
that the measured diameter of the SUVs lies around 60 nm (determined
by dynamic light scattering measurements, see the Supporting Information, ) and thus below the optical diffraction
limit. Therefore, individual SUVs cannot be resolved by conventional
optical microscopy. Formation of negatively charged dsGUV is successful
in the presence of Mg+ ions since the Mg ions
are capable of screening the negative charges, as visually indicated
by the bright ring in the confocal plane, see B,ii. Alternatively, an increased concentration
of monovalent ions (100 mM) can be used to achieve dsGUV formation. The formation of dsGUVs from positively charged
SUVs, on the other hand, is only possible in the absence of Mg ions (B,iii,iv). Most remarkably and importantly, this provides a direct
route for the formation of multicompartment systems (vesosomes) with
distinct lipid compositions as demonstrated in B,v: If a mixture of positively and negatively
charged SUVs is encapsulated during the shaking process in the absence
of Mg, the positively charged SUVs fuse at the droplet
periphery to form the large outer GUV compartment. The negatively
charged SUVs, on the other hand, are not attracted to the droplet
periphery under these conditions and hence small internal compartments
remain. Note that we do not observe fusion of the oppositely charged
SUVs as has been reported before. This
may be due to the lack of ions in the buffer. We thus demonstrate
that the shaking method for GUV formation can separate SUVs according
to their charge. While SUVs have previously been encapsulated in GUVs, to our best knowledge we demonstrate the first
multicompartment system where internal and external compartments are
made of different lipids. Multicompartment systems with segregated
volumes can decouple reactions inside complex synthetic cells or drug
carriers. They are also relevant as mimics of eukaryotic cell architecture,
featuring membrane-bound organelles enclosed by a larger compartment. (A) Schematic illustration of the
3-step “shaking”
strategy for the formation of GUV-based synthetic cells. Step 1: An
aqueous solution containing the SUVs and/or proteo-liposomes and the
species for entrapment is layered on top of fluorinated oil supplemented
with PEG-based fluorosurfactants. Step 2: Manual shaking or vortexing
induces the formation of surfactant-stabilized water-in-oil droplets.
SUVs and proteo-liposomes fuse to form a spherical supported lipid
bilayer at the droplet interface (termed droplet-stabilized GUVs,
dsGUVs). Step 3: Upon addition of an aqueous buffer and a droplet
destabilizing agent, GUVs are released from the surfactant shell and
the oil phase into the aqueous buffer. (B) Confocal fluorescence images
and schematics illustrating the conditions for the charge-mediated
formation of dsGUVs. In the absence of Mg, negatively
charged SUVs (here, 30% DOPG, green) remain homogeneously distributed
inside the droplet (i), while dsGUVs are formed in the presence of
Mg (10 mM, ii). The opposite is true for positively charged
SUVs (here, 30% DOTAP, red, iii and iv). Multicompartment GUVs can
be formed from a mixture of positively (red) and negatively (green)
charged SUVs (v). Note that SUVs are smaller than the diffraction
limit and that the droplet interface is negatively charged due to
the presence of Krytox (10.5 mM, light green in illustration). Scale
bars: 10 μm. Characterization of GUVs Formed by the Shaking Strategy http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf To validate the proposed strategy for synthetic cell assembly, we
first used the shaking method to form plain free-standing GUVs in
an aqueous buffer without membrane proteins or encapsulated species. A shows dsGUVs produced
by vortexing of an oil and an aqueous phase for 10 s. The aqueous
phase contained SUVs composed of 30% negatively charged lipids (1.2
mM lipids, 30% DOPG, 34.75% DOPC, 34.75% POPC, supplemented with
0.5% Atto488-labeled DOPE for visualization purposes) in a 10 mM MgCl-containing Tris buffer (30 mM Tris, pH 7.4). To trigger the
charge-mediated fusion of the SUVs and the formation of dsGUVs, the
oil phase (containing 1.4 wt % of a commercially available PEG-based
fluorosurfactant in HFE-7500) was supplemented with a negatively charged
perfluoropolyether (PFPE) carboxylic acid fluorosurfactant (10.5 mM
Krytox). Under these conditions, the
dsGUV formation was successful, visually indicated by the bright ring
in the confocal plane (A). Note that without the negatively charged surfactant or
without MgCl, the SUVs remain homogeneously distributed
within the droplet (see B,i and the Supporting Information, ) and the release of GUVs is not possible. B shows the GUVs after their
successful release from the oil phase and the surfactant shell into
an aqueous buffer (10 mM MgCl, 30 mM Tris, pH 7.4). As
expected, GUVs in close proximity adhere to one another because of
their negative charge and the presence of magnesium ions in the buffer. This can be circumvented by replacing MgCl with an osmolarity-matched sugar solution (e.g., 30 mM glucose
instead of 10 mM MgCl). The histograms in C,D show the size distribution
of the GUVs before (C) and
after release (D) under the described conditions. The mean diameter
of the GUVs after release lies at around 10 μm. The more narrow
size distribution after the release can be explained by the fact that
the more unstable large GUVs tend to burst during the release process
or to fuse with the coverslide. While the GUV dimensions are not monodisperse
and fully controllable as with microfluidic methods, there are several
factors that determine their size: Manual shaking produces larger
GUVs than vortexing which, in turn, produces larger GUVs than emulsification. Additionally, surface
tension affects  the GUV diameter, which depends on the specific
combination of surfactant, buffer conditions, and encapsulated species.
Note that while the release of GUVs is possible immediately after
dsGUV formation, higher yield can be achieved if the dsGUVs are left
to equilibrate overnight at 4 °C. Especially when only monovalent
ions are used, it can take several hours until the SUVs completely
fuse at the droplet periphery forming a homogeneous lipid bilayer.
Depending on the buffer conditions, overnight equilibration therefore
increases the amount of GUVs by approximately 50–200%. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf By counting the GUVs in the confocal plane as described in the
Supporting Information (), we estimate the yield of the GUV production. With just 1 mL of
the aqueous phase, our method can produce over 10 GUVs.
Approximately 10% of the droplets were released successfully after
overnight incubation. Since the shaking method can easily be scaled
up to the milliliter scale and beyond, a relatively low release rate
does not set a particular limit to the overall amount of obtained
GUVs. The scalability of the shaking method is of special interest
for biomedical applications of GUVs, in particular drug delivery.
While liposomal drug delivery currently employs small liposomes rather
than GUVs (<200 nm in diameter), larger
compartments will become necessary for loading more sophisticated
large cargos. These include nano/microparticles or supramolecular
DNA complexes that offer great potential for future therapeutic approaches. We envision that GUV-based drug carriers could
be administered subcutaneously or transdermaly, e.g., for wound healing,
used as synthetic cell implants or potentially be injected intravenously,
if they can deform sufficiently in narrow capillaries. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf To test
if highly charged GUVs can also be successfully released
from the oil phase into an aqueous environment, we performed confocal
fluorescence imaging experiments and zeta potential measurements. E (left) shows free-standing
GUVs made of highly negatively charged lipids (50 mol % DOPG, green),
neutral lipids (DOPC/POPC, yellow), and highly positively charged
lipids (50 mol % DOTAB, red). GUVs composed of similarly high fractions
of charged lipids are difficult to obtain with electroformation. In the case of neutral lipids, their polar headgroup
is sufficient to trigger the charge-mediated fusion at the droplet
interface. To probe whether certain types of lipids may be leaking
into the oil phase rather than being incorporated into the GUV, we
performed zeta-potential measurements for GUVs formed from SUVs containing
different percentages of charged lipids. As plotted in E (right), the measured charge
of the released GUVs corresponds to the charge of the SUVs. A comparison
of the zeta-potentials of SUVs and GUVs is plotted in the Supporting
Information (). We thereby confirmed
that the shaking method for GUV formation is suitable to form neutral
as well as highly charged GUVs. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf Furthermore, we successfully
tested diverse lipid compositions
including lipids like DOPC, POPC, DOPG, DOTAB, EggPC, EggPG, EggPA,
cholesterol, and even  polar lipid extract
(for a tabular overview and confocal images see the Supporting Information, ). The shaking method for
GUV formation is compatible with a diverse range of different buffers,
including sucrose/glucose, pure water, sorbitol, magnesium chloride,
sodium chloride, PBS, or even full medium (DMEM with 10% FBS) (see
tabular overview and confocal images in the Supporting Information, ). All conditions listed
in  were optimized to give release
rates of at least 2%. Best release rates were obtained for EggPC/EggPG
lipids and in the absence of magnesium ions in the release buffer
(up to 50%, see ). Considering
that the shaking method can produce GUVs on the milliliter scale,
a low release rate still provides a remarkable amount of GUVs. When
testing new conditions that are not described here, to achieve the
best possible results, we advise to consult the extensive literature
on the formation of SLBs and to screen the parameter space
for an optimal combination of lipids, buffer, and Krytox concentration. Formation of free-standing GUVs  the shaking
method. (A) Confocal fluorescence imaging of droplet-stabilized GUVs
obtained after encapsulation of SUVs into water-in-oil droplets  the shaking method. Oil phase: 1.4 wt % PEG-based fluorosurfactant,
10.5 mM Krytox in HFE. Aqueous phase: 1.2 mM lipidmix (SUVs made of
30% DOPG, 15% cholesterol, 27.25% DOPC, 27.25% POPC, 0.5% Atto488-labeled
DOPE) in 10 mM MgCl, 30 mM Tris, pH 7.4. (B) Free-standing
GUVs after release. (C) Histogram showing the size distribution of
the droplet-stabilized GUVs produced by the shaking method before
release. (D) Histogram of the size distribution of free-standing GUVs
after release. The size distribution was analyzed with ImageJ using
manual thresholding and the particle analysis tool. (E) Confocal fluorescence
imaging (left, scale bars, 10 μm) and zeta potential measurements
(right) of free-standing GUVs produced from SUVs with different mol
% of charged lipids: up to 50% negatively charged lipids (green, DOPG
in 10 mM MgCl, 30 mM Tris), neutral lipids (yellow, 50%
DOPC, 50% POPC in 100 mM KCl, 30 mM Tris), and up to 50% positively
charged lipids (red, DOTAP in 30 mM Tris). 0.5 mol % Atto488-labeled
DOPE or LissRhod-PE was added to the lipid mixture for visualization
purposes. Unilamellarity of the
compartment membrane is a prerequisite for the functional incorporation
of transmembrane proteins, an important aspect to establish signaling
between synthetic cells and the surrounding environment. We therefore
set out to assess the membrane quality and the unilamellarity of the
GUVs produced  shaking. First, we performed fluorescence
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) measurements to determine the
fluidity of the membrane. A circular bleaching area was selected at
the top of the vesicle (opposite to the area where the vesicle is
in contact with the cover slide) and the fluorescence intensity within
this confocal plane was recorded over time. A shows confocal fluorescence images (inset)
and a plot of the fluorescence intensity before and directly after
bleaching, as well as after recovery (12 s time point). We obtained
a diffusion coefficient of 2.30 ± 0.25 μm/s, determined from an exponential fit of
the intensities during the recovery period. This value is in very
good agreement with literature values for GUVs with a similar membrane
composition. CryoTEM measurements were performed to visualize the membrane
lamellarity
of the released vesicles. B shows a cryoTEM micrograph of a vesicle that we produced  the shaking method. The zoom image unambiguously confirms
its unilamellarity. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_003.avi http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf Moreover, to provide an independent proof
of unilamellarity, we
added the protein nanopore α-hemolysin externally to the preformed GUVs and carried out dye influx experiments
using fluorescein as a fluorescence probe. Since the protein pore
can only span a single lipid bilayer, no dye influx would be observed
for multilamellar vesicles. In a unilamellar vesicle, on the other
hand, the nanopore will create a passage for the polar dye, which
can then permeate into the vesicle along its concentration gradient.
In the presence of the nanopores, the fluorescence intensity inside
the GUVs increased within a few minutes as visible in the representative
confocal image and the plot in C, confirming the unilamellarity of the lipid membrane.
In the absence of the nanopores, the GUVs remained dark (D) as expected since
fluorescein is polar and hence mostly membrane impermeable under the
conditions we used. It should be noted that the experiments were carried
out at low α-hemolysin concentrations (10.7 nm heptameric pores)
to avoid bursting of the GUVs. Under these conditions, inhomogeneities
in the distribution of the α-hemolysin across the GUVs are expected
and led to a wide spread of dye transport rates in the experiments.
For a visual impression of the dye influx, see , and an individual trace showing dye influx in the
presence of the pores is plotted in the Supporting Information (). When increasing the α-hemolysin
concentration by 1 order of magnitude, the vast majority of the GUVs
(≈95%, determined by confocal imaging and counting the GUVs
before and after addition of α-hemolysin) burst within minutes. The vesicles that remained intact (≈5%)
are likely to be multilamellar. A similar fraction of multilamellar
vesicles is obtained with the standard methods for GUV production. The results presented in this section
indicate that the lipid membrane
properties of GUVs produced  the shaking method
do not differ noticeably from those formed by other means. Traces
of oil, surfactant, and/or destabilizing agent were not detectable
in the GUVs in bending rigidity measurements and infrared (IR) and MALDI mass spectrometry (MS) measurements. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that
traces of the substances are present in the lipid membrane. Confirmation of unilamellarity of
GUVs produced  the shaking method. (A) FRAP measurements
provide a diffusion coefficient
of 2.30 ± 0.25 μm/s. Error bars correspond
to the standard deviation of five independent measurements. (B) CryoTEM
micrograph of a GUV (20% EggPG, 79% EggPC, 1% LissRhod-PE in PBS,
10 mM MgCl) showing the unilamellarity of the lipid
bilayer. (C) Dye (fluorescein) influx measurements performed after
addition of 10.7 nM heptameric α-hemolysin nanopores (75
nM monomers). Left: The mean intensity inside GUVs over the intensity
outside of the GUVs ( = 25) is plotted as a function
of time. The mean and the standard deviation are shown. Right: Representative
confocal fluorescence images of a GUV at the beginning and the end
of the measurement. (D) Dye influx measurements performed without
addition of α-hemolysin nanopores.  = 28.
Error bars correspond to the standard deviation. Reconstitution
and Encapsulation The most critical
step toward the construction of synthetic cells, however, is the reconstitution
of proteins and the encapsulation of diverse biocomponents inside
the GUV. A particular advantage of our shaking method for GUV formation
is the ease of membrane protein reconstitution by forming GUVs directly
from SUVs. This is highly advantageous since the reconstitution of
membrane proteins into SUVs is well established, while direct reconstitution
in GUVs often remains problematic. To
illustrate this, we formed GUVs from proteo-SUVs containing the TAMRA-labeled
transmembrane protein αβ integrin
as shown in A. Note that the orientation of membrane protein insertion may be
random, especially for proteins that lack large hydrophilic head groups.
However, methods to control the directionality of the insertion are
under active development and would be compatible with the shaking
method for GUV formation. Similarly, cholesterol-tagged
DNA could be tethered to the membrane of the GUVs simply by forming
the GUVs from DNA-functionalized SUVs (see B). While GUVs have been functionalized with
cholesterol-tagged DNA on the exterior, e.g., to trigger attachment
of DNA nanopores or membrane-bending DNA nanostructures, this has never been achieved for the internal
bilayer leaflet. Notably, cholesterol-tagged DNA handles at the GUV’s
interior could serve as addressable attachment handles to organize
components inside synthetic cells. Another advantage of the shaking method is the high encapsulation
efficiency of components inside the GUVs. Water-soluble components
can simply be added to the aqueous SUV solution before shaking. We
first demonstrated this by encapsulating a fluorescent dye (pyranine)
inside the GUVs (see C), but likewise we achieved the encapsulation of biomacromolecules
like mRNA (see D). The size of the encapsulated species is not particularly limited:
We achieved the encapsulation of fluorescent polystyrene beads, mitochondria
isolated from living cells, and even  inside
the GUVs (see E–G). High encapsulation efficiency is not only desirable
for synthetic
cell assembly but also of great importance for biomedical applications
of GUVs, in particular for drug delivery. H,I shows the possibility to achieve complex
membrane architectures including encapsulated GUVs and nonspherical
lipid compartments obtained by osmotic deflation. Such architectures are again relevant for more realistic
cell mimics. Note that all examples in  are free-standing GUVs which have been released
from
the oil phase to mimic the physiological conditions. The shaking method,
however, offers the additional opportunity to work with the dsGUV
which are still surrounded by an oil phase and stabilized by surfactants.
In this state, the compartment is highly stable and can easily be
manipulated, e.g.,  microfluidic pico-injection. This will be advantageous for applications that
do not require the external aqueous phase. Release into a physiological
environment can still be performed at a later stage. All these
examples illustrate how versatile the shaking method
for GUV formation is. This allows for the recombination of functional
modules for synthetic cells, greatly enhancing the scope for complexity in
the field. Confocal fluorescence
images showing the diverse possibilities
for encapsulation and reconstitution into the GUVs produced by the
shaking method. Free-standing GUVs with (A) reconstituted TAMARA-labeled
αβ integrin; (B) Cy3-labeled
membrane-adhering cholesterol-tagged DNA; (C) 100 nM encapsulated
pyranine; (D) SYBR Green I-stained mRNA; (E) multifluorescent polystyrene
beads; (F) mitochondria isolated from HeLa cells and stained with
MitoTracker Green; (G) GFP-labeled ; (H) GUVs;
and (I) lipid budding and tube formation in osmotically deflated GUVs.
Scale bars: 10 μm. We have presented a straightforward
yet scalable shaking approach
to form GUVs and highlighted its relevance for the assembly of increasingly
complex synthetic cells as well as potential drug delivery systems.
The shaking method for GUV formation is most closely related to the
previously described droplet transfer method and the microfluidic method for dsGUV formation. Having characterized our GUVs and confirmed their unilamellarity  FRAP measurements, cryoTEM, and dye influx assays, we
demonstrate the versatility of our shaking method by forming highly
charged GUVs and GUVs with diverse lipid compositions under various
buffer conditions. We then tested the compatibility of our method
with versatile functional modules for synthetic cells. Notably, the
reconstitution of the membrane protein is straightforward, since the
shaking method allows for the formation of GUVs directly from SUVs,
circumventing the more problematic direct reconstitution in GUVs. While maintaining the same encapsulation efficiency as for microfluidic
compartment formation, our method avoids complications related to
the microfabrication of on-chip functions. We exemplify this point
by encapsulating dyes, small and large vesicles, nucleic acids, microbeads,
organelles, and even bacteria. The system offers maximum flexibility,
as experiments can be performed in the droplet-stabilized state as
well as on released GUVs, depending on whether compartment stability
and manipulability is preferred or whether a physiological aqueous
environment is necessary. The optimal method for GUV formation will
always depend on the specific application. While the shaking method
is broadly applicable, it does not come without limitations. As described,
lipid composition, buffer conditions, and surfactant charge have to
be matched such that the charge-mediated formation of a supported
lipid bilayer is possible. This makes it challenging to form, e.g.,
negatively charged GUVs in the absence of cations, unless a positively
charged surfactant is used. If components for encapsulation interact
with the surfactant layer, the formation of a supported lipid bilayer
may be inhibited. Although traces of oil or surfactant were not detectable
in our GUVs, we cannot exclude their presence in the lipid membrane
at low concentrations. Additionally, GUVs obtained  the shaking method are not monodisperse in size. If homogeneous
size is required, filtering of the GUVs in the droplet-stabilized
state is an option. Note that dsGUVs can in principle
be reinjected into a microfluidic device for further manipulation,
e.g.,  pico-injection, for observation or sorting. This work, greatly scaling up and simplifying
synthetic cell assembly, will lead to GUV-based multicomponent synthetic
cells of unprecedented complexity, shifting paradigms for bottom-up
synthetic biology. At the same time, the previously impossible high
volume production of GUVs will pave the way for high-throughput screening
assays, e.g., to test for drug transport in well plate formats and
to develop novel smart drug delivery systems. Atto488-labeled 1,2-dioleoyl--glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
(Atto488-DOPE) was purchased
from ATTO TEC (Germany) and cholesterol C8667 from Sigma-Aldrich (Germany).
All other lipids were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids, Inc. All
aqueous buffers were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Germany). Lipids
were stored in chloroform at −20 °C and used without further
purification. SUVs with different lipid compositions were formed by
mixing the lipids at the desired molar ratio in a glass vial and subsequently
dried under a stream of nitrogen gas. To remove traces of solvent,
the vial was kept under vacuum in a desiccator for at least 2 h. A
solution of 30 mM Tris, pH 7.4 (if not mentioned otherwise) was added
to resuspend the dried lipid film at a lipid concentration of 2.2
mM. The solution was vortexed for at least 10 min to trigger liposome
formation and subsequently extruded to form homogeneous SUVs with
seven passages through a polycarbonate filter with a pore size of
50 nm (Avanti Polar Lipids, Inc.). SUVs were stored at 4 °C for
up to 3 days or used immediately for dsGUV formation. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf We initially prepared an aqueous solution
containing SUVs (1.1 mM 30% DOPG, 34.75% DOPC, 34.75% POPC, 0.5% Atto488-DOPE)
in 10 mM MgCl, 30 mM Tris, pH 7.4. The oil–surfactant
mix contained HFE-7500 fluorinated oil (3M, Germany) with 1.4 wt %
perfluoropolyether–polyethylene glycol (PFPE–PEG) fluorosurfactants
(Ran Biotechnologies, Inc.) and 10.5 mM PFPE–carboxylic acid
(Krytox, MW, 7000–7500/mol, DuPont, Germany). Note that the
Krytox-concentration can be estimated  a Rhodamine
6G assay (see the Supporting Information, ). This combination of lipid composition, buffer conditions,
and Krytox concentration will be referred to as the “standard
conditions”. These were employed unless otherwise specified.
A volume of 100 μL of aqueous solution was layered on top of
300 μL of the oil–surfactant mix. Note that the reaction
volumes are scalable as long as the oil–surfactant mix is used
in excess (to form oil-in-water droplets, the volumetric ratio of
oil to aqueous phase has to be reversed). The probe was vortexed vigorously
for about 10 s until water-in-oil droplets formed (visible as a milky
emulsion layer on top of the remaining oil). Note that emulsion droplets
will form independent of the shaking method, manual shaking, vortexing,
or with an emulsification processor. The latter, however, will produce
mainly GUVs with a diameter below 10 μm (see the Supporting
Information, ). The SUVs fuse
to form a spherical supported lipid bilayer at the droplet periphery. To release the GUVs from the oil phase, 100
μL of the aqueous solution (10 mM MgCl, 30 mM Tris,
pH 7.4, or an osmolarity-matched buffer) is pipetted on top of the
droplet layer. To destabilize the droplets, 100 μL of perfluoro-1-octanol
(PFO) destabilizing agent (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) was added slowly.
Within seconds to minutes, the milky emulsion breaks up and disappears,
forming a transparent aqueous layer on top of the oil–surfactant
mix. From this top layer, the released GUVs were carefully removed
with a pipet and transferred into a BSA-coated observation chamber
(bovine serum albumin, SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH, Germany) for immediate
imaging or stored in a fresh test tube at 4 °C for up to 48 h.
For imaging purposes, it can be beneficial to sediment the GUVs in
a glucose/sucrose gradient to prevent them from moving during the
observation. For FRAP measurements and dye influx experiments, we
therefore supplemented the buffer containing the SUVs with 200 mM
sucrose and released the GUVs into an osmolarity-matched buffer containing
glucose. By omitting MgCl in the release buffer, it is
possible to prevent adhesion of the GUVs to one another and to prevent
fusion with the coverslide. Note that while immediate release is possible,
the release efficiency can be improved by overnight storage of the
dsGUVs at 4 °C for equilibration purposes before addition of
the release buffer and the destabilizing agent. Confocal Fluorescence
Microscopy For the confocal imaging,
two different confocal laser scanning microscope setups were used:
a Leica TCS SP5 confocal (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Germany) with a
40× water immersion objective (HC PL APO 40×/1.10 w, CORR
CS2, Leica Microsystems GmbH, Germany) and a Zeiss LSM 800 confocal
(Carl Zeiss AG, Germany) with a 20× air objective (Plan-Apochromat
20×/0.8 M27, Carl Zeiss AG, Germany) and a 63× oil immersion
objective (Plan-Apochromat 63×/1.40 Oil DIC, Carl Zeiss AG, Germany).
In both setups, the pinhole aperture was set to one Airy Unit, and
experiments were performed at room temperature. The recorded images
were brightness and contrast adjusted and analyzed with ImageJ (NIH). For FRAP measurements, the same Leica
SP5 confocal microscope was used as described above, equipped with
an argon laser (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Germany). The GUVs were sealed
in an observation chamber, where they quickly settled on the bottom
of the coverslide aided by a glucose/sucrose gradient. A bleaching
spot with a radius of 2.5 μm was defined at the confocal plane
at the top of the GUV. Using the FRAP-WIZZARD, 8 images were recorded
before bleaching (laser intensity, 20%), 10 images during bleaching
(laser intensity, 80%), and 30 images after bleaching (laser intensity,
20%) as indicated in A. The 256 pixel × 256 pixel images were acquired at
a line rate of 1 kHz. The diffusion coefficient was derived from the
recorded images using a custom-written MATLAB (MathWorks, Inc.) code
as described previously. Samples were prepared for cryo-EM by applying
2.5 μL of GUVs solution (20% EggPG, 79% EggPC, 1% LissRhod-PE
in PBS, 10 mM MgCl) onto a glow-discharged 200 mesh C-flat
holey carbon-coated multihole grid (Protochips, Morrisville, NC).
The grid was blotted for 4 s and plunge-frozen in liquid ethane using
a Vitrobot Mark IV (FEI NanoPort, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) at 100%
humidity and stored under liquid nitrogen. Cryo-EM specimen grids
were imaged on a FEI Tecnai G2 T20 twin transmission electron microscope
(FEI NanoPort, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) operated at 200 kV. Electron
micrographs were recorded with a FEI Eagle 4k HS, 200 kV CCD camera
with a total dose of ≈40 electrons/Å. Images
were acquired at 50 000× nominal magnification with 1.24
μm defocus applied. Droplet stabilized
GUVs were
produced from an aqueous solution containing SUVs (2 mM 69% EggPC,
30% EggPG, 1% LissRhod-PE), 10 mM MgCl, 200 mM sucrose,
10 mM Tris, and 1 mM EDTA and an oil phase containing HFE-7500
fluorinated oil, 1.4 wt % PEG-based fluorosurfactant, and 10.5 mM
Krytox. The GUVs were released into an aqueous buffer containing 230
mM glucose, 10 mM Tris, and 1 mM EDTA. Just before the measurement,
the aqueous solution containing the GUVs was mixed in a ratio of 9:1
with an aqueous solution containing 70 μM fluorescein, 230 mM
glucose, 10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, and 10.7 nM heptameric α-hemolysin
nanopores (75 nM monomers). For the control experiment, the α-hemolysin
was omitted. The final solution was pipetted into an observation chamber,
sealed, and imaged as described with the Zeiss 800 confocal laser
scanning microscope. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00034/suppl_file/sb9b00034_si_001.pdf The
zeta potentials of
GUVs and SUVs were measured with a Malvern ZetaSizer Nano ZS in phosphate
buffered saline in a folded capillary zeta cell (Malvern). The refractive
index for the dispersant was set to 1.330, and the viscosity to 0.882
cP with a dielectric constant of 79. The κ ·  value was set to 1.5. The particle refractive index was set to 1.42
(matching the refractive index of the GUVs). For each condition, 3
measurements were performed with a minimum of 10 runs per measurement.
The maximal voltage was set to 25 V in order to reduce the oxidation/reduction
effect of the lipid at the capillary electrodes. Raw data was processed
and fitted with the build in general propose mode. For washing, the
water phase of the released GUVs was diluted into phosphate buffered
saline and pelleted at 18 000 for 30 min.
The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was resuspended in an
equivalent amount of magnesium-free PBS. For confocal fluorescence
images before and after centrifugation, see the Supporting Information . It should be noted, however, that
larger GUVs do not remain intact when centrifuged at that speed. The
GUV solutions were diluted 1:10 to a final volume of 1 mL at 25 °C
with 5 min equilibration time. Reconstitution and Encapsulation Integrin αβ was purified by Christine Mollenhauer from outdated
human blood platelets (Katharinenhospital Stuttgart) based on a protocol
described earlier and optimized by Stojan
Perisic. The purified integrin was used for fluorescence labeling
by means of a NHS (succiniminidyl) ester-conjugated Alexa Fluor 568
fluorescent dye (Life Technologies, Germany). The protein was stored
at −80 °C. The reconstitution of the purified integrin
into SUVs was carried out according to a previously published protocol. In brief, 435 μM eggPC and 435 μM
eggPG were dried under a gentle stream of nitrogen and then placed
in a desiccator under vacuum for 2 h or overnight. Next, the dried
lipids and Alexa Fluor 568-labeled αβ integrin were dissolved in 1 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4,
50 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl, and 0.1% Triton X-100 to a final
ratio of 1:1000 (integrin/lipid). Then the solution was incubated
on a Thermomixer (Eppendorf, Germany) for 2 h at 37 °C and 600
rpm shaking (Eppendorf ThermoMixer C, Germany). Afterward, 50 mg/mL
BT Bio-Beads SM-2 (BIO-RAD, Germany) for detergent removal were added
into the microtube. The mixture was stirred on a magnetic stirrer
for 3.5 h. This step was repeated once more in order to remove the
Triton X-100 completely. The proteoliposome solution was used immediately
for dsGUV formation or stored up to 3.5 h at 4 °C. In order to
create integrin proteo-GUV, the integrin proteoliposomes were mixed
1:10 with SUVs (27.25% DOPC, 27.25% POPC, 30% DOPG, 15% cholesterol,
and 0.5% Atto488 DOPE) to a final lipid concentration of 1.1 mM in
20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl, and 10
mM MgCl. This liposome mixture was used as an aqueous
phase for dsGUV formation. HPLC purified
3′ cholesterol-tagged
DNA with a 5′ Cy3 label was purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies,
Inc. (Belgium, DNA sequence: 5′ GAT GCA TAG AAG GAA 3′).
It was added to preformed SUVs at a concentration of 1 μM, where
it self-assembles into the lipid membrane. The DNA-functionalized
SUVs were used to form GUVs  the shaking method
under the standard conditions. 8-Hydroxypyrene-1,3,6-trisulfonic
acid trisodium salt (pyranine) was purchased from Merck (Germany)
and encapsulated at a concentration of 100 nM under the standard conditions. VEGFD mRNA was generously provided
by Prof. Daniela Mauceri (Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences,
Heidelberg). The RNA solution was diluted to a final concentration
of 1 ng/μL in a 3 mM SUV solution (30% DOPC, 69% POPC, 1% LissRhod-PE).
The obtained lipid mix was used as the aqueous phase to form GUVs  the shaking method under the standard conditions. For
image acquisition, released RNA containing GUVs were incubated with
0.5× SYBR Green I (Sigma-Aldrich S9430, Germany) for 30 min and
imaged as previously described. Polystyrene Beads Encapsulation Polybead Polystyrene
Microspheres with a diameter of 1 μm were purchased from Polysciences,
Inc. (North America) and added at a concentration of 10 beads/to the aqueous phase for GUV formation. The excitation wavelength
used for imaging under the confocal microscope was 405 nm. Total mitochondrial extracts
were obtained from MitoTracker Green FM (Thermo Fischer Scientific,
Germany)-labeled HeLa cells using the mitochondrial isolation kit
from Thermo Fischer Scientific (89874) strictly following the manufacturer’s
instructions. The mitochondria containing solution was mixed 1:10
with a 3 mM lipid solution (SUVs composed of 30% DOPC, 69% POPC, 1%
LissRhod-PE) in PBS and 10 mM MgCl. The obtained lipid
mix was used as the aqueous phase to form GUVs  the shaking method under the standard conditions. GFP-labeled  were suspended
in PBS at OD = 10 and mixed at a ratio of 1:1 with
3 mM SUVs (30% DOPG, 34.75% DOPC, 34.75% POPC, 0.5% Atto488-DOPE).
The mixture was used as an aqueous phase for the formation of GUVs  the shaking method described before. GUVs with internal GUVs were formed
using a similar strategy as for the multicompartment systems encapsulating
SUVs (B,v).
Positively charged SUVs were encapsulated together with negatively
charged GUVs in the absence of Mg ions. Under these conditions,
the positively charged liposomes fuse at the droplet periphery, whereas
negatively charged liposomes remain inside the droplet lumen. Lipid tubulation was achieved by osmotic
deflation of the GUVs after release as described previously for GUVs
made by electroformation. Briefly, a
small drop of GUV solution was exposed to air, causing evaporation
and hence a slow increase in salt concentration on the GUV’s
exterior. The resulting osmotic pressure leads to water eflux from
the GUVs and hence their deflation..