Peroxisomal targeting is a regulated
posttranslational process in which proteins tagged with a peroxisomal
targeting signal (PTS1 or PTS2) are selected for import into the peroxisome.
The PTS1 targeting signal consists of a short tripeptide (a serine-lysine-leucine
“SKL” or similar motif) at the protein C-terminus, which
facilitates binding to the Pex5 peroxisomal import receptor. Upon
Pex5 binding, cargo are transported from the cytosol to the peroxisomal
inner membrane. Studies have shown that attachment of a canonical
PTS1 motif to nonperoxisomal proteins, such as GFP, is sufficient
for peroxisomal import. In this work, we sought
to develop a system to confer light control over peroxisomal protein
trafficking. The field of optogenetics involves the use of natural
and engineered photosensory domains to confer light control to molecular
and cellular processes. Recently, systems have been developed using
light to directly regulate protein trafficking, including control
of nuclear-cytoplasmic trafficking and secretory trafficking. Tools allowing inducible control of peroxisomal import
would allow study of the import process or function of specific peroxisomal
proteins at specified times and locations. In addition, as proteins
imported into the peroxisome are encapsulated in this organelle, such
tools could also be applied to functionally sequester proteins from
the cytosol at specific times in cells of interest. To enable
optical control of peroxisomal import, we used the LOV2 (Light, Oxygen,
Voltage) domain of  phototropin1 (LOV2), a member of the
conserved Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domain family. In the dark, a C-terminal Jα-helix is bound tightly to the
core of LOV2. Blue
light triggers covalent bond formation between a conserved cysteine
residue on the LOV domain and a flavin mononucleotide chromophore. This results in unwinding of the Jα-helix and dissociation
from the LOV core, ultimately affecting phototropin kinase activity. These large structural changes
occurring in LOV-Jα have been exploited to confer light control
over heterologous protein activities. In particular, proteins or peptides attached at the C-terminus of
the Jα-helix can be “caged” such that they are
unable to interact with effectors in the dark, but this steric block
can be released in the presence of light and Jα-helix unwinding. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00144/suppl_file/sb5b00144_si_003.pdf Here, we used a similar approach to control binding of a PTS1-tagged
protein to the Pex5 peroxisomal import receptor with light (a). To first examine
feasibility for targeting the LOV-PTS1 fusion to the peroxisome, we
used a constitutively active form of LOV2 (ΔK533)
that has a constitutively undocked Jα-helix. We attached a PTS1 sequence from acyl-CoA oxidase, “LQSKL”
to the C-terminus of the LOV2-Jα motif, along
with a GFP reporter at the N-terminus to allow visualization. Expression
of this construct in COS-7 cells showed a punctate GFP expression
pattern consistent with peroxisomal localization ( Figure S1). We next tested a Jα-helix
truncation series to screen for light dependent peroxisomal targeting
(b). Within
the LOV2 domain, we incorporated T406A and T407A
mutations that increase Jα-helix docking and a V416I mutation
that prolongs the lit state, as well as G528A and N538E mutations that were shown to increase
the dynamic range of a previous LOV-based photoswitch. One of the constructs (PTS1.2) showed no peroxisomal
localization in light or dark, while a second (PTS1.3) showed constitutive
localization in light and dark. LOV-PTS1.1 (hereafter referred to
as LOV-PTS1) showed light-dependent peroxisomal localization, as shown
by colocalization of GFP with a peroxisomal marker, PMP70 (c). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00144/suppl_file/sb5b00144_si_001.avi Peroxisomal localization
of GFP-LOV-PTS1 was minimal in dark, though some background localization
could observed that varied from cell to cell (1.9 ± 1.9% fluorescence
in peroxisomes) (d). After 3 h light illumination, peroxisomal targeting increased
more than 10-fold (31.7 ± 6.5% fluorescence in peroxisomes) (d). Using live cell
imaging, localization could first be observed ∼10–20
min after initial light application (e,f and  Movie S1), consistent with previous studies in permeabilized or
injected cells. Peroxisomal localization required
sustained delivery of light pulses to maintain LOV2 in an activated conformation. Delivery of a single pulse of
light, which photostimulates the V416I variant of LOV2 with a half-life of ∼3 min, was insufficient to induce visible peroxisomal targeting (data not
shown). The protein may reversibly dissociate from the Pex5 complex
upon dark reversion, or the amount of Pex5 available for binding/translocation
may be limited, thus visualization of peroxisomal import is only possible
after multiple rounds of Pex5-mediated cargo transport. To validate
that light-dependent import of GFP-LOV-PTS1 was indeed due to light-dependent
binding to Pex5, the peroxisomal import receptor, we examined this
interaction using yeast two-hybrid (). LOV-PTS1 fused to a Gal4 DNA binding domain
was tested for interaction with a Pex5-Gal4 activation domain fusion.
While LOV-PTS1 and Pex5 did not interact in the dark, they interacted
upon blue light illumination (b). We compared import efficacy of
the GFP-LOV-PTS1 protein with that of other reporters and LOV2 mutants (a). In HEK293T cells, GFP-LOV-PTS1 showed 35.7 ±
9% of protein localized to peroxisome after 24 h in light, and 10-fold
lower levels in dark (3.3 ± 3%). With the GFP-LOV-PTS1ΔK533
variant, 53 ± 7% of the protein was localized in the peroxisome
after 24 h. A mCherry-tagged native peroxisomal protein, alanine:
glyoxylate aminotransferase (mCherry-AGTma), showed lower efficacy
of import (38 ± 6% peroxisomal). A mCherry-tagged version of
LOV-PTS1 (mCh-LOV-PTS1) showed light/dark differences, but much higher
background in dark and reduced import in light, thus further experiments
used only the GFP-tagged version. As the GFP-LOV-PTS1 construct showed
some background peroxisomal import even in the dark, we tested whether
we could reduce this using a I532A LOV2 variant
previously shown to stabilize dark state Jα-helix docking. Incorporation of this mutant eliminated background
peroxisomal localization in the dark, but also reduced light-stimulated
translocation (16.2 ± 4% fluorescence in the peroxisome after
3 h light), consistent with the higher overall caging properties of
this mutant (b–d). Given the successful use of I532A in reducing dark state
binding here, as well as in several prior studies with LOV2, this residue may be universally useful for
toggling the dynamic range of a variety of LOV-based photoswitches. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00144/suppl_file/sb5b00144_si_004.pdf As the I532A mutant showed
very low background, we examined if we could use our light-regulated
system to follow the fate of peroxisomal cargo ( Figure S2). We induced peroxisomal
accumulation of GFP-LOV(I532A)-PTS1 by incubating with light for 18
h, then blocked accumulation with a 24 h dark chase. Samples incubated
in dark the entire 48 h showed minimal (0.5%) peroxisomal accumulation,
indicating this approach should provide a useful means to track protein
specifically targeted to the peroxisome only when light is applied.
We observed no significant difference in levels of peroxisomal protein
between cells quantified at the start of the dark incubation or after
24 h in dark, indicating that fractions in the cytosol and peroxisome
remained relatively stable over this period. One potential application
of a light-regulated trafficking signal is to sequester a protein
of interest from the cytosol, an approach that has been used with
other optogenetic tools. To examine this, we
tested depletion of cytosolic protein from cells expressing GFP-LOV-PTS1
from a tetracycline responsive promoter (). When coexpressed with a tTA (Tet-OFF)
transcriptional activator, this allows blockage of transcription with
doxycycline. This construct also contained a nuclear export sequence
to maintain cytosolic localization. We induced expression of GFP-LOV-PTS1
in dark, then added doxycycline to block transcription and light to
induce peroxisomal trafficking. While minimal peroxisomal localization
(1.9 ± 1.3% at time 0) was observed in dark, samples incubated
in light showed depletion of cytosolic protein into the peroxisome
(77 ± 7.6% of protein localized to the peroxisome after 24 h).
Depletion was dose-dependent, increasing with duration of light incubation. Prior studies have indicated
that proteins imported into the peroxisome can allow import of “piggybacking”
binding proteins. We thus tested if this approach could be extended
to deplete interacting proteins from the cytosol. We tagged GFP-LOV-PTS1
with FKBP12, which was coexpressed with a mCherry-labeled FRB (mCh-FRB)
(a). FRB and
FKBP do not interact when coexpressed but dimerize in the presence
of rapamycin. When expressed alone or
coexpressed with mCh-FRB in the absence of rapamycin, peroxisomal
trafficking of FKBP-GFP-LOV-PTS1 could be triggered by light (b). In contrast,
when coexpressed with FRB-mCh and rapamycin was added prior to light,
peroxisomal translocation was prevented. Rapamycin itself had no effect
on peroxisomal trafficking in the absence of mCh-FRB (b). These observations demonstrate
that binding of a second protein to a PTS1-tagged cargo, per se, is
not sufficient to allow trafficking of any protein. Thus, other criteria
are important for import of oligomeric proteins or protein complexes.
This data correlates with recent work suggesting peroxisomal import
of many oligomeric proteins is often inefficient. Although we cannot exclude the possibility that binding
to FRB-mCh sterically blocks the interaction of LOV-PTS1 with Pex5,
our results suggest that, in some cases, a binding interaction may
prevent or block peroxisomal import of a PTS1-tagged cargo. In summary, we demonstrate use of the LOV2 domain to directly control peroxisomal import with light. The
construct showing the best light/dark differences used a fusion site
on the Jα-helix (after Ala542) similar to that used with TULIP
dimerizers. Other studies have successfully
caged peptides using nearby fusion sites, such as nuclear localization
peptides caged using fusions at Ile539, Asp540, or (to cage a bipartite
NLS), Lys544. A fusion site at Ala543 was successful
for caging a ssrA peptide and a “RRRG”
degron sequence, while a kinase inhibitor
was caged at a junction with Glu541. Combined,
these results indicate a clear consensus for successful caging of
peptide fusions between residues 539–544 of the Jα-helix;
however, optimal placement appears to differ within these sites depending
on the peptide used. We were unable to completely deplete cytosolic
protein using this approach after 24 h, suggesting some inefficiency
and saturation of the import process. We were also unable to sequester
interacting proteins into the peroxisome, suggesting that there are
specific requirements to “piggybacking” proteins into
this organelle. Indeed, using a dual chemical and light regulated
approach, we found that binding to a second cytosolic protein prevented
peroxisomal import of a competent PTS1-tagged cargo. Binding to cytosolic
proteins may provide a means for regulation of compartmentalization
for dual localized proteins (for example, proteins that localize either
to the peroxisome or mitochondria under different conditions). Similar
mechanisms of binding interactions preventing import could also contribute
to disease states associated with mislocalization of peroxisomal proteins,
as in the metabolic disease primary hyperoxaluria. We envision this tool may be used to inducibly target
proteins to the peroxisome at specific times or within defined locations,
to study kinetics of peroxisomal import, and to track peroxisomal
cargo. This approach can also be used to deplete protein from the
cytosol; however, this process is slow, occurring over a time frame
of hours, and over the time frame of our study did not allow complete
protein knockdown. Relatively slow time scales such as these, however,
are comparable to other approaches to deplete protein activity with
light such as inducible degradation. While we did
not specifically explore this application, given the saturability
of the peroxisomal import machinery, we
expect the GFP-LOV-PTS1 module may also have utility in competition
experiments, allowing blockage of protein import at specific times
and locations. Optical regulation of
peroxisomal trafficking. (a) Schematic of caged LOV-PTS1 construct.
LOV-PTS1 has a C-terminal Jα-helix that dissociates from the
LOV core with light and uncages the PTS1 sequence. Pex5 binds PTS1
and shuttles the protein to the peroxisome. (b) Alignment of tested
sequences with LOV2-Jα sequence. Numbering
corresponds to amino acid residue in the plant LOV2 sequence. LOV-PTS1.1 (*) was used in further studies. Orange
residues indicate regions where mutations were introduced. Yellow
residues indicate the PTS1 signal. “+”, < 5% of cells
show peroxisomal localization; “–”, greater than
95% of cells show peroxisomal localization. (c) Localization of GFP-LOV-PTS1
in COS-7 cells. COS-7 cells were transfected with GFP-LOV-PTS1 and
exposed to dark or blue light pulses for 24 h, 18 h after transfection.
Representative fixed cells are shown. Localization of the peroxisomal
marker PMP70 is shown in middle. Scale bar, 10 μm (d) Quantification
of peroxisomal fluorescence in HeLa cells. Cells were transfected
with GFP-LOV-PTS1, incubated in dark for 18 h, then imaged every 10
min for 3 h. During imaging, cells were exposed to LED light (1s 461
nm pulse every 1 min). Dark quantification used the image capture
at time 0. Data represents the average of one experiment,  = 8, error bars, s.d. This experiment was repeated two
times with similar results. (e) Images of representative HeLa cell
expressing NES-GFP-LOV-PTS1 exposed to light using the experimental
treatment described in (d). Peroxisomes are highlighted using a mCherry-AGTma
reporter. DNA was transfected at a ratio of 3:1 (NES-GFP-LOV-PTS1
to mCherry-AGTma). Scale bar, 10 μm. (f) Quantification of image
sequence in (e). Peroxisomal translocation is due to light-dependent binding
to Pex5. (a) Schematic showing yeast two-hybrid assay testing interaction
of LOV-PTS1 with Pex5. (b) BD-LOV-PTS1 does not interact with AD-Pex5
in the dark, but shows interaction under blue light illumination. Quantification
of peroxisomal localization of GFP-LOV-PTS1 mutants and PTS1 reporters.
(a) Quantification of % peroxisomal protein. HEK293T cells were tranfected
with indicated peroxisomal targets and fluorescence quantified after
24 h. Light samples received 24 h blue light pulses. Data represents
the average of one imaging experiment,  = 8, error
bars, s.d. (b–d) Analysis of higher caging LOV2 mutant I532A. (b) COS-7 cells were transfected with wild-type
or I532A GFP-LOV-PTS1 and incubated in dark or 24 h light. Scale bar,
10 μm (c) Quantification of peroxisomal localization in HeLa
cells transfected with GFP-LOV-PTS1(I532A). Cells were incubated in
dark 18 h, then treated with light pulses and imaged for GFP fluorescence
every 5 min for 3 h. The first image was used to quantify dark background.
Data represents the average of one imaging experiment,  = 7, error bars, s.d. This experiment was repeated two times with
similar results. (d) Image series of cells expressing GFP-LOV-PTS1(I532A)
treated as in (c). Light-triggered
depletion of a cytosolic reporter protein. HEK293T cells expressing
pTRE3G-NES-GFP-LOV-PTS1 and pBT224-tTA2 were incubated in the dark
for 18 h, then doxycycline (1 μg/mL) was added and light treatment
was initiated. (a) Images of representative cells 0, 8, and 24 h after
initiation of light treatment. Scale bar, 10 μm. (b) Quantification
of percent peroxisomal protein at 0, 8, or 24 h. Data represents average
of one experiment; this experiment was repeated 2 times with similar
results.  = 10, error bars, s.d. ***, -value <0.001. Rapamycin-induced
dimerization blocks light-triggered peroxisomal import of GFP-LOV-PTS1.
(a) Schematic of constructs used. (b) When coexpressed in COS-7 cells
with mCherry-FRB, FKBP-tagged GFP-LOV-PTS1 is inducibly targeted to
the peroxisome with light, but targeting is blocked if rapamycin,
which induces FRB-FKPB dimerization, is added first. Constructs were
transfected at a ratio of 2:1 (FKBP-GFP-LOV-PTS1 to mCherry-FRB).
Translocation of FKBP-GFP-LOV-PTS1 expressed alone is not affected
by rapamycin. Scale bar, 10 μm. Chemicals,
Strains, and Plasmid Construction http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00144/suppl_file/sb5b00144_si_002.xls Primer and final clone
sequences are listed in  Table S1. Rapamycin was from Selleck Chemical LLC, doxycycline hyclate
was from Enzo. We used PCR to amplify the “TULIP” LOVpep
construct pDS248, containing a erbin
binding peptide at the C-terminus of GFP-LOV2-Jα.
This construct contains residues 404–540 of LOV2 (numbering corresponds to the corresponding location in the
wild-type  phototropin 1 sequence), as
well as additional mutations T406A, T407A, and V416 in the LOV2 core. In addition, we added helix-stabilizing mutations
G528A and N538E. A cannonical PTS1 peroxisomal targeting sequence,
“LQSKL”, was added at the C-terminus. To generate the
constitutively active ΔK533 variant, we used pDS420 as template. The GFP-LOV-PTS1 insert was cloned into pcDNA3.1
at HI and RI sites, using
primers 1068/1070r (LOV-PTS1.1), 1068/1072 (LOV-PTS1.2), 1068/1071r (LOV-PTS1.3), or
1068/1069r (LOV-PTS1-CA). To create a tetracycline
regulated construct, a nuclear export signal was cloned into pcDNA3.1-GFP-LOV-PTS1
at dIII and HI to create pcDNA3.1-NES-GFP-LOV-PTS1.
NES-GFP-LOV-PTS1 was PCR-amplified and cloned into pTRE3G-luc between I and EcoNI using primers 1713/1714r.
Site directed mutagenesis was used to change Ile532 to Ala using primers
1567/1568r. The mCherry-AGTma construct was generated
by first inserting mCherry into pcDNA3.1 between HI and RI using primers 1347/1373r, and then inserting the coding sequence for alanine: glyoxylate
aminotransferase at EcoRV and XhoI using 1548/1541r.
For yeast two-hybrid studies, the Gal4AD-Pex5 fusion protein was in
pGADT7rec (Clontech). LOV-PTS1 was cloned by homologous recombination
in pDBTrp using primers 1084/1085r. The mCherry-FRB construct was generously provided by Dr.
Matthew Kennedy (UC Denver). 2xFKBP was amplified from 2xFKBP-GFP-homer1c
(provided by Dr. Kennedy) by PCR and cloned into the pcDNA3.1-GFP-LOV-PTS1.1
vector at I and HI sites. HEK293T and COS-7
cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.2%
Triton X-100 in PBS with 5% normal goat serum, and incubated with
an α-PMP70 monoclonal antibody (Sigma clone 70–18, SAB4200181,
1:100 dilution) and Cy3-conjugated goat antimouse secondary antibody
(Jackson Immunoresearch 115–165–146, 1:500 dilution). Microscopy, Live Cell Imaging, and Image Analysis Media in glass bottom dishes was changed to HBS with 1 mM CaCl directly before imaging. Live cell imaging was performed
at 34 °C using two systems: 1) An Olympus IX71 microscope equipped
with a spinning disc scan head (Yokogawa Corporation) with a 60×/NA
1.4 objective. Excitation illumination was delivered from an AOTF
controlled laser launch (Andor Technology) and images collected on
a 1024 × 1024 pixel EM-CCD camera (iXon; Andor Technology). The
emission bandpass filters were 525/30 (GFP), and 685/36 (mCherry).
Metamorph software was used for collection of images. To focus on
cells without stimulating, we used filtered light (572/28 bandpass
filter, Chroma). 2) A Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 Inverted Spinning
Disc microscope with a 63×/NA 1.4 objective and HQ 480/40×
and HQ565/30× (Chroma) bandpass filters. Excitation illumination
was delivered by a 3i Ablate! Model 3iL13 and image collected using
a Yokogawa CSU-X1CU camera. Slidebook 6 was used for image collection. ImageJ 1.45s and Fiji were used for image analysis. Percent of
protein in puncta was calculated by first determining the total fluorescence
within the cell or cell region and subtracting background. Then, the
total fluorescence within peroxisomal puncta (background subtracted
as well was determined using ImageJ thresholding (Otsu’s method)
to delineate protein within puncta (also background subtracted). The
% fluorescence within peroxisomes was calculated by dividing the fluorescence
within puncta by total fluorescence within each cell or analyzed region. HeLa, HEK293T, and COS-7
cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM)
supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37 °C
with 5% CO. Cells were seeded onto a 35 mm glass bottom
dish (live cell imaging) or coverslips on a 12 well plate (fixed images)
and transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. For Tet-OFF experiments (), cells were transfected
with pTRE3G-NES-GFP-LOV-PTS1 and pBT224-tTA2 at a DNA ratio of 1:1.
Eighteen hours after transfection, 1 μg/mL doxycycline was added
to the media. Dark samples were wrapped in aluminum foil immediately
after transfection, and all manipulations carried out using a red
safelight. Unless otherwise indicated, light-treated cells were illuminated
using a custom programmable blue LED light source (461 nm) with a
1 s pulse per 1 min interval, 5.8 mW/cm. Yeast two-hybrid studies were performed using
strain AH109 (MATa, trp1–901, leu2–3, 112, ura3–52,
his3–200, gal4Δ, gal80Δ, LYS2::GAL1-GAL1-HIS3, GAL2-GAL2-ADE2, URA3::MEL1-MEL1-lacZ, MEL1).
Yeast were transformed with indicated GalBD and GalAD fusion plasmids,
then grown on SC -Trp/-Leu/-His/ + 3 mM 3-AT for 3 days at 30 °C
in light or dark. The AD-control was a pGADT7rec-CIB1 construct that
is not expected to bind Pex5..