Genetically
encoded biosensors
composed exclusively of RNA may lead to a novel class of sensors that
enable real-time monitoring of biomolecules in living cells. Additionally,
RNA-based biosensors may be an ideal platform for sensing intracellular
genetic information, such as mRNAs (mRNA) or noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs)
that are specific to tissues or diseases, because the sensing mechanism
can be engineered by simple base-pairing. To that end, the Spinach
aptamer selected to bind 3,5-difluoro-4-hydroxylbenzylidene imidazolinone
(DFHBI) and activate fluorescence by mimicking the GFP fluorophore has inspired a number of promising biosensors
by coupling the Spinach folding with another aptamer that binds a
molecule of interest. Here, we report an  RNA circuit capable
of signal amplification in which an input RNA strand catalytically
activates multiple Spinach aptamers via nonenzymatic RNA strand displacement
reactions. As depicted in Figure a, the circuit
consists of three RNA strands: an internally blocked Spinach aptamer
(), a fuel strand (), and a catalytic
input strand (). First,  hybridizes with
the inhibitory strand within , which allows the aptamer
to bind DFHBI and become fluorescent while concomitantly exposing
a short toehold sequence. Second, the fuel strand ()
which is present in excess displaces  by a toehold mediated
branch migration to produce the final product  and
recycles  for further catalysis. The compact  circuit exclusively composed of RNA (except for
DFHBI) described here may serve as a model for catalytic signal amplification
of functional RNA devices (e.g., aptamers, ribozymes, regulatory RNAs)
for applications  and . RNA signal amplification circuit design. (a) Schematic illustration
of the RNA signal amplifier mechanism. The circuit consists of three
RNA strands: an internally blocked Spinach aptamer (), a fuel strand (), and a catalytic input strand ().  hybridizes with  using
the toehold (red) to form  allowing the Spinach
aptamer domain (blue) to fold and activate fluorescence after binding
DFHBI. Subsequently,  hybridizes with  via the newly exposed toehold (green) to displace  which can engage in further catalysis. (b) Fluorescence of  and  (500 nM) in the presence of DFHBI
(3 μM). Fluorescence of  was restored in the
presence of  (1500 nM). The average raw fluorescence
values from triplicate experiments were obtained and normalized by
the corresponding fluorescence of  (500 nM). (c) Sequences
of the circuit components described in this work. Supporting Information Figure S1 To implement the RNA circuit depicted
in Figure a, the internally blocked Spinach
aptamer () was first designed by extending the 5′
end of the Spinach
aptamer with a sequence that is complementary to a part of the Spinach
aptamer critical for ligand binding (Figure c, ). As expected,  transcribed  exhibited diminished fluorescence in the presence of 3 μM
DFHBI relative to the unmodified Spinach aptamer  (approximately
4% of the unmodified Spinach) (Figure b).
Importantly, the fluorescence of  recovered to about
90% of that of  in the presence of 3-fold molar excess
of a DNA strand complementary to the internal blocking sequence and
its neighboring bases (), demonstrating that  can be activated by sequestering the blocking sequence
by hybridization (Figure b). Supporting Information Figure
S2 Supporting Information Figure S3 Next, we
designed three catalytic input strands (, , and ) and two fuel strands
(, ) with different sizes (Figure c). Reactions containing  (500
nM) and  (1000 nM) with or without  (50
nM) were set up and the fluorescence was monitored over time at 30
°C (Figure a, b). The fluorescence intensity
was normalized to that of the unmodified Spinach aptamer  (500 nM), which corresponds to the sum of the concentrations of  and . The linearity of the Spinach
fluorescence was confirmed for the  concentrations
between 0 to 500 nM (). Both  and  displayed
comparable rates of uncatalyzed formation of  likely
due to transient access of the toehold. However,  in the presence of  exhibited the strongest activation
of  (Figure a), and therefore,
it was chosen for further analysis. Fluorescence activation was monitored
in the presence of  (500 nM),  (1000 nM), and varying concentrations of . The
reaction rate increased in a dose-dependent manner on the  concentration. The catalytic nature of the circuit was evident,
as demonstrated by the production of 126 nM activated aptamer ( + ) by catalysis in the presence of
25 nM  in 185 min (Figure c). This corresponds to, on average, activation of 5.0 molecules
of  by one molecule of . In the
absence of the fuel strand, no increase in fluorescence was observed
after the rapid initial formation of the  complex
(). Recently, a number of promising metabolite and protein sensors
based on the Spinach aptamer have been designed by strategically fusing
an aptamer that binds to the molecule of interest to the Spinach aptamer. Stoichiometric activation of the Spinach aptamer by a short oligonucleotide
was also demonstrated. Catalytic activation
of a fluorescent RNA aptamer such as Spinach is an attractive strategy
because it can significantly improve the sensitivity of the Spinach-based
sensing systems. To this end, Bhadra and Ellington recently described
a related  RNA circuit that combines catalytic
hairpin assembly (CHA) with a fluorescent Spinach aptamer output. The strategy was based on the DNA CHA circuits
they previously reported. In that work,
they designed a core signal amplification circuit in which hybridization
of two DNA hairpins (H1 and H2) was catalytically triggered by an
input. Subsequently, the researchers designed various output modules
that can be activated by the amplified H1–H2 duplex. In the
recent work, Bhadra and Ellington implemented this strategy using
RNA and designed an output module that activates Spinach fluorescence. Although their core amplification circuit exhibited
impressive performance with a low uncatalyzed reaction rate as evaluated
by a FRET-based output reporter, their Spinach aptamer output suffered
low signal-to-noise ratio, and catalytic turnover was not explicitly
demonstrated. Conceptually, the CHA architecture is attractive for
its modular design, as elegantly demonstrated by the DNA implementation . With RNA, however,
it remains to be seen if the benefits of the proposed modularity outweigh
the added complexity of the circuits (more components, more reaction
steps), especially for  applications where
control of multiple RNA species (stoichiometry, stability) can be
challenging. Also of interest, the Pierce group described “small
conditional
RNAs (scRNAs)” where a series of RNA-based oligonucleotides
(some bases were chemically modified) were designed to conditionally
produce a Dicer substrate that can induce RNA interference (RNAi)
in response to a trigger RNA. One implementation
in their recent report resembles CHA in which the product serves as
a Dicer substrate. Supporting Information
Figure S4 One limitation of our current circuit is
that the sequence of the
catalytic strand is constrained by the Spinach sequence. Both the
Pierce and the Ellington groups have demonstrated strategies to translate
an arbitrary input sequence or a molecular input to trigger the catalytic
reaction, which can also be adapted to the circuit
described here. For example, the catalytic strand can be extended
on its 5′ terminus to include a sensor sequence that also blocks
the toehold domain so that the catalytic strand can be conditionally
activated by a target molecule (). Our work described above and the recent related
efforts by other
groups strongly suggest that the robustness demonstrated
by the nonenzymatic DNA signal amplification circuits is, in principle, achievable with RNA. However, additional
efforts to improve the performance and robustness of the RNA circuits
are needed to ultimately implement them as genetically encoded signal
amplification circuits in living cells. Characterization
of the catalytic RNA signal amplification circuits.
(a) Activation of  (500 nM) fluorescence in the presence
of  (1000 nM) with or without a catalytic strand
(,,; 50
nM) over time. (b) Activation of  (500 nM) fluorescence
in the presence of  (1000 nM) with or without a
catalytic strand (,,; 50 nM) over time. (c) Activation of  (500 nM)
fluorescence in the presence of  (1000 nM) with
or without different concentrations of  over time.
(a–c) The reactions were performed as described in the , and the average fluorescence values from
triplicate experiments were plotted. The triplicate measurements were
typically within 3% of the plotted average values, which were smaller
than the data symbols shown. and  were prepared by  transcription using T7
High Yield RNA Synthesis Kit (New England Biolabs) according to the
manufacturer’s instruction. The DNA templates for  transcription reactions were obtained by PCR using
a plasmid in which the Spinach aptamer sequence was cloned and sequence
verified. The transcripts were treated with 0.1 U/μL of TURBO
DNase (Ambion) at 37 °C for 30 min to digest the template DNA,
and purified using RNA Clean and Concentrator-5 kit (Zymo Research).
No further purification was performed as the RNA purity was observed
to be suitable by denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE).  and the RNA catalyst and fuel strands were chemically
synthesized by IDT. The RNA circuit reactions were
carried out in 10 μL volumes in black 384-well plates (Greiner
Bio-One) in a buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.3, 37.5 mM KCl and 1.5
mM MgCl) containing 3 μM DFHBI (Lucerna Technologies).
RNA stock solutions were individually preannealed by heating to 95
°C for 3 min and rapidly cooling on ice for 30 s. Each set of
reactions included wells with 500 nM  (+DFHBI) and
wells with just DFHBI as controls. The fluorescence was monitored
using Safire microplate reader (TECAN)
set to 460 nm excitation and 510 nm emission with 20 nm bandwidth
at 30 °C. The raw fluorescence values of the samples were subtracted
by those of the DFHBI wells, and then normalized by the corresponding
fluorescence of the 500 nM  wells to calculate the
concentrations of the activated  species ( and ). RNA and DNA Sequences Used in This Study : 5′GGAGGACGCAACUGAAUGAAAUGGUGAAGGACGGGUCCAGCUGCUUCGGCAGCUUGUUGAGUAGAGUGUGAGCUCCGUAACUAGUUGCGUCCUC
3′ : 5′ GGACGACCCGUCCUUCACCACAUGACAAACAAGAGGACGCAACUGAAUGAAAUGGUGAAGGACGGGUCCAGCUGCUUCGGCAGCUUGUUGAGUAGAGUGUGAGCUCCGUAACUAGUUGCGUCCUC
3′ : 5′ GUCAUGUGGUGAAGGAC
3′ : 5′ GUCAUGUGGUGAAGGA
3′ : 5′ UCAUGUGGUGAAGGA 3′ : 5′ UGGUGAAGGACGGGUC 3′ : 5′ UGGUGAAGGACGGGU 3′ : 5′ GTCATGTGGTGAAGGACGGGTCGTCC
3′.