From the initially static objects
to rudimentary switching of states and finally multistage movement,
environmental triggering, and information relay, the field of DNA
nanotechnology has evolved to the increasingly
dynamic, enabled state it is today. Remarkable
development in building functional nanostructures using DNA molecules
as fundamental building blocks has elicited
various stimuli-responsive mechanisms and elementary functions that
can be integrated into solving sophisticated tasks in a preprogrammed
manner. In other words, DNA nanotechnology is encroaching on the realm
of robotics. There is an incredible amount of digital information
that can be
encoded into and read from DNA as demonstrated by Church and colleagues. Despite this ingenious and far-reaching approach to use DNA as a
digital information storage, Richard Feynman once famously postulated that the key feature in biology is not just about
writing the information, but rather what we could  with it. The information in DNA, , the sequence
of nucleobases, directs the construction of countless nanoscopic atomically
precise molecular machines that can perform intricate tasks in a dynamic
and reliable manner. On the other hand, this protein-dominating machinery
has evolved to meet its primary function, and therefore, it is remarkably
demanding—yet possible through  protein
design—to revamp the machines for any other
purpose. Thus, one way to manufacture artificial and accurate nanoscale
tools for performing similarly complex, but now user-defined, functions
is to harness DNA molecules in additive, bottom-up fabrication. DNA
molecules and their derivatives, DNA nanostructures, composed of a
few to dozens of custom-length and -sequence DNA strands and whose
assembled shapes are therefore also encoded in the sequences of the
building blocks, can change their conformations
or behavior in response to a plethora of physical and chemical inputs,
including heat, presence of certain molecules, pH, and light. Due to the modularity and high addressability of DNA nanostructures,
the responses of these tiny nanomachines can be engineered toward
specific applications. Furthermore, while DNA nanostructures are based
on molecular self-assembly, an intrinsically additive (bottom-up)
fabrication process, there exists both “bottom-up” and
“top-down” approaches for designing them. Features can
be either gradually added to a design from nothing (bottom-up), or
a user can directly create a 3D model and then systematically route
a DNA-strand frame around it, sculpting the model’s likeness
with DNA (top-down). Through these design paradigms DNA nanostructures
are respectively afforded excellent customizability, addressability,
and freedom of form. Thanks to effortless automated design and powerful simulation tools, programmable
DNA-based nanostructures such as scaffolded DNA origami and various top-down fabricated wireframe structures have enjoyed widely spread interest as drug
carriers, measurement and sensing tools, photonic instruments, molecular templates, spectroscopic rulers, and eventually the dynamic nanoscale devices discussed in depth
in this review. The first major steps in creating dynamic DNA-based
systems were
taken around two decades ago. In the
very end of the 1990s it was reported how manipulating solution conditions
could induce simple rotary and linear motion in primitive DNA structures  conformational changes of helices. Soon after, Yurke  presented the first DNA-based molecular tweezers that could reversibly switch between open and closed states by using
additional DNA strands as fuel. Next, Yan () employed a similarly reversible fuel-based strategy
to change the hybridization topology of a DNA system, causing it to
partially rotate between two topologies. These mechanisms of controlled
movement eventually led to the creation of the first DNA walkers, that could travel step-by-step along a molecular track by consuming
fuel. These reversible mechanisms were based on so-called -regions. Toeholds are short single-stranded DNA
(ssDNA) extensions that serve as the docking sites for the reactant
ssDNA at the end of the dsDNA domains. In other words, they are essentially
short ssDNA extensions that could initiate the strand displacement
reaction and energetically favor one of the two sides in this reaction.
Around the same time, also other kinds of DNA motors were devised, similarly expending various molecular fuel sources to induce a rudimentary cycle of motion. The mechanisms have since
evolved into more complex ones, and alternative
regulation methods like external fields, weak base stacking interactions, and
logic gates have recently opened completely
new possibilities for building dynamic systems. Currently, we are
approaching the level of advanced and feasible DNA-based nanorobotics. To probe the mechanical movements of individual DNA nanostructures,
several single-molecule techniques could be employed. The label-free
techniques like transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and atomic
force microscopy (AFM) are commonly applied for acquiring static configurations
of DNA nanorobots with subnanometer spatial resolution. With the recent
developments of high-speed AFM (HS-AFM), even dynamic events could
be recorded with a temporal resolution down to hundreds of milliseconds
per frame. On the other hand, DNA nanostructures labeled with fluorophores
could be characterized by the single-molecule fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (smFRET) to resolve their dynamics with a much higher
temporal resolution. Fluorescence-based super-resolution imaging, , DNA points accumulation for imaging in nanoscale topography
(DNA-PAINT) is natively compatible with
DNA nanostructures for high spatial resolution imaging in aqueous
environments. Two interesting research areas that deserve to
be mentioned but
are not touched here in detail are DNA computing and protein–DNA
hybrid structures. DNA computing is based on dynamic DNA interactions
combined with the programmable nature of the DNA function. The programmability
enables for example creation of neural-networks using DNA molecules
and thus realization of the neural-computing at the molecular scale
and scaled up digital circuit computation by DNA strand-displacement
cascades. Meanwhile, in the hybrids one could combine
the addressability and modularity of DNA nanostructures with the precision
and functionality of proteins. For example,
in the work of Derr () the dynein and kinesin motor proteins—that have also inspired
many versions of DNA walkers—were attached to a DNA origami
strut, thereby facilitating a molecular scale tug-of-war between different
protein populations. While the goals of protein–DNA hybrids
are similar as for purely DNA-based machines, the approach is fundamentally different as functionality stems more
from the proteins instead of the DNA components. The topic is thus
discussed elsewhere. Here, we describe the progress in user-defined robotic DNA nanostructures
by summarizing the recent achievements of device development for a
variety of applications. In the context of this review, we define
nanorobots as dynamic nanoscale devices that display sophisticated
functions such as multistage and repeatable movement, interconnectivity,
or autonomous regulation. In particular, we mainly focus on the structurally
complex DNA nanodevices, , the newly emerged
ones that usually consist of dozens of DNA strands. First, we introduce
the mechanisms of the DNA nanostructure movement and provide examples
of DNA nanostructure-based force spectroscopy, thus laying the foundation
for all the other emerging implementations. We describe regulatory
and information relay systems, nanomedical robots for imaging, diagnostics
and drug delivery, dynamic photonic and plasmonic structures, as well
as DNA-based instruments driven by external fields. Finally, we discuss
advanced robotics that are capable of autonomous operation. Principles
of Mechanical Movement and Characterization of Molecular
Scale Forces The fundamental core of DNA structures is highly
specific and based
on ordered Watson–Crick base pairs. However, DNA is not brittle, but instead pliable and robust. Mechanically
it behaves as an entropic spring, , when the
DNA molecule is stretched, the entropy decreases (fewer available
conformations) thus resulting in a restoring force. A DNA helix can
be elastically stretched and bent by external forces and in proper
conditions it possesses the ability to reconstitute itself in case
part of it unravels due to excessive stress. This malleability makes DNA an excellent building material for durable
moving parts. DNA retains most of these
spring-like properties when assembling into larger 3D structures such
as DNA origami, the mechanical properties of which have been documented
by Kauert () with
direct force measurements. Importantly, the architecture of the assembly
(crossovers, .) affects the bending and torsional
rigidity of the object. Thus, the mechanical properties can be tuned
from beamlike stiffness to wire-like flexibility by intelligent design
of the structures, using only DNA as material. A nice demonstration
of this was made by Liedl and co-workers, where they crafted prestressed tensegrity structures from DNA origami. Stiff beams can be connected by short single-strands to constitute
hinges and facilitate restricted, mechanical movement. Marras () used this strategy to
create DNA origami analogues of a hinge for angular motion, a slider
for linear motion, a crank-slider that links angular and linear motion
(a, left panel),
and finally a Bennet linkage capable of a reversible, 3D movement
cycle (a, right
panel). Their hinge was made of two beams connected from their ends
with short ssDNA wires, enabling angular opening and closing of the
beams. The slider was built by positioning a mobile DNA origami ring
around a beam with a stopper ring and then anchoring it from the both
ends with ssDNA. Three hinges and the slider were then combined to
constitute the crank-slider. The opening and closing cycle of the
Bennet linkage could be initiated by addition of single-stranded DNA
inputs that “zipper” the sides of the linkage together.
The linkage could then be opened  strand displacement
of the input strands. After the “zippering” was undone,
electrostatic repulsion forced the structure to its original, open
shape. In terms of control, the inherent flaw with floppy ssDNA hinges
is that they are subject to random, thermal motion. However, the locally
addressable flexibility also provides the basis for making other kinds
of joints that offer more direct control. A bit earlier, in 2014,
Zhou () showed how
stiffer and more compliant origami components could be combined to
form a joint-like structure. The stiff regions, 3-fold stacks of layered
helices, were connected by a singular layer from one end at the middle,
while the other side was connected by a lone DNA strand acting as
a spring (b).
By changing the length of the spring, varying forces were exerted,
and the joint complied accordingly. In this way, the bending force
could actually be controlled very carefully. The following year,
Zhou and his co-workers exploited this
when they developed a dynamic, compliant
DNA origami mechanism that displayed two rationally designed stable
configurations separated by an energetic barrier. The device was an
assembly of four connected bars that had two possible resting positions
where no deformation was present. Changing configuration required
bending the bars, thus creating an energy barrier to overcome. They
then displayed how such a mechanism could be actuated and released
by DNA strand inputs and strand displacement, respectively. Employing a ssDNA as a roughly ideal entropic spring, Nickels () were able to craft a
DNA origami-based nanoscopic force clamp (c). In the clamp, a sample molecule could
be propped between stiff DNA origami towers by ssDNA springs. The
force applied to the target molecule could be controlled incrementally
by changing the length of the ssDNA spring strands base by base. With
the additional help from Förster resonance energy transfer
(FRET) pairs, the authors used the clamp to study conformational changes
in a Holliday junction and the bending that a TATA-binding protein
causes to a DNA helix. A slightly similar approach was taken by Kilchherr
and co-workers to study weak DNA base
stacking forces in a time-resolvable manner. They attached stiff honeycomb-packed
DNA origami pylons to micrometer-sized beads that could then be manipulated
with optical tweezers (d). The pylons were connected to each other  a ssDNA tether and the blunt-ended double helices protruded from
the ends of the pylons. Owing to the optical tweezers, they were able
to record forces and associated lifetimes for the blunt-ended base
stacking interactions, resolving the exact moments when stacked bases
disconnected upon applying a set force. The use of such a novel molecular
scale tool provided unique insight into the mechanics and dynamics
of stacking bonds, for example differentiating various nucleotide
combinations by their lifetimes (e) and allowing observation into the energetics
of stacking bond formation and dissociation (f). Finally, nanoscale force calipers
have also been constructed from
DNA by the research groups of Carlos E. Castro and Hendrik Dietz.
In a design visually like the hinge in a, the opening angle of the hinge is controlled,
thereby controlling also the tensile force applied to a sample tethered
at the ends of the caliper. These have proven especially useful precise
measurement tools for molecular scale features that may otherwise
be impossible to characterize. These include various nucleosome properties,
such as the forces between nucleosomes, nucleosome unwrapping, and the stability
of nucleosomes. It has become clear
from above that the structural evolution of
dynamic objects and the requirements of the delicate molecular scale
measurements have further increased the importance of a powerful software
for simulating structural details of the DNA nanoshapes and their
movement. Here, our main focus is on the different robotic mechanisms
and their intriguing applications, so the readers are suggested to
refer to other sources for multiple DNA design and simulation software
options. Both modeling and validation methods have been recently reviewed
in ref (), and in
more detail, for the design of the DNA nanostructures, see, , ref () (various approaches) or ref () (wireframe constructions), and for the simulation software,
see, , rigid-beam models in finite element frameworks
(software CanDo), atomistic molecular-dynamics
simulations, or coarse-grained modeling
(software oxDNA). DNA nanostructure mechanics and force spectroscopy. (a) Mechanic
DNA nanostructures. Left panel from top to bottom: a hinge for angular
motion, a slider for linear motion, and a crank-slider that executes
angular and linear movement. Right panel: a Bennett linkage. (b) Compliant DNA origami structures. (c) A DNA origami force clamp created using
ssDNA as an entropic spring (force adjustment demonstrated in the
left panel). (d) Measurement setup for
unraveling the base stacking (top left) forces. The opposite DNA origami
pylons with blunt-ended dsDNA variants (top right panel) are linked
together through a ssDNA tether and the pylons are attached to the
optical tweezer beads for force spectroscopy (bottom panel). (e) Average lifetimes of select base stacking
interactions as a function of force, as measured with the setup depicted
in (d). Six, four, and two stack arrays are depicted as blue, orange,
and red data points, respectively. The solid line represents an exponential
fit of the data. Meanwhile, the dashed line is a visual guide for
combinations with particularly long lifetimes, that were difficult
to dissect with the optical trap. (f)
A free energy diagram of the dissociation of two GC:CG stacks as a
function of distance. The energy minimum highlights relaxed, fully
formed stacks (∼20 Å) and a plateau is accordingly reached
at full dissociation of the stacking (>26 Å). In addition,
a
sharp increase in average orthogonal displacement respective to the
helical axis can be observed as the stacks are pulled apart by the
measurement rig. (a) Reprinted with permission
from ref (). Published
by 2015 National Academy of Sciences. (b) Reprinted with permission
from ref (). Copyright
2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Reprinted with permission from
ref (). Copyright
2016 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d–f)
Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2016 The American Association for
the Advancement of Science. In order to be
able to handle complex tasks, it may be necessary
for the components of a system to communicate with each other and
to propagate information. By triggering one component with the chosen
input, it can undergo a change and release an output that will in
turn act as the input for the next component, eventually translating
into a predetermined function. With these kinds of cascaded selective
triggering mechanisms and precise internal interactions, system modularity,
dynamics and automation can be achieved. To this end, several interaction
cascade and information relay strategies have been devised for DNA-based
systems. In 2015 Gerling () published a strategy for manipulating connections
between ready-assembled
3D DNA structures by the weak base stacking interactions between the
components, first introduced by Woo and Rothemund using 2D tile stacking (a). The authors created shape-complementary features on the
lateral surfaces of DNA structures, enhancing the weak interactions
at these interfaces and effectively docking DNA bundles together in
a shape-specific manner. The attractive force between the nanostructures
could be overcome by electrostatic repulsion forces by changing the
prevalent solution conditions such as salt concentration or temperature.
Thus, the DNA structures could be reversibly disassembled and recombined
as necessary, in a time frame of seconds, making them toggleable and
forming a basis for dynamic functions. Furthermore, combined bundles
could then constitute a new shape-complementary interface in a manner
similar to a 3D jigsaw puzzle, that could allow the next structure
to dock to the previously combined ones. Finally, Gerling  also showed how singular elements of the system could
be selectively disabled and enabled by using single-stranded DNA loops
and toehold-mediated mechanisms. By including ssDNA loops at a shape-complementary
interface and then adding a loop-specific and complementary strand
to the system, that interface would deform and become unusable for
assembly. The reverse could then be realized by removing the complementary
strand  the toehold-mediated hybridization of
a so-called recovery strand. In this way, the authors presented one
option for making complex DNA nanostructure systems, where components
can reversibly interact in a dynamic, cascading manner, and where
individual elements can be activated and deactivated at will. One
example is a large-scale reconfigurable lattice based on non-base-pairing
interactions (a). The individual dynamic cross-like switches (a, middle panel) can be polymerized
into a network (a, right panel) that reversibly changes between the closed (high
magnesium level) and open state (low magnesium level) depending on
the prevalent cation concentration (a, bottom panel). A year later Ke and co-workers introduced
a rhombus-shape DNA origami nanoactuator (b). The device was composed of a driver and
a mirror, , four stiff rod-like arms assembled
into a rhombus shape using flexible ssDNA scaffolds in every corner.
The conformation of the device (opening angle) was controlled  ssDNA “strut-locking” strands of different
lengths embedded on driver-side arms. The mirror-side contained two
capturing strands for cargo attachment. Tunable fluorescent behavior  long-range allosteric regulation was demonstrated by
attaching two halves of enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP)
to the capturing strands in open conformation. Closing of the device
with short locking strands regained the strong fluorescence of eGFP
(b, bottom
panel). Choi () expanded
the actuator concept by constructing a reconfigurable DNA accordion
rack using a network of long DNA beams joined together  multiple flexible joints. Conformational switching in 2D DNA 6 ×
6 rhombus meshes was controlled by adding DNA lock strands at predefined
positions in the structure (c). Multistep lattice reconfigurations were generated
using a toehold-mediated strand-displacement process by repeating
the locking process after detaching the prior DNA locks. Moreover,
controlled multistep lattice reconfigurations of the accordion rack
and the wrapped up 2D DNA configuration resulting in a 3D DNA nanotubular
structure with various dimensions was demonstrated. One step
further in the information propagation systems, , transformations with programmable initiation, propagation,
and regulation was presented by Song () who employed base-stacking interactions as a
driving force to perform long-range information relay on dynamic DNA
molecular arrays. The modular system was constructed from dynamic
multi-interconnected trapezoidal DNA “antijunction units”
that could switch between two stable conformations  an open intermediate conformation. The array transformation analogous
to molecular domino array was launched by adding trigger strands at
the predefined “antijunction” unit. This resulted in
a conformational switch in an adjacent unit, which then migrated through
the system without the need of additional strands (d). This is due to declined
base-stacking and higher energy at the interface between the units.
The reconfiguration process is reversible since the array can be transformed
to its initial conformation by releasing the old trigger strands with
new ones. Such artificial systems allow the study of complex dynamic
behaviors and allosteric mechanisms observed in biological systems. DNA nanostructures for
information relay and regulation. (a) Top
left panel: a dsDNA protrusion (red) fits tightly to the designed
dsDNA recession (blue) thus stacking the counterparts through non-base-pairing
interaction. Middle left panel: A reversible DNA switch with designed
protrusions and recessions. Middle right panel: Working principle
of a reconfigurable large-scale network obtained by polymerization
of multiple switches. Bottom panel: TEM images verifying reversible
switching of the network (closed state: high magnesium concentration;
open state: low magnesium concentration). (b) A rhombus-shape DNA origami nanoactuator; movement on the driver
side (left) is mirrored to the right side. The lower panel depicts
the regaining of eGFP fluorescence by bringing its two halves in close
proximity using the actuator. (c) DNA
accordion rack that can adapt different geometries relying on DNA
lock strand positioning. (d) Long-range
step-by-step information relay process in DNA “domino”
nanoarrays, launched by the hybridization of a trigger strand to a
single unit. (a) Reprinted with permission
from ref (). Copyright
2015 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b)
Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2016 Springer Nature Ltd. (c) Reprinted
with permission from ref (). Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons. (d) Reprinted with
permission from ref (). Copyright 2017 The American Association for the Advancement of
Science. Biobased nanorobots are typically operating
at the subcellular
level and consist of stimuli-responsive biomaterials with excellent
precision and efficiency and these nanorobots have recently attracted
increasing attention particularly in medical applications. With delicate design, nanorobots can outperform
conventional techniques through a combination of several unique properties,
such as cargo-loading, degradation resistance, site-targeting, tissue
penetration and stimuli responsiveness. The multifunctionality makes
them ideal candidates for drug delivery and imaging. For instance,
light, ultrasound, and magnetic fields have been utilized
to transport or trigger the release of loaded drugs or imaging agents.
Additionally, they may reach targets in the human body that are otherwise
inaccessible to conventional robotics. As one
of the most important biomacromolecules in all life forms,
DNA possesses advantages over other smart materials in the construction
of such robots. First of all, DNA is intrinsically biocompatible and
biodegradable, which lightens the concerns on its possible adverse
effects. On top of this, the tremendous development in automated DNA
synthesis has enabled production of DNA strands in large quantities,
yet with site-specific addressability, which may lead to integrated
functionality, such as drug-loading, site-targeting and stimuli-responsiveness
within one rationally designed architecture. There are several reviews that have well summarized the design and
construction of DNA nanostructures, as well as their potential in
drug delivery applications, while their bioimaging possibilities and biological responses have been
addressed in others. For an in-depth discussion on the various drug
payloads and their delivery mechanisms, interested readers are respectively
referred to ref (). In this section, we will focus on the advances in the emerging
field of logic-gated dynamic DNA nanorobots in nanomedicine, which
includes two main categories: imaging/diagnostics and delivery/computing. Yamuna Krishnan’s research group has performed seminal work
on  imaging using several smart DNA nanorobot
designs. In their early versions, the nanorobot was constructed with
several fluorescent dye-modified oligonucleotides that underwent a
conformational transition of an i-tetraplex in response to protons,
which was used for pH-mapping (a). The spatiotemporal
pH-mapping based on the so-called I-switch was demonstrated to be
efficient in living cells using FRET. Later, the same design was applied
for pH-mapping in a living organism using nematode  as a model. study revealed that the internalization of I-switch
to coelomocytes followed a receptor-mediated endocytosis pathway and
that the nanorobot functioned as efficiently  as . By using two nanorobot designs that
were modulated with distinct endocytic pathway-trafficking proteins,
they managed to simultaneously map pH gradients through intersecting
cellular entry pathways in the same cell. They also extended the design, termed as 2-IM, which could simultaneously
detect protons and chloride ions in living cells. The 2-IM enters lysosomes through the process mediated
by a lysosome-targeting tag. Following the entrance, a H-induced conformational change of an i-tetraplex triggers FRET between
a fluorophore pair while a Cl-sensitive dye reports
Cl gradient. It was found that 2-IM is able to
report the pH and chloride ions within one lysosome quantitatively
and simultaneously. As a demonstration of this concept, 2-IM was employed
to image fibroblasts derived from skin biopsies of both healthy individuals
and patients with Niemann–Pick disease resulting in highly
distinct lysosome subpopulation profiles, thus demonstrating the efficiency
of 2-IM in disease diagnosis. Other than the simple i-motif structure, a DNA icosahedra
was also
designed and used for cargo-loading, which was further employed in
cell imaging. For example, they introduced three different endocytic ligand (folic
acid (FA), galectin-3 (Gal3), and the Shiga toxin B-subunit (STxB))
to the quantum dot (QD)-loaded DNA icosahedra respectively through
site-specific modification and demonstrated the feasibility to characterize
the dynamics of endocytic pathways facilitated by Gal3 and STxB. Hence, the QD-loaded DNA icosahedra exhibited
an excellent platform in real-time endocytic pathway mapping at single-particle
level. They also loaded the DNA icosahedra with photoresponsive polymers
and realized targeted spatiotemporal imaging of single endosomes in
specific cells in . Kuzuya  developed a nanomechanical DNA origami
plier-like device that consists of two DNA lever domains joined together
by a Holliday junction. With this design,
target molecules of various sizes can be detected at a single-molecule
level with three independent mechanisms: “pinching”,
“zipping”, or “unzipping”. For example,
by attaching two ligands to the concavities of DNA arms, the DNA plier
could cooperatively capture a single target molecule, transforming
the origami from a cross or antiparallel configuration into a parallel
closed form (b). The shape transition can then be detected by AFM, spectroscopic
analysis and agarose gel electrophoresis. Later on, they realized
a more sophisticated system with precise control over the transitions
between three structural conformations, thus showing potential in
molecular computing. In addition
to the previous examples, Francesco Ricci’s
research group has also shown remarkable progress in developing a
variety of antibody sensors using smart DNA robots. Omitting often complex and large DNA nanostructures, they
have designed sensors that consist of only several functionalized
DNA sequences and realized sensitive antibody probing based on the
structural transition of their devices. Other than
sensors, it is worth noting that with the help of antibodies the group
has also produced DNA robotic vectors for controlled release of molecular
payloads. Through deliberate design,
Douglas  constructed
a capsule-like DNA robot that can open and close in response to a
binding antigen (c). In the open state, the nanocapsule
can be loaded with designated cargos such as nanoparticles and proteins
through complementary DNA hybridization (c, left panel). The loaded capsule can then
be closed by two DNA aptamer “locks” and stabilized
by the guiding staples. Upon interaction with the antigens expressed
on the human leukocyte surface, the DNA aptamers change conformation,
which leads to the open state and subsequent display of encapsulated
cargo. Owing to the modularity of the system, the authors used two
distinct aptamer “locks” for two different targets/keys
to “unlock” the capsule, which is equivalent to a logical
AND gate (shown in c top right panel and bottom panel). By utilizing similar
devices as above, Amir  developed the universal
computing system that was operational in
a living animal. The barrel-shaped DNA
nanorobot was conjugated with DNA aptamer gates that targeted different
protein cues, platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF). Together with the interaction between nanorobots
that triggered molecular payloads on or off, they managed to realize
various logic gates (AND, OR, XOR, NAND, NOT, CNOT and a half adder)
in a living animal model, cockroach (). Possible outcomes of the robot interactions, , drug outputs, depended on different protein cues and the prevalent
robot states (d). In a more recent report, they also showed that the DNA nanorobot
in a living  could be controlled
by human brain activity. An electromagnetic
field was regulated by an online algorithm which recognized electroencephalography
(EEG) patterns. The thought-induced switch in the field caused the
heating of metal nanoparticles that were attached to the gate, which
led to the opening of nanorobots and subsequent display of payloads. Li  designed an intelligent DNA robot and
brought the test subject from cultured cells to tumor-bearing mouse
models, demonstrating a promising strategy for cancer treatment in
mammals. Their tubular DNA nanorobot
was loaded with blood coagulation protease, thrombin, and fastened
along the periphery by targeting DNA, a DNA aptamer (AS1411) that
targets nucleolin that is specifically expressed in tumor-associated
endothelial cells (e). Upon intravenous injection in tumor-bearing mouse models,
it was found that the DNA nanorobots explicitly accumulated on tumor
vessels where the encapsulated thrombin was released, finally leading
to inhibition of tumor growth and tumor necrosis. The therapeutic
effect was confirmed in mouse models bearing melanoma, lung cancer,
breast cancer, and ovarian cancer, while the safety and immunological
inertia was proved in mice and Bama miniature pigs. Besides the above-mentioned
examples, other stimuli have also been demonstrated to be feasible
in triggering the cargo release from DNA nanorobotics, such as temperature, light, and mRNA. Using a modified capsule design, Ijäs  changed the trigger to a more general subject, pH,
by replacing
the aptamer “lock” with Hoogsteen triplexes, dubbed
pH-latches (f). The Hoogsteen triplexes form at
low pH, resulting in a closed state of the nanocapsule. When the pH
was elevated, the Hoogsteen triplexes dehybridized and thus rapidly
opened the nanocapsule revealing the encapsulated cargo. In this study,
AuNPs and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) were successfully loaded and
displayed selectively in response to the specified external trigger.
Similar process has also been demonstrated by Grossi , but in their approach strand-displacement
reactions were employed in achieving successive opening and closing
of the “nanovault” (g). In summary, the genetic information-bearing
DNA and its derivative
nanorobots hold tremendous potential for the preparation of personalized
medicine, especially so with the foreseeable
simple and cost-effective mass production of DNA nanostructures. As the key limitation, however, detailed elucidation
on the  features such as the pharmacokinetics,
structure-performance relationships and circulating half-lives is
still missing. As of today, no clinical trials have yet been reported, although an increasing amount of efforts have
been invested in the research on DNA nanostructure stability and behavior
in physiologically relevant conditions. Currently, covalent cross-linking, intelligent crossover
design, and structure-dependent digestion have yielded promising results in increasing resistance against
enzyme digestion, denaturation, and low-magnesium environments. DNA nanorobotics for biomedicine. (a) An i-tetraplex
for pH-mapping. (b) A nanomechanical
DNA origami plier for detecting
target molecules (observed through the plier configuration change). (c) A logic-gated DNA nanorobot for encapsulation
and display of cargo. Top left panel: the open robot with loaded antibodies.
Top right panel: Boolean AND gating with two-lock (two aptamer locks
for robot) and two-key (antigens at the cell surface) combinations.
Bottom panel: Logic-gating in action; different lock-key combinations
against selected cancer cells. (d) Universal
computing with DNA nanorobots; a generalized version of the robots
shown in (c) with multiple different gate options. The logic-gated
DNA nanorobots can adopt distinct states, and depending on the interaction
with the protein cue profile, the interaction can result in different
drug output. (e) Top panel: Working
principle of the thrombin-loaded DNA nanorobot that is wrapped into
a tubular shape using strands with nucleolin aptamers (robot interaction
with nucleolin opens the robot and displays the cargo). Bottom panel:  mouse model for inhibition of tumor growth and tumor
necrosis. (f) A reconfigurable DNA origami
nanocapsule with “pH-latches” for encapsulation and
display of cargo. The capsule can reversibly open (dsDNA and ssDNA
do not form a triplex) and close (dsDNA and ssDNA form a triplex)
upon the pH change. (g) A similar device
as in (f), but this type of DNA origami nanovault closes and opens
through strand displacement reactions (DNA keys). (a) Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2009 Springer
Nature Ltd. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2011 Springer
Nature Ltd. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2012 The American
Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Reprinted with permission
from ref (). Copyright
2014 Springer Nature Ltd. (e) Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2018 Springer
Nature Ltd. (f) Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2019 American
Chemical Society. Further permissions related to the material excerpted
should be directed to the American Chemical Society. (g) Reprinted
with permission from ref (). Published by 2017 Springer Nature Ltd. Plasmonic
and Photonic Robots as Sensors and Walkers Photons serve
as ideal readout signals for nanorobotics as they
can be detected remotely and instantaneously. To detect the state
of a DNA nanodevice by optical means, it often requires a mechanism
to translate the spatial configuration to a measurable optical quantity.
Two most common mechanisms that have been employed are chiral plasmonics and FRET. Gold nanorods (AuNRs), which have
distinct longitudinal and transversal plasmon modes, can couple with
each other in different chiral modes depending on their relative spatial
configurations. This chirality can thus be measured by circular dichroism
(CD) spectroscopy. FRET, for one, is a well-established method to
understand the distance between molecules by measuring the energy-transfer
efficiency from donor fluorophore to acceptor molecule. In this section,
recent robotic DNA structures relying on these two mechanisms will
be discussed, and these nanodevices can be roughly categorized into
sensors and walkers. DNA nanostructures are actively studied
and employed as sensing
units in DNA nanotechnology. The input from DNA sensing strands can
be translated to a measurable CD or fluorescent output  mechanical reconfiguration of the nanorobots. Based on this operational
principle, a variety of sensing devices have been built. Kuzyk  have developed a reconfigurable chiral
plasmonic nanomachine or “metamolecule” that can be
modified to convert various input signals to a shift in its CD spectroscopy. The framework of the metamolecule consists of two DNA origami beams
connected  a single Holliday junction that enables
the free rotation of the beams with respect to each other. One oligonucleotide-functionalized
AuNR is attached to each beam in a parallel fashion so that the AuNRs
move following the rotation of the DNA beam (a left panel). The metamolecule can switch
between a relaxed configuration and a fixed configuration by the sensing
strands attached at the end or edge of the system. By employing different
sensing strands, the nanomachine can be used to detect ssDNA and RNA with
specific sequence (a right panel shows the switching in action), as well as pH
changes, light irradiation, and aptamer-binding molecules. A similar system has been developed
by Zhou () Instead
of using two beams, they employed
a rectangular platform with a beam able to rotate in a plane parallel
to the plate. The involvement of the plate provided more addressable
space for attaching several sets of sensing strands, thus allowing
the systems to be regulated by multiple aptamer-targets at the same
time. Wang () have
taken the approach one step further by combining up to four AuNRs
together into diastereomers with the help of multiple beam-and-plate
platforms. Besides these chiral plasmonic approaches, FRET has
also been used
as an output of DNA nanorobots. Selnihhin () designed a hinge-like DNA origami beacon equipped
with donor and acceptor fluorophore arrays (b). The nanosystem can switch between an
opened and a closed state by the sensor modules attached at the edges
opposite of the rotation axis. Because of the high number of FRET
pairs, the beacon can detect a target ssDNA with specific sequence
at the concentration down to 100 pM and therefore demonstrates its
potential as a point-of-care diagnostic device. Besides a plasmonic
signal reporter, the AuNR can also serve as
a walker itself. Zhou () designed a system that allows a AuNR walker to move along
a predefined track on a 2D or 3D DNA origami platform. With a stator
AuNR equipped on the opposite side of the platform, the location of
the walker is reflected in the CD spectroscopy. The walking behavior
of the AuNR can be precisely controlled in a reversible stepwise manner
by fueling the system with specific sets of blocking strands and removal
strands for toehold-mediated strand displacements. The oligonucleotides
attached to the surface of the AuNR act as feet during the walking,
and a series of ssDNA extrusions on the platform serve as the footholds
thus defining the track of the motion. The walker moves forward as
the blocking strands cause the feet on the backside of AuNR to dissociate
from the footholds, while the removal strands simultaneously free
the footholds in the walking direction. This “release and capture”
process is demonstrated in c. The authors have also shown that the walker can
walk on a 3D uneven platform with prescriptive tracks. Such a dynamic
DNA nanodevice is not only able to report its own structural dynamics,
but it also enables fine-tuning its plasmonic properties  for optical applications. To expand the toolbox
of DNA-based dynamic nanomachines for accomplishing
even more diverse tasks, other types of mechanical movement have also
been explored. For example, sliding is one important basic motion
required for many nanofactories. Urban () implemented the same principle of programmable
walking as above but translated the coordinated walking of two AuNPs
to a mechanical sliding of two antiparallel DNA origami filaments.
However, instead of the reporting function of chiral arrangement of
AuNRs, the sliding was characterized  by a
FRET pair located at one end of the beams. Powered by similar DNA
fuels as in ref (), the sliding motion can also be controlled in a stepwise and reversible
manner. When the two beams slide away from each other, the donor and
acceptor pairs will be spatially separated with increasing distances,
and therefore, the progress of the sliding could be monitored by fluorescence
spectroscopy. In addition, in the attempt to investigate the system
in more detail, the authors found an intriguing fact that the sliding
could occur even when the structures were confined by DNA sidelocks.
However, the underlying mechanism was not clear and needs further
investigation. Zhan () further
increased the complexity and motion types of nanomachinery by hierarchically
assembling multiple DNA origami with AuNP/AuNR and fluorophores. These
sophisticated assemblies can perform a variety of highly regulated
and coordinated mechanical movements, which include an independent
revolving, a synchronized revolving and a complex joint motion. These
DNA nanomachines and their macroscopic analogues were depicted in d. The authors demonstrated
that two DNA origami beams equipped with footholds composed of different
sequences can be independently controlled to revolve around the same
AuNR by feeding the system with corresponding instructions  toehold-mediated reactions. When the footholds contained
the same sequence, such motions were synchronized. Furthermore, a
joint motion which combines simultaneous sliding and revolving were
also realized by placing the footholds in a shifted pattern. It is
worth mentioning that all the motions in this work are monitored in
situ  the changes of fluorescence intensity owing
to the distance-dependent interactions between fluorophores and AuNRs. Another intriguing implementation of the “release and capture”
type of walker is a nanoclock designed by Xin () (as shown in e). The clock consists of three DNA origami
parts: a rectangular plate foundation, a ring-shaped track, and a
rotary beam. A rotor-stator AuNR pair was equipped with the beam and
foundation for reporting the structural dynamics. Both the track and
rotor were connected to the foundation, the only difference being
that the track was immobilized, while the rotor was linked to the
foundation  two adjacent scaffold crossovers with
30 unpaired bases. The long scaffold linkers provide sufficient flexibility
for the beam to freely rotate along the track. In total, 16 footholds
were placed on the track, allowing a 360° rotation with 22.5°
intervals. Periodic CD intensity changes as a function of rotation
angles were observed for both the clockwise and counterclockwise rotations,
which were in good agreement with theoretical simulations. While the
stepwise rotation was still controlled by external inputs, the authors
realized an autonomous clock by adding DNAzyme sequences as feet and
replacing footholds with RNA molecules. After activating the DNAzyme
feet and releasing the rotor, the DNAzyme cut the RNA substrates into
shorter segments one after another in a time span of a few hours.
In other words, the autonomous nanoclock was powered by RNA hydrolysis
with a burnt-bridge mechanism. Dynamic plasmonic and photonic DNA nanodevices. (a) Left
panel:
a reconfigurable plasmonic metamolecule made from AuNRs and a DNA
origami with lock strands (colorful strands) on both sides. Right
panel: operational principle of the switching between relaxed state
and left-handed or right-handed state  strand
displacement. (b) Left panel: a hinge-like
fluorescence beacon with multiple donor–acceptor pairs and
sensor modules. Right panel: comparisons of fluorescent spectra and
energy transfer efficiency between opened and closed state. (c) Working principle of AuNR walking on predefined
tracks on a DNA origami plate. (d) Macroscopic
mechanical elements and their corresponding nanoscale counterparts
in different DNA nanosystems. (e) A
rotary nanoclock; a DNA origami hand rotates along a ring track  strand displacement. (a)
Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2014 Springer Nature Ltd. (b) Reprinted
with permission from ref (). Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Reprinted
with permission from ref (). Published by 2015 Springer Nature Ltd. (d) Reprinted with
permission from ref (). Published by 2019 The American Association for the Advancement
of Science. (e) Reprinted with permission from ref (). Published by 2019 Springer
Nature Ltd. Robots Guided and Driven by External Fields The plasmonic and nanophotonic mechanisms mentioned in the previous
subsection may provide instantaneous output information about the
structural dynamics of DNA nanorobots, but the actuation of the structural
reconfiguration is still relatively slow when, for example, diffusion-limited
strand-displacement reactions are employed.
However, charged DNA nanostructures can be manipulated by electric
fields based on (di)electrophoretic motion, and therefore, DNA nanomachines with considerably swift responsiveness
and well-defined temporal and spatial control driven by external electromagnetic
fields have been realized. Kopperger () fabricated
a dynamic nanoelectromechanical robotic arm composed of a rigid rectangular
DNA origami tile equipped with a 6HB arm that was joined to the tile  ssDNA scaffold crossovers (a, top panel). The flexible joint enabled
stochastic switching of the arm due to transient binding, detected
from FRET signals generated by the donor fluorophore (Alexa Fluor
488) on the tip of the arm and two acceptor dyes (ATTO 565 and ATTO
647N) connected on the opposite sides of the origami tile. Electrically
driven movement of the robot arm was measured when the system was
seated at the center of a cross-shaped electrophoretic chamber having
two perpendicular fluid channels. The electric field was applied by
two pairs of platinum electrodes inserted in the reservoirs at the
ends of the channels that resulted in a movement of the pointers,
detected with an electron-multiplying charge-coupled device camera
using total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy (a, bottom panel).
Moreover, the arm enabled electrically driven transport of cargo which
is useful for the control of photonic and plasmonic processes. This
DNA robotic arm was reported to be at least 5 orders of magnitude
faster than previous DNA motor systems and in the same class as adenosine
triphosphatase-driven biohybrid motors. Unlike electric fields
that can directly exert forces on the negatively
charged DNA robotic arms, magnetic fields need magnetic particles
(MPs) as media to apply their forces. It is challenging to scale down
the MPs to nanoscale to match DNA nanodevices while still creating
sufficient forces to overcome thermal fluctuations. Therefore, instead
of scaling down the MPs, Lauback () designed stiff DNA levers with persistence
length over 20 μm to match the sizes of micron-scale superparamagnetic
particles. These levers could be integrated into DNA nanorotors and
nanohinges to actuate their motions. To facilitate the assembly of
these nanomachines, one segment of the rigid lever was first connected
to the nanoscale system, and then it served as a seed to extend the
microscale lever arm with a NP attached at the end. During the experiments,
either the lever itself or the stationary part of the rotor or hinge
was immobilized on the surface  biotin–streptavidin
affinity (b,
left panel). Several fluorophores were attached to the lever so its
movement can be visualized by TIRF, in b the right panel shows the rotor and hinge
in action. The authors demonstrated the direct manipulation of DNA
origami nanodevices with subsecond response times and torques ranging
from ∼20 to 80 pN nm rad at magnetic fields
of ∼10–100 Oe. Moreover, compared to other systems which
usually have a few discrete states, a continuous rotation of the rotor
was established in this magnetic field driven system, exhibiting a
high level of spatial control over the DNA nanodevices. Yang () composed
a light-driven nanomachine based on a DNA walker that was fueled by
350 nm wavelength photoirradiation instead of strand-displacement
or enzymatic reactions. Walking strands comprising two pyrene moieties
moved on a rectangular 2D DNA tile along four disulfide-modified “stator”
strands aligned linearly. Hopping from the cleaved stator to the adjacent
one took place  duplex formation. Stepwise movement
of the walker was time-dependent and visualized using HS-AFM. Most of the DNA nanorobots presented in this review so far are
focused on actuation of a local structural reconfiguration. In fact,
the locomotion of the entire nanorobot for traveling a longer distance
is also an essential aspect for many applications, , in targeted biomedicine delivery. Recently, fundamental research
along this line has been carried out, including proof-of-concept experiments
on the movement of mechanically interlocked DNA nanostructures on
DNA filaments or long-range swimmers
propelled by flagella made from DNA nanostructures (see below). Maier () have
built a micron-scale swimmer driven by a rotating external magnetic
field. The hybrid microswimmer consists of a magnetic bead of 1 μm
diameter and several artificial flagella assembled from tile-based
DNA n-helix tubes (nHT) having various degrees of twist, which were
linked together  biotin–streptavidin coupling
(c). The magnetic
bead functions as a rotating power-driven hub that follows the homogeneous
external field rotating perpendicular to the swimming direction. While
swimming, the DNA flagella formed a hydrodynamically assembled corkscrew-like
bundle of several micrometers long. The swimmer can propel with a
speed up to 0.6 μm/s when it was driven by a 3 Hz magnetic field.
In addition, by manipulating the magnetic field, complex maneuvers
like moving in a curved path have been demonstrated by fluorescent
microscopy. Another plausible concept to fabricate microswimmers
is thermophoresis.
Herms () and Heerwig () proposed janus-type
hybrid nanoparticles made from AuNP and DNA origami as self-thermophoretic
swimmers. The authors predicted that the temperature gradient created
by the asymmetric particles when the AuNPs absorb energy from laser
irradiation could generate a slip flow to propel the swimmer forward.
However, although these nanostructures have been assembled and their
thermal stability has been studied, experimental work showing the
swimming behavior has not been reported at the time of this review. Electromagnetic
field-driven DNA nanorobotics. (a) Top panel: The
design and the working principle of the electrically driven movement
of a 6HB robot arm that enables stochastic switching. Bottom panel:
TIRF images showing the movement of the arm under the electric field
(- and -coordinates follow sinusoidal
behavior). (b) Left panel: DNA origami–superparamagnetic
particle configurations to realize lever, rotor, and hinge systems.
Right panel: TIRF images showing rotor and hinge system in operation. (c) Left panel: Different helix tube designs
acting as flagella for magnetic beads. Right panel: Micrographs of
the tubes (left) and two magnetic beads–DNA origami hybrids
(twisted and supertwisted tubes, right). (a) Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2018 The American Association for
the Advancement of Science. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref (). Published by 2018 Springer
Nature Ltd. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2016 American
Chemical Society. Arguably, one of the most intriguing classes
of nanomachinery in
synthetic biology is autonomous robotics. These robots may be seamlessly
integrated into biological systems and they could mimic for example
naturally occurring motor protein functions or execute completely
unnatural tasks with high efficiency and precision. A number of different
DNA nanostructure based autonomous robots with defined moving pathways
have been introduced. One of the earliest examples taking advantage
of the programmability
and addressability of DNA origami was presented by Lund () They created an autonomous
DNA robot able to carry out sequences of actions such as , , , and  on a DNA platform. Previously engineered “molecular spiders” that consist of a streptavidin “body”
and three catalytic deoxyribozyme “legs” (adapted from
the 8–17 DNA enzyme) were set to autonomously move along the
predefined paths coded on a rectangular DNA origami canvas. Movement
was based on Brownian sensing and modifying tracks of substrate molecules
by catalytic DNA binding and degradation of oligodeoxynucleotide substrates  hydrolysis. Real time movement of single spider particles
was tracked by super-resolution total-internal-reflection fluorescence
video microscopy. Wickham and co-workers employed a
100 nm long track on DNA origami rectangle to demonstrate stepwise
directional movement of ssDNA motor through precisely aligned “stators”
(1D array of complementary single-stranded attachment sites), including
a distinct start and stop “stators”. A multistep autonomous
movement at constant speed through stators was initiated by a thermal
strand displacement reaction to form a motor-stator duplex (a). Hydrolysis by
restriction enzyme drives the movement of the motor to the adjacent
intact stator  branch migration. The terminal
stator has a built-in mismatch in the motor–stator duplex,
which shuts down the motor and shields it from the nicking enzyme.
Transport of individual motor molecules was monitored with a HS-AFM
imaging system. Extension of the concept demonstrated integrated long-range
transport and information processing. Authors established that the
path of a ssDNA motor through a network of tracks containing alternative
routes can be programmed using instructions that are added externally
(87% operational yield) or embedded internally to the motor (71% operational
yield). Programmable motion will pave the way, , to the trajectory of computing networks and the evolution of self-
and cargo-sorting molecular systems and assembly lines. Inspired by a motion of kinesin, Liber () demonstrated dynamic to and fro movement of
the bipedal motor that can be extended over two DNA origami tiles
(60 × 90 nm each) that were dimerized using bridging strands.
Successive deployment of fuel and antifuel strands drives the bipedal
motor from tile A to B back to A-tile through five footholds moving
twice across the junction with an overall track distance of 64 nm.
The uniformity of double-tiles and high operational yield was proven
by smFRET and alternating laser excitation techniques (ALEX) and assisted by AFM. Gu and colleagues created a proximity-based
programmable DNA nanoscale assembly line constructed of three distinct
components: a tensegrity-triangle walker possessing four ssDNA legs
and three hands, a DNA origami platform that provide an automobile-style
assembly line, and programmable cargo-donating cassettes mounted as
stations. Three cassettes, each containing a robotic arm, can be independently switched between two states.
The ON state (PX) allows transfer and loading of the cargo to the
walker, whereas for the OFF state (JX) the loading is
disabled. All locomotion, orientation of the walker, and proximity-based
attachment events of different Au-NPs is mediated by toehold-binding/branch-migration
methods, which facilitate programming
of eight assembly pathways and thus, eight different products. Schematic
of the molecular assembly line steps and AFM images showing only the
states of Au-NP cargo is depicted in b. A step toward a cargo-sorting DNA
robot was introduced by Thubagere () who developed a sophisticated
algorithm capable of sorting two types of cargo and their destinations
on a 2D DNA origami platform (c). The DNA robot assembled from three modular domains
was equipped to pick up and release the cargo at the specified location.
The robot was designed to perform a random walk which requires no
supplemental energy. Thus, a single robot was able to perform . 300 steps during the cargo sorting (on average), which
is a significant enhancement on previously reported bipedal DNA walkers
that performed tasks while moving. Ketterer and co-workers demonstrated
the assembly of complex nanomachines from multiple DNA origami elements
by taking advantage of DNA–DNA interactions. The group fabricated
a miniature rotary apparatus that was inspired by the FF-adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthase (d). The device was constructed
from tight-fitting DNA origami components, including a rotor, a clamp,
and a socket, by steering the self-assembly with specific DNA hybridization
events or base-stacking interactions. The rotating devices were not
driven, but they were shown to exhibit random Brownian motion, as
observed  single particle fluorescence microscopy
recordings. Such a prototype equipped with external triggers and control
of the movement may facilitate a basis toward creating complex and
sophisticated DNA-based nanomachines. As a fascinating example
of how the different DNA robots can interact
with each other, Kaminka () used similar two-state (open-close) devices as explained
in Amir () This
time the authors created mixtures of interacting robots that were
able to recreate biochemistry professor and science fiction author
Isaac Asimov’s infamous “Runaround” scenario based on his “Three Laws of Robotics”
L1–L3 (see ref ()). While the story is about a fictional robot and it is often regarded
as impractical, some of its implementations may be rather thought-provoking
when considering safety, autonomy and decision making of robotics
in real life. In Asimov’s book a robot gets stuck at
equilibrium between
the laws L2 and L3 during its mission, and is finally freed from this
condition by overriding both L2 and L3 by the law L1. In this experimental
setup the populations of logic-gated DNA nanorobots (L1, L2, and L3)
were chosen in such a way that L1 and L2 formed a logical NOT gate
(, without a damage signal, L1 is closed and
L2 is open and active, but when the damage signal is present, L2 is
closed through binding to L1), and a microRNA molecule (a human miR-16
analogue) was employed as a damage signal. However, this gate function
depends on the L1:L2 ratio, as the excess of L2 robots leads to exaggerated
activity, and on the other hand, the excess of L1 robots halts the
system. Therefore, the third robot L3 works as a sensor for the L1:L2
ratio and provides the functionality of the system, in other words,
the necessary L1:L2 ratio is analogous to the robotic system protecting
itself (L3). Importantly, as the proportion of robots required to
exert action is relatively small, some L1 and L2 robots in the system
may serve as ratio indicators, while others interact on accessible
L3 robots in order to physically exert the effects. In practice, the
inputs for the L3 robot are DNA strands attached to L1 and L2 robots.
The scenario starts with L2 dominating, carrying out its defined task
(open), followed by a conflict between L2 and L3. Experimentally it
is reached by closing L3 robots by DNA strands, which mimics a skewed
L1:L2 ratio thus resulting in a lower activity equilibrium of L2.
This achieved equilibrium is then terminated by introducing a miR-16
damage, which leads to L1 override and thus a near-baseline activity
of L2. Autonomous and semiautonomous DNA origami nanorobotics.
(a) Top
panel: a stepwise directional movement of a ssDNA motor through aligned
“stators” (green) (the hairpin loops are marked in blue).
Bottom panel: a nicking restriction enzyme cuts the motor-bound stator
revealing a toehold at the 3′ end of the motor (magenta) that
drives the motor to the adjacent intact stator by branch migration
(a “burnt bridges” mechanism). (b) Left panel: a proximity-based programmable DNA nanoscale assembly
line and its stepwise operation. Right panel: atomic force micrographs
of the system corresponding to the process steps sketched as states
(i–vi) in the molecular assembly line. (c) A cargo-sorting DNA robot that employs an irreversible
strand displacement reaction for picking up and delivering selected
cargo to a goal on top of a 2D DNA origami platform. (d) A DNA origami rotary device fabricated from tight-fitting
components showing closed brackets and a docked rotor (left) and an
undocked, mobile rotor (right). Color code: blue = rotor unit, gray
= clamp units, red = shape-complementary sockets on the rotor and
the clamps, respectively. (a) Reprinted
with permission from ref (). Copyright 2011 Springer Nature Ltd. (b) Reprinted with
permission from ref (). Copyright 2010 Springer Nature Ltd. (c) Reprinted with permission
from ref (). Copyright
2017 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d)
Reprinted with permission from ref (). Published by 2016 The American Association
for the Advancement of Science. Conclusions and Future Directions In this review we
have introduced multiple DNA nanomachines that
are able to execute tasks in a dynamic manner and described their
main working principles ranging from the fast-moving external field
driven devices to fully autonomous robots. The classification of the
most important DNA devices, their sensing/actuation mechanisms, characterization
techniques, and potential applications are listed in . All of these devices are based
on programmable DNA nanostructures that are loaded with various (bio)chemical,
physical, and logical features. During the past ∼40 years,
the structural DNA nanotechnology has reached a state at which the
design, fabrication, and cost of intricate DNA objects are no more
obstacles on the road to real-life implementations. However, to date
the great number of all presented DNA constructions have been static
(usually on purpose), and therefore, the coming of age of the mechanically
moving more complex DNA nanostructures has only recently been witnessed. That also means there are a great deal of challenges
ahead in creating dynamic DNA devices, such as their stability under
application-specific conditions. Currently, the DNA robots show considerable promise
especially
in biomedicine for rather obvious reasons, and thus prototypes of
sophisticated delivery vehicles and point-of-care diagnostic molecular
devices are coming increasingly in view. To just produce more advantageous
robots may not sound too fancy, but the long-term goal in synthetic
biology could be for example in the reprogramming of our immune systems
using active biocompatible DNA machines. This, for one, would indeed
have far-reaching outcomes. To use DNA nanorobots for realizing such
scenarios as Isaac Asimov’s Runaround are arguably intriguing;
however, we still remain miles away from the arenas often depicted
in science fiction. This is due to the fact that it is extremely hard
to maintain the autonomy of the device, while trying to increase the
complexity of its functions. The present-day autonomous devices are
still operating at the very fundamental level, but looking back into
the recent rapid development of DNA nanotechnology may give us an
impression of how swiftly the DNA robots could revolutionize synthetic
biology and simultaneously open entirely new avenues for scientific,
medical, and technological exploration. Selected Robot Types,
Their Mechanisms
of Action, Characterization Techniques, and Possible Applications Resolving, , DNA conformational changes Resolving DNA base stacking
interaction DNA hinge + interaction between the investigated species Measuring, , forces between nucleosomes
and nucleosome unwrapping Base stacking
(depends on ionic strength) Long-distance step-by-step movement Various conformational
(, i-tetraplex)
and structural transitions, DNA transient binding FRET,
fluorescence microscopy, DNA-PAINT Diagnostics, studying
pathway dynamics, payload delivery, super-resolution
imaging, pH-mapping (also ) Diagnostics,
molecular computing (Logic-gated) aptamer-protein interaction Targeted and programmable
drug delivery, computing (also ) Strand displacement/pH-sensitive DNA strands/light/temperature/mRNA TEM, FRET, fluorescence microscopy, enzyme kinetics Selective and controlled display/release of molecular cargo Strand displacement/pH-sensitive
DNA strands/azobenzene-modified
strands/aptamer-binding Nanomachines
with rapid and controlled movement Nanomachines with rapid and controlled movement Strand displacement/toeholds/restriction enzyme driven Nanoscale assembly
lines, cargo-sorting, computing Controlled DNA base stacking
+ Brownian motion Single-particle fluorescence microscopy Toward biomimicking nanomachines Interacting
dynamic robot populations Binding through hybridization/toeholds, detection of signals
such as miR Toward safe,
decision-making robotics.