Nitrogen
fixation, that is,
the reduction of N to NH, is a prokaryotic
process catalyzed by a family of enzymes called nitrogenases, the
most ecologically relevant and abundant one being the Mo-nitrogenase. The Mo-nitrogenase is a two-component metalloenzyme
consisting of a molybdenum–iron (MoFe) protein that catalyzes
N reduction and an iron (Fe) protein that acts as specific
electron donor to the MoFe protein. The
Fe protein is a homodimer of the  gene product
carrying a single [FeS] cluster between its
subunits, whereas the MoFe protein is a heterotetramer of the  and  gene products carrying two
pairs of a [FeS] cluster and a [FeSMoC-homocitrate], designated as the P-cluster and FeMo-co,
respectively. In addition to the nitrogenase
structural genes, a number of accessory nitrogen fixation () gene products are required for the maturation of the
structural components to their catalytically active forms. These include
proteins that interact in complex biosynthetic pathways for the assembly
of nitrogenase metal clusters and their insertion into target apo-proteins. Engineering N-fixation activity
could be achieved by
transferring the appropriate bacterial  genes
to the plant. However, the biochemical and genetic
complexity of nitrogenase assembly and regulation poses a major challenge.
Although the , , , and  gene products have been
shown to carry out all essential biochemical reactions in FeMo-co
biosynthesis , the exact number of  genes required for the
genetic transfer of nitrogen fixation among bacterial species depends
on the nature of both the nitrogenase source and the engineered host. To add more complexity, Nif protein stoichiometry has been shown
to be dynamic and strongly regulated. The plant cell offers several possibilities for  gene expression due to its three genomes and multiple compartments.
As Nif proteins are bacterial proteins, it can be envisioned that
plant cell compartments of prokaryotic origin (plastids and mitochondria)
would be superior for accumulation of active Nif proteins, each of
the organelles offering its pros and cons. Plastids are favorable because of the highly efficient homologous
DNA recombination and the support for prokaryotic-type transcription
and translation machineries, allowing multiple genes to be expressed
from operons. However, the extreme sensitivity
of nitrogenase to O, which destroys its metal clusters,
poses a serious obstacle, particularly in chloroplasts where O is generated during photosynthesis. This problem has been
highlighted in a recent work, in which the Fe protein from transplastomic  leaf extracts showed some  activity only when plants had been previously incubated at subambient
O levels. Therefore, mitochondria
could offer an advantage due to the respiratory high O consumption. Mitochondria also harbors a [Fe–S] cluster assembly
machinery highly similar to the NifUS system, in addition to the plentiful ATP and reducing power that is generated
by respiration. A minimum of 16 molecules
of ATP is required to reduce one molecule of N. ATP is
required for electron transfer from the NifH [FeS] cluster to the P-cluster of the NifDK component during N reduction, and possibly also for P-cluster maturation and
FeMo-co synthesis. While plastid proteins can be
expressed either via transformation of the plastid genome, or imported
post-translationally following nuclear expression, transformation
of the mitochondrial genome is more difficult. Recently, it has been shown that mitochondria of
aerobically grown
recombinant  cells expressing  and  accumulate active Fe protein. Yeast cells are convenient hosts to test eukaryotic
expression of Nif proteins as they can be grown at varied O levels, to reduce the negative effects from O on Nif
protein maturation. They are also easy to transform and maintain,
enabling larger and more complex libraries to be constructed and analyzed.
Its mitochondrial bacterial-like [Fe–S] cluster assembly machinery
is also the best understood among eukaryotes. Finally, yeast cultures can easily and economically be scaled up,
which is required to generate sufficient biomass for protein purification
and subsequent activity assays to prove Nif protein functionality.
In this regard,  will serve as an important
eukaryotic model system when learning to engineer (more important)
eukaryotic organisms, such as plants. The entire prokaryotic  gene cluster cannot
be directly transferred to yeast due to differences in the molecular
biology of gene expression. Thus, refactoring the  cluster and generation of  gene expression
parts is critical. Refactoring is an engineering
approach to clean up genetic systems. There are
many examples of characterized yeast promoter and terminator collections. However, how much the promoter or terminator contributes to final
gene expression strength, or whether there are emergent interactions
with particular combinations of parts, have not been explored. Furthermore,
models of gene expression in yeast, and eukaryotes in general, lag
behind those used to construct powerful design tools in prokaryotes. Large genetic systems in yeast have been constructed
by repeating both the promoter and terminator across transcription
units. One approach to reducing part
reuse is placing the 2A viral self-cleaving peptide between open reading
frames, enabling multicistronic expression in yeast. However, a monocistronic gene expression approach, where
expression of each gene is independent from the others, is best suited
to combinatorial design, assembly, and optimization. Thus, more yeast
gene expression parts are needed to build stable constructs of varying
expression strength. Composability and
design of Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene expression To this end, a set of over 1200 transcription
units composed of
varying promoters and terminators were individually characterized
for GFP expression in yeast (Eric M. Young, Johannes A. Roubos, D.
Benjamin Gordon, and Christopher A. Voigt.  2017,
in preparation). From this set, part combinations can be selected
to achieve varying expression levels, while preventing part reuse.
This selection can be done manually or algorithmically with Double
Dutch, to aim for a suitable stoichiometric
ratio of  protein production but vary across the
dynamic range of monocistronic gene expression strength in yeast. In this study, we aimed to simultaneously optimize protein expression
and mitochondria targeting for a 9-gene  cluster
() from the model diazotroph  in the yeast . was chosen as source
of  sequences due to its strictly aerobic life
style, in which nitrogenase is protected from O damage
mainly by maintaining high respiratory rates. To refactor the 9  genes, each gene was codon optimized for
expression in  With expression ratio
intuition derived from native expression of the cluster in , and little  knowledge of appropriate absolute expression levels
or mitochondrial tags, combinatorial design and assembly was chosen
in order to optimize the cluster in yeast. Gene products were targeted to the yeast mitochondria using three
different mitochondria leading sequences. These two variables were
simultaneously optimized in the combinatorial design. In total, 96
strains of  were generated with  genes integrated into the yeast genome. Expression
and mitochondria targeting of properly processed Nif proteins was
confirmed at the protein level and NifDK tetramer formation, an essential
step of nitrogenase assembly, was experimentally proven. However,
the purified NifDK protein was inactive, and did not appear competent
for activation by FeMo-co insertion. To our knowledge, this is the
first attempt undertaken in a eukaryotic cell to express sufficient  genes necessary for a functional nitrogenase. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_002.xlsx Ninety-six
strains of  were constructed with genomic
integration
of yeast-optimized coding sequences for mitochondria-targeted versions
of the  genes. As stoichiometric
levels of Nif proteins are essential for maturation and functionality, 29 different promoters were combined with 18 distinct terminators
to adjust the expression level of each  gene.
Similarly, combinations of three distinct mitochondria targeting signals
were used to ascertain efficient Nif protein targeting and leader
sequence processing upon mitochondria import (Supporting Information ). In this study, DNA sequences
encoding a duplicated mitochondria targeting signal for the  Mn-superoxide dismutase (here referred to as SOD2), as well as the leader sequences
for subunit 9 of the  F-ATPase (SU9) or the  INDH1 (INDH) were fused
to the 5′ end of  genes. SOD2 and SU9 have
been already shown to successfully deliver Nif proteins to yeast mitochondrial
matrix. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_002.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_003.xlsx Two different combinatorial
libraries of nitrogen fixation clusters were constructed. The purpose
of the first was to determine the appropriate mitochondrial tags for , , , , and . The purpose of the second
was to vary expression, testing previous assumptions of gene expression
ratios. To achieve the desired expression for each set, promoter and
terminator combinations previously characterized by GFP expression
were used. The sequences for each part are listed in  and the expression strength of each combination is
listed in . The mitochondrial
tag combinatorial library consisted of 24 clusters
(strains DSN1–24), hereafter referred to as the “designed
set”. The designed set varied mitochondrial tags within four
subsets of expression strength. Within each subset, the mitochondrial
tags are varied in six combinations (, ,  tagged with SU9 or INDH combined
with  and  tagged with SU9,
SOD2, or INDH, all others tagged with SU9). Based on previous work
with the  cluster, all genes were targeted to be expressed at a constant ratio.
Relative to , the expression of  was targeted to be a factor of 10 higher,  and  6 times higher,  and  2 times higher, and all others equal to . Expression
was set “very high”, “high”, “medium”,
and “low” for each subset. The expression strength of
each selected promoter and terminator combination with GFP is depicted
in a. The expression combinatorial library
consisted of 72 clusters (strains
DOE1–72), hereafter referred to as the “factorial set.”
The factorial set fixed mitochondrial tags (, ,  tagged with INDH,  and  tagged with SOD2, all others tagged with
SU9) and assigned each gene one of two expression levels according
to a factorial design output by the software package JMP. High and
low expressing combinations of promoters and terminators were chosen.
The expression strength of these combinations, tested with GFP, is
depicted in b. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_003.xlsx Measured strengths
of transcription units. The geometric mean and
standard deviation of biological replicates is plotted in arbitrary
units for each promoter-terminator combination. (a) The four expression
levels for each of the nine genes in the designed set. (b) The two
expression levels for each of the nine genes in the factorial set.
The targeted ratios, and how close each promoter-terminator pair approximates
that ratio with GFP is shown in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_004.xlsx A hierarchical assembly strategy based
on TypeIIS cloning was used to construct all clusters. A simplified version of this strategy is depicted in a, with a more detailed version
described in the  section and . Clusters were built up
from a set of tagged genes, an antibiotic resistance gene for selection,
and transcriptional parts. The parts were combined into transcription
units via TypeIIS assembly. The transcription unit destination vectors
defined gene order and allowed assembly into three subclusters, SEN,
DSelK, and HMBU. These subclusters contained homologous sequences
to one another and to the  genome, and
could therefore be assembled into full clusters by homologous recombination
during transformation. All assembly steps for the designed set are
depicted by the assembly tree in b, while the assembly tree for the factorial
set is shown in c. An example of final  gene organization is
shown from DSN14 (d). Each assembly step is also tabulated in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_005.xlsx Following gene assembly, a subset of clusters was selected
for
genomic DNA isolation and verification of cluster assembly by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). A further subset was confirmed by Sanger sequencing
of the PCR products (). All clusters
tested were correct, with the exception of two clusters within the
designed set that were determined to have a newly discovered bacterial
transposon inserted into  during the cloning
process. This transposon was observed to only affect those transcription
units which contained  expressed with P4 and
T7, therefore the two clusters containing this transcription unit
(DSN1 and DSN4) were omitted from further analysis yielding a final
number of 94 yeast clones. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf Hierarchal assembly. (a) Assembly strategy for transcription
units,
subclusters and full clusters inserted by homologous recombination
in the genome of . The standard KanMX
selection cassette, abbreviated as “Sel,” was used to
select for G418 resistance as a result of successful integration.
(b and c) Assembly tree of the designed (b) and factorial (c) set,
where each line represents an assembly step (see  section and  for further details). Note the variants of the tags on each gene
in the designed set (b), while the tags are unchanged for each gene
in the factorial set (c). (d) Scheme of  gene
organization in DSN14. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_005.xlsx To
confirm protein expression,
total protein extracts were prepared from aerobically grown yeast
cultures and analyzed by immunoblot using antibodies specifically
targeting each Nif protein. Levels of Nif proteins in each strain
were given a score of 0 if the protein was undetected, 1 if detected,
and 2 if detected and the band was more pronounced, qualitatively
indicating more protein being present (). Using expression and protein migration data from these 94 strains,
efficiency of mitochondria targeting signals and promoters for each
Nif protein could be assessed (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_006.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_007.xlsx The three mitochondrial targeting signals tested
here successfully
expressed Nif proteins. One striking exception was INDH, which when
fused to  did not produce detectable NifH protein
levels in any of the eight clones tested, independent of the promoter
being used. In contrast, with the use of SU9 or SOD2 tags NifH accumulated
in most constructs (a–c and ). Although
sufficient separation of NifE and NifN was not possible by SDS-PAGE,
as NifE and NifN in each clone were expressed with the same mitochondria
targeting signal, the NifEN immunoblot result could be included in
the mitochondria signal analysis. However, as different promoters
were used for  and , they
were excluded from the promoter analysis (Supporting Information  and ). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_007.xlsx Evaluation of promoter sequences that successfully produced
detectable
Nif proteins lead to the following general conclusions (d–j and ). Promoter 1 (from actin gene) rendered
good expression levels, as demonstrated by results obtained using
NifD, NifH, and NifS antibodies. In other cases, expression of proteins
using the same promoter sequence gave strikingly different results
depending on the gene. One example is promoter 24 (from the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase gene) that resulted in NifU protein in all 35 strains
used, but only in half of the six clones where it was used for NifB
expression. Another example is promoter 17 (from telomerase inhibitor
gene) that generated detectable expression of NifH in nearly 90% (31/35)
of the strains, but only NifB protein in half (3/6) of the strains
and no NifS protein (0/4). These four strains lacking NifS expression
had SU9 as the mitochondria tag, suggesting that promoter 17 might
fail when combined with this N-terminal sequence. However, in the
case of NifB, the three positive clones expressing detectable protein
all contained SU9, indicating that the combination of promoter and
leading sequence (P17+SU9) per se was likely not the reason for nondetectable
NifS. In addition, SU9 sequence fused to  showed
accumulation of NifS protein in five out of six strains when controlled
by promoter 6 (from elongation factor 2 gene), further demonstrating
that promoter 17 + SU9 was not the sole reason for the failure of
these strains to accumulate NifS. Analysis of promoters/terminators and mitochondria targeting
signals.
Efficiency of each mitochondria targeting signal (a–c) and
promoter (d–j) in generating detectable Nif proteins. As no
NifH protein was detected when tagged with INDH (a–c), INDH-NifH
was excluded in the promoter analysis (d–j). Solid bars indicate
% positive clones as detected by Western blotting using antibodies
targeting Nif proteins (a–j, left axis). Striped bars indicate
observed fluorescence when GFP was expressed by corresponding transcription
unit, with the geometric mean and standard deviation of biological
replicates plotted in arbitrary units for each promoter–terminator
combination (d–j, right axis, see also ). Data in (d–j) is ordered according
to GFP fluorescence levels. bdl, below detection limit. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_008.xlsx http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf To analyze the effect of gene tag
and expression level on detection of the protein in the immunoblot,
least-squares regression was performed using the statsmodels Python
library. Bands corresponding to Nif proteins in individual immunoblots
were scored by no detection (0), detection (1), and strong detection
(2). Clusters were then scored by summing the immunoblot scores for
each protein. Thus, a cluster could have a maximum score of 18 (9
genes, each with a maximum score of 2) and a minimum score of 0. Regression
analysis of cluster score against all factors within the cluster was
performed. The models used for regression, the associated  values, and coefficients for selected fit
equations are listed in . The python
script used to perform all regression analysis is provided in the . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_008.xlsx In general, transcription
unit strength and mitochondrial tags were not predictive of detection
by immunoblotting at the cluster level ( = 0.59 for the designed set and  =
0.50 for the factorial set). This implies that other factors, such
as misassembly, mutation, and antibody sensitivity determine how many
genes in a cluster were detected. Since protein level rather than
transcription was assessed, we cannot eliminate the possibility of
instability of the mRNA transcripts or the nascent proteins, as there
appears to be one or more truncation products of Nif proteins (discussed
below). The fit equation for the designed set () shows that the SU9 tag, the expression strength,
and the interaction terms between the SU9 tag and the expression strength
all have the largest positive coefficients, indicating that those
factors are positively correlated with detection by immunoblotting. Ordinary least-squares regressions were also performed at the individual
gene, not cluster level. Variability in the quality of fit was observed.
NifS detection was uncorrelated to its expression strength ( ∼ 0.16 in the factorial set and ∼0.08
in the designed set), while NifM, NifB, and NifU also showed poor
fits ( values between 0.3 and 0.6 in
both sets). However, NifD detection better correlated with its expression
strength ( = 0.77 in the factorial set
and 0.71 in the designed set). NifH detection was uncorrelated with
expression in the factorial set ( =
0.14), but better correlated in the designed set, where the mitochondrial
tag was varied ( = 0.65). The INDH tag
was used for NifH in the designed set, which did not produce detectable
protein. For NifH in the designed set, NifH detection was negatively
correlated with the INDH tag (coefficient = −0.69), and positively
correlated with both SOD2 and SU9 tags (coefficients of 0.81 and 0.56,
respectively). The cluster with detectable expression of all nine
Nif proteins by Western blotting was the designed set cluster DSN14
( and ). This cluster also showed strong immunoblot
detection of seven of the nine genes, giving a cluster score of 16
of a possible 18. This cluster contains all genes tagged with SU9
and with expression set at the high level (d). This is in agreement with the conclusions
of the regression analysis. Nif protein expression in 20 selected yeast
clones. Immunoblot
analysis of 20 transformed yeast clones, showing expression and migration
of NifDK, NifH, NifU, NifS, NifB, NifM, and NifEN proteins, as well
as tubulin (loading control). Theoretical masses of corresponding  Nif proteins are indicated. Wild-type (WT)
yeast clone is included as control of Nif antibodies specificity.
Red squares highlight migration at the location of corresponding  proteins. On the basis of the initial
immunoblot-based screening, the 20 most promising strains were selected
for further analysis. These strains were grown again and independently
analyzed to verify protein expression levels (). To ensure that Nif proteins were properly
translated and processed, their migration on SDS-PAGE gels were compared
to the migration of corresponding protein from  total protein extracts, or purified  Nif proteins. Difference in migration
could indicate faulty translation start, improper processing of mitochondria
targeting sequences or Nif protein instability/protein degradation.
In this regard, a prominent and faster-migrating polypeptide around
50 kDa was recognized by the NifDK antibodies in many yeast strains,
in addition to the expected NifDK double band. This could indicate
that NifD and/or NifK are prone to degradation when expressed in a
eukaryotic host. As NifD and NifK forms a tetramer consisting of two
NifD and NifK subunits, insertion of this aberrant variant into NifDK
could prevent NifDK functionality. Another possibility is that this
variant appears when NifDK is not properly assembled, and that the
putative degradation product is indicative of failing NifDK maturation. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf To understand the origin of the faster migrating polypeptide, purified  NifDK protein was separated by SDS-PAGE and
immunoblotted using antibodies raised specifically against NifD or
NifK (). The result showed slower
NifD migration, although the theoretical size of NifD is several kDa
below that of NifK (55.3 and 59.4 kDa, respectively). In this regard,
the presence of the 50 kDa band in the yeast protein extracts coincided
with the upper and slower migrating NifD (or NifD together with NifK),
compared to clones that only showed NifK expression, confirming an
NifD origin of the 50 kDa band (). This was further supported using NifD and NifK specific immunoblots
of yeast protein extracts (),
in which the NifD antibodies detected a band around 50 kDa. Interestingly,
expression of mitochondrial targeted N-terminally His-tagged NifD
(SU9-His-NifD) with NifK (SU9-NifK) from plasmids using galactose
induced promoters showed that full-length NifD was recognized by the
His-tag antibody, while the 50 kDa form was not, strongly suggesting
that the 50 kDa variant is originating from N-terminal processing
of NifD (). A similar faster
migrating NifD isoform is observed in  cells upon deletion of the  gene (unpublished
data), indicating that indeed this NifD form is produced upon incomplete
NifDK assembly. Targeting and Processing of Mitochondrial
Signals As
most Nif proteins form homodimers or complexes with other Nif proteins,
correct N- and C-termini can be critical for Nif functionality. Our
analysis showed that SU9 mostly rendered polypeptides of correct size,
while, for example, SOD2 often resulted in two distinct bands, where
the slower migrating form likely corresponded to non (or partly)-processed
SOD2 fusion proteins (e.g., compare migration of NifH in DSN14 and
DSN17 (SU9-NifH) with DSN16, DOE7, and DOE11 (SOD2-NifH) in ). In other cases,
SOD2 generated two polypeptides that migrated slower than the expected  protein, and as seen using SU9 signal (e.g.,
compare DSN17 (SU9-NifM) with DOE3 (SOD2-NifM) in ). While INDH failed to generate
detectable protein for most NifH and NifM clones c, it was efficient in generating
NifB of apparently correct size (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf Targeting of Nif proteins using
the three leader sequences was confirmed by isolating enriched mitochondrial
fractions from selected strains (). As expected, mitochondria targeting was achieved using all three
mitochondria targeting signals (SU9, SOD2, and INDH). Importantly,
the lower NifD isoform was enriched in mitochondria isolations, indicating
its appearance was not due to faulty translation initiation, but that
processing/degradation appears to take place in the organelle itself.
In line with results from the  mutant
mentioned above, this finding could indicate that excessive NifD processing
is initiated by inefficient or absent NifDK tetramer formation. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf Maturation of NifDK tetramer
depends on the action of the  gene products.
To test NifDK complex formation, protein extract prepared under anoxic
conditions were obtained from yeast strain DSN14. DSN14 was selected
due to good expression and accurate mitochondrial targeting and processing
of NifU, NifS, NifH, NifM, NifD, and NifK ( and ). Two individual strategies were used to test NifDK assembly. First,
proteins were separated on anoxic native gels, where eventual NifDK
complexes would migrate intact. Immunoblot analysis showed that polypeptides
cross-reacting with NifDK, as well as the NifD and NifK specific antibodies,
comigrated (a). As NifDK is known to migrate differently depending on the clusters
present (e.g., FeMo-co present at holo-NifDK increases its
migration compared to the P-cluster containing, but FeMo-co-less,
apo-NifDK), the purified  holo- and
apo-NifDK proteins were included as comparisons. Yeast NifD and NifK
migrated closely, but not identical to any of the two  NifDK forms, indicating that some conformational or biochemical
discrepancies exist between the proteins expressed in the two hosts
and suggesting that some of the critical components of NifDK could
be missing in the yeast expressed protein. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf As a second and independent approach to verify NifD and NifK
direct
interaction, an inducible yeast expression vector was created where
His-tagged NifD and nontagged NifK, both with SU9 leader sequences,
were expressed using the galactose inducible galactokinase 1 and 10
(GAL1 and GAL10) promoters. Anaerobic Co affinity chromatography
of protein extracts from DSN14 cells, or wild-type yeast cells complemented
with galactose inducible expression of NifUSHM, transformed with the His-NifD/NifK expression vector and
grown with galactose as the carbon source, showed that NifK copurified
with His-NifD and further suggested that NifDK complex is indeed formed
(b and ). In addition, the faster migrating
N-terminally processed isoform of NifD (lacking His-tag) was copurified
with full-length His-NifD, suggesting that tetramers of NifDK, and
not only eventual NifDK dimers, are formed. Mitochondria targeting
of Nif proteins in DSN14. Immunoblot analysis
of total extracts (TE) and mitochondria isolations (Mito) from wild-type
yeast (WT) and DSN14, where Nif proteins are expressed and targeted
to mitochondria using SU9 leader sequences. Analysis using antibodies
recognizing cytoplasmic (tubulin) and mitochondria (HSP60) control
proteins is included. s.e. and l.e., short and long exposure. NifDK tetramer formation. (a) Ponceau and immunoblot
analysis of
yeast DSN14 protein extract, as well as purified  holo- and apo-NifDK proteins (red and blue squares, respectively),
separated on anoxic native gels. Polypeptides cross-reacting with
NifD, NifK, and NifDK antibodies are highlighted with black arrows.
(b) Co-purification of NifK with His-tagged NifD. NifK (green arrows)
comigrates with His-tagged NifD (yellow arrows), indication complex
formation of NifK and His-NifD polypeptides. In addition, the faster
migrating species, presumably N-terminally processed form of NifD
(red arrows) is copurifying with His-tagged NifD, suggesting that
NifDK tetramer is formed. (c) Ponceau and immunoblot analysis of yeast
DSN14 protein extract, as well as purified  holo- and apo-NifDK proteins (red and blue squares, respectively),
separated on anoxic native gels in the absence or presence of NafY.
Co-migration of NafY protein with apo-NifDK is indicated by green
arrow, as compared to unbound NafY (brown arrow). Faster migrating,
presumably FeMo-co bound NafY, is indicated by gray arrow. A population
of NafY protein comigrating with yeast NifDK is indicated by yellow
arrow. s.e., short exposure. NafY protein is shown to
bind both the iron–molybdenum cofactor (FeMo-co) and to FeMo-co-less
apo-NifDK. Interaction between NafY and
apo-NifDK can be assessed using anoxic gel electrophoresis, where
NifDK-bound NafY shows retarded migration with respect to free NafY. NafY incubated with pure  apo-NifDK comigrated with apo-NifDK as expected (c), whereas binding to holo-NifDK
was significantly weaker. The majority of NafY, when incubated with
holo-NifDK, showed faster migration compared to NafY alone. This is
likely to result from binding of NafY to holo-NifDK-derived FeMo-co, as FeMo--bound NafY has been shown to migrate
faster on anoxic native gels. While most
of NafY incubated with anaerobic DSN14 cell-free extract migrated
as in the control sample, a small population of NafY polypeptides
showed retarded migration at the site of yeast NifDK. This result
suggests some affinity of NafY for yeast NifDK, supporting that NifDK
in DSN14 is partly matured. However, no difference in yeast NifDK
migration was observed upon incubation with purified FeMo-co, and
no NifDK activity (assessed by acetylene reduction)
was measured following FeMo-co insertion (data not shown), indicating
that the yeast expressed protein was not readily activated by FeMo-co.
Therefore, to what extent the formed NifDK tetramer is matured in  and what factor(s) are missing remains to
be investigated. We generated and analyzed
94 strains of  with nine  genes () integrated
into the yeast
genome. Gene products were targeted to the yeast mitochondria using
three different mitochondria leading sequences, and their expression
was regulated using 29 distinct promoter and 18 terminator sequences
aiming for a suitable stoichiometric ratio of Nif protein production.
Successful expression, targeting and mitochondrial signal trimming
was confirmed in aerobically grown yeast cultures by immunoblotting
with Nif targeting antibodies. This work elucidated SU9 as a promising
mitochondrial tag to use in future  cluster assemblies,
and that efficient Nif protein expression in eukaryotic cell is possible. Accurate NifDK protein assembly is of absolute necessity for future
attempts to generate eukaryotic organisms (e.g., plants) able to fix
atmospheric dinitrogen, and to test the possibilities of eukaryotic
hosts to perform this activity is required. We therefore determined
efficiency of Nif protein production and maturation in yeast protein
extracts, with a special emphasis on NifDK. Apo-NifDK is defined as
a P-cluster containing, but FeMo-co-less, NifDK protein consisting
of two NifD and NifK subunits, respectively. Formation of apo-NifDK
depends on the activity of NifSUHM in addition to NifDK, where NifS
and NifU are involved in synthesis and delivery of [Fe–S] clusters
to NifDK (and NifH), and NifH is necessary for the maturation of the
P-cluster in apo-NifDK. NifM is important
for maturation of active NifH, although its mechanism is not
completely clarified. Our results show that NifS, NifU, NifH,
NifM, NifE, NifN, and NifB
proteins could be efficiently expressed and accumulated at mitochondria.
We could also detect formation of NifDK protein, indicating that the
two subunits are capable of forming a complex upon import into yeast
mitochondria. When coexpressed with NifHUSM, yeast NifDK showed some
affinity toward NafY, indicative of the presence of P-clusters (or
P-cluster precursor). However, formed apo-NifDK was not readily activated
by FeMo-co , suggesting that coexpression
of additional  genes might be necessary for efficient
NifDK formation to take place in the eukaryotic cell. Proper  gene expression dynamics could also be an important
factor for NifDK formation.  cells entering
nitrogen-fixing conditions show a peak of  and  expression preceding  expression,
probably to ensure the supply of Fe–S clusters to newly formed
nitrogenase components. It is possible
that engineering nitrogenase in nondiazotrophs would require the incorporation
of promoters adding temporal control to  gene
expression. Further work will be needed
to elucidate the biochemical properties of this protein and to understand
the level of NifDK maturation achieved. This study highlights
the strength of yeast as platform to rapidly
design, test, and evaluate expression and functionality of heterologous
Nif proteins targeted to mitochondria, compared to using plants. This
platform will be important in further attempts to express even more
complex combinations of Nif proteins, which will likely be needed
to generate a functional nitrogenase in a eukaryotic organism. Strains,
Media, and Molecular Biology for Generation of Yeast
Strains CEN.PK113–7D
(MATa URA3 TRP1 LEU2 HIS3 MAL2–8c SUC2) was the host strain
for all constructs and grown at 30 °C in YPD media with 200 μg/mL
G418 added when appropriate. Yeast transformations were carried out
according to the lithium acetate method. Chemically competent  DH5α (New England
Biolabs) was used as a cloning strain and grown at 37 °C in LB
media with appropriate antibiotics (100 μg/mL carbenicillin,
25 μg/mL chloramphenicol, or 25 μg/mL kanamycin) and inducer
(100 μL of 40 mg/mL X-gal) was spread and dried on plates for
blue/white screening when appropriate. All Sanger sequencing
reactions were performed by Quintara Biosciences. Plasmid isolations
were performed with Qiagen Qiaprep kits where purity and yield were
desired or Zymo Zyppy kits when speed was desired. Genomic DNA was
isolated using the Promega Wizard Genomic DNA Preparation Kit. Gel
electrophoresis was carried out using an Agilent bioanalyzer according
to manufacturer instructions. BsaI was purchased from New England
Biolabs. BbsI was purchased
from Thermo Fisher Scientific. High concentration T4 DNA ligase was
purchased from Promega. Assembly reactions were performed as previously
described. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_002.xlsx All PCR primers were
ordered from IDT (). All PCRs used Q5 2X Master Mix from New England Biolabs.
PCRs were performed on BioRad 1000 series thermocyclers. Synthetic
double stranded DNA, when required, was ordered as a gBlock from IDT. Cluster Genes and Localization Tags http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_002.xlsx Yeast-optimized
versions of , , , , , , , and  (GenScript) were selected to form a minimal nitrogen fixation cluster
in . An N-terminal His tag was placed
in NifD. These genes were directed to the mitochondrial matrix by
using three different N-terminal peptide tags: SOD2, SU9, and INDH. While the peptide sequence was maintained, the
DNA sequence of the mitochondrial tags was varied to minimize risk
of recombination in yeast. Furthermore, the mitochondrial tag for
only a subset of the genes was varied. The tags for  and  were SOD2, SU9, and INDH. The tags for , , and  were
SU9 and INDH. All other genes used SU9 only. Gene and tag sequences
are listed in . Composability and design of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
gene expression http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_002.xlsx Promoters and terminators
were selected from a set of characterized yeast gene expression parts
(Eric M. Young, Johannes A. Roubos, D. Benjamin Gordon, and Christopher
A. Voigt.  2017, in preparation). Promoter and terminator
sequences are listed in . Yeast
promoter and terminator sequences were cleaned of any BsaI or BbsI
sites by point mutation, and then placed into level 0 TypeIIS assembly
vectors for versatile cloning into any transcription unit. To
characterize expression strength, promoters and terminators were cloned
into respective characterization vectors. The promoter characterization
vector, pEMY01AB-PRO, contains homologous sequences to the yeast genome
upstream of the promoter cloning site, and a fragment of a yeast codon-optimized
GFP downstream. The terminator characterization vector, pEMY01C-TER,
contains an overlapping fragment of GFP upstream of the terminator
cloning site, and homology to the  TEF1 promoter used to drive expression of the G418 resistance gene.
Using these characterization vectors, any promoter could be combined
with any terminator due to the homology occurring in the shared GFP
protein. A combination can be integrated into the yeast genome and
selected by G418 resistance. Using homologous recombination
and automated liquid handling (LabCyte
Echo), thousands of unique transcription units could be created from
these characterization vectors. To measure GFP expression strength,
yeast strains with unique integrated promoter–terminator pairs
were cultured for 24 h in an Infors Multitron shaker at 30 °C
with 500 μL of SC+G418 media in a deep-well microtiter plate.
Yeast cultures were then diluted 1:10 in sterile water and GFP expression
was quantified by flow cytometry using a MACSQuant VYB cytometer.
Flow cytometry data was analyzed by taking the geometric mean and
standard deviation of 20 000 events for each promoter–terminator
combination (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf Hierarchical assembly allows for the
combination of any gene with any transcriptional part, yet requires
part standardization to eliminate restriction sites used in the assembly
process. Yeast promoters and terminators were previously standardized
and are maintained in Level 0 vectors with carbenicillin resistance
and BsaI sites for Level 1 transcription unit assembly (). Promoters have the scars GTGC and
AATG. Terminators have the scars TAAA and CCTC. Upon BsaI digestion,
these scars form sticky ends that are then ligated together with the
desired open reading frame. However, the yeast-optimized  genes were not in Level 0 vectors, many did not have the necessary
mitochondrial tags, and most needed to be modified to eliminate BsaI
and BbsI sites. First, a  gene was amplified from
the parent vector with PCR using primers that added flanking BbsI
sites. If a base was to be edited, an upstream fragment and a downstream
fragment were amplified, with the modified bases forming a TypeIIS
scar sequence and flanked by BbsI sites. Mitochondrial tags were ordered
as gBlocks from IDT, also with flanking BbsI sites. This allowed,
in one assembly reaction, removal of all TypeIIS sites, addition of
mitochondrial tags, and placement in a Level 0 vector for further
assembly (). Each Level
0 vector was picked using blue/white screening and later confirmed
by Sanger sequencing of the inserted gene. All  genes assembled appropriately into Level 0 vectors, with the exception
of , which was toxic to  in the Level 0 vector, even when a low-copy p15a replicon was used.  was therefore ordered as a gBlock from IDT with flanking
BsaI sites to be used in Level 1 assembly. Level 0 vectors containing  inhibited the growth of , but
were stable. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_004.xlsx Level 1 transcription units were assembled by digesting
Level 0
vectors with BsaI and ligating them into a chloramphenicol-resistant
Level 1 destination vector ().
Level 1 destination vectors are designed to determine gene order within
the cluster, and are designed to have yeast terminator-like elements
as a spacer between transcription units (see ). All desired Level 1 transcription units could be constructed,
although  was constructed using a p15a replicon
rather than ColE1. All Level 1 transcription units are described in . Each Level 1 assembly was picked using
red/white screening and later confirmed by Sanger sequencing. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_004.xlsx Level 2 subclusters were assembled by digesting Level 1 vectors
with BbsI and ligating into a kanamycin-resistant Level 2 destination
vector (). The left subcluster
contains , , and . The center subcluster contains , the KanMX yeast selection marker, and . The
right subcluster contains , , , and . All Level 2 subclusters
are described in . These subclusters
were constructed with the aid of the Labcyte Echo acoustic liquid
handling device. Each Level 2 subcluster was picked using blue/white
screening and later confirmed by BsaI digestion and gel electrophoresis.
A subset was later confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Two subclusters
containing  failed at this stage because the
observed fragment size was larger than expected on the gel. This was
later determined to be due to transposon insertion. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_004.xlsx Subclusters
were cut with BsaI to generate linear fragments for
yeast transformation. By adding homology fragments with identity to
the yeast chromosome XV, subclusters recombined and integrated into
this chromosome. This is depicted in . Subclusters were combined with the aid of the Labcyte Echo acoustic
liquid handling device. Genome integrations were selected by growth
in the presence of G418. A subset of clusters were selected for genomic
DNA isolation and verification of insertion by PCR. A further subset
was confirmed by Sanger sequencing of the PCR products. All Level
1 vectors are diagrammed in  and
all yeast-integrated clusters are described in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00371/suppl_file/sb6b00371_si_002.xlsx As
an additional safeguard
against read-through, terminator-like elements were placed in between
each transcription unit in this work. By combining known efficiency,
spacing, and polyadenylation elements in forward and reverse orientation,
a double terminator-like spacer sequence was generated using a python
script (). Varying elements and
adding random bases between elements diversified the spacer sequence
to limit recombination. Spacer sequences are listed in . Generation of Plasmids
for Galactose-Induced Expression DH5α was used for storage and amplification
of yeast expression vectors, and grown at 37 °C in Luria–Bertani
medium supplemented with appropriate antibiotics. Yeast optimized
coding sequences for SU9-His-NifD (containing an N-terminal 8xHis-tag)
and SU9-NifK were cloned into pESC-LEU (Agilent Technologies), generating
pRHB887 (GAL1p::mlsSU9-his8-nifD and GAL10p::mlsSU9-nifK). Plasmid
pRHB887 was transformed into  W303–1a
(MATa leu2–3, 112 trp1–1 can1–100 ura3–1
ade2–1 his3–11,15) strain GF11 (GAL1p::mlsSOD2-his7-nifH and GAL10p::mlsSOD2-flag-nifM in pESC-His,
and GAL1p::mlsSu9-nifU and GAL10p::mlsSu9-nifS in pESC-URA), generating
SB01Y. To make the vector compatible with transformation into prototrophic  CEN.PK113–7D clone DSN14, the hygromycin
marker hphMX4 was amplified from pMJ696 (identical to pAG32) by PCR to replace the LEU2 auxotrophic marker
of pRHB887, generating pN2SB16. pN2SB16 was transformed into DSN14,
generating SB05Y. Growth of Yeast Clones and Preparation of
Nif Total and Mitochondria
Enriched Protein Extracts CEN.PK113–7D
(and derivative strains constructed herein) and  CEN.PK2–1C (MATa ura3–52 trp1–289 leu2–3,112
his3Δ1 MAL2–8c SUC2) (used to prepare wild-type protein
extracts) were grown in flasks at 28 °C and 200 rpm in synthetic
drop-out (SD) medium (1.9 g/L yeast nitrogen base, 5 g/L ammonium
sulfate, 20 g/L glucose, and Kaiser drop-out mixture (SC -His -Leu -Trp -Ura, FORMEDIUM) supplemented with 40
mg/L tryptophan, 40 mg/L histidine, 20 mg/L uracil, 60 mg/L leucine,
and 20 mg/L adenine). Total yeast protein extracts for screening of
Nif protein expression levels were performed using mild alkali treatment. Similar loading on SDS-PAGE gels was obtained
by preparing samples according to optical density, and was confirmed
using Ponceau staining of nitrocellulose membranes and immunoblotting
with tubulin antibodies. Mitochondria-enriched isolations were prepared
following Diekert et al., and purity
verified using tubulin (cytoplasmic) and HSP60 (mitochondria) targeting
antibodies. Cultures for NifDK purification were grown following
a previously reported procedure, in a
4-L fermenter (BIOSTAT) containing rich medium (1% yeast extract,
0.75% bactopeptone, 0.5% bactotryptone, 0.5% ammonium sulfate, 2.5%
galactose), supplemented with 25 mg/L ammonium iron(III) citrate,
1.25 mM magnesium sulfate, 1.5 mM calcium chloride, and trace element
solution. pH was maintained around 5
using 0.8 M ammonium hydroxide. Plasmid for the inducible expression
of NifK and His-tagged NifD in transformed DSN14 (SB05Y) was maintained
by supplementing the inoculum growth media with 300 μg/L hygromycin.
Plasmids for the inducible expression of Nif proteins in SB01Y was
maintained by growing the inoculum in SD medium using their auxotrophic
requirements. Antibodies and Immunoblotting
Quantification Antibodies
used for immunoblotting and quantification in this study were as follows:
polyclonal antibodies detecting NifDK, NifEN, NifH, NifM, NifU, NifS,
NifB, and NafY were raised against purified preparations of the corresponding  proteins. Quantification of NifD and NifK
polypeptides using NifDK antibodies was accomplished due the apparent
difference in migration. NifEN was quantified collectively, as the
NifEN polypeptides could not be sufficiently separated by SDS-PAGE.
For immunoblotting scoring, both mature Nif protein with processed
mitochondria leader sequence and nonprocessed protein was included. NifD and NifK specific antibodies were a kind gift from Dr. Yuichi
Fujita, Nagoya University. Monoclonal antibodies against tubulin (3H3087,
sc-69971, Santa Cruz), His-tag (H-3, sc-8036, Santa Cruz), and HSP60
(LK2, NBP2–34671H, Novus Biologicals) are commercially available. Preparation of Anaerobic Yeast Cell-Free Extracts cells were resuspended in anaerobic lysis
buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 400 mM NaCl, 20% glycerol) supplemented
with 2 mM dithionite (DTH), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF),
2.5 μM pepstatin A, 1 μg/mL leupeptin, 2 μg/mL aprotinin,
2.5 μM E-64, and 1.5 μM phosphoramidon disodium salt.
The cells were lysed in an Emulsiflex-C5 homogenizer (Avestin Inc.)
at 25 000 lb per square inch. Cell-free extracts were obtained
after removing debris by centrifugation at 50 000 for 1 h at 4 °C under anaerobic conditions, followed by 0.2
μM filtration (Nalgene Rapid-Flow, Thermo Scientific). Anoxic
Native Gels and NafY Binding Separation of NifDK
by discontinuous anaerobic native PAGE was performed inside a glovebox
(MBraun). All buffers were previously made anaerobic by sparging with
N. Anaerobic yeast cell-free extracts were mixed with
2× loading buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9, 30% glycerol) and
separated using a water-cooled SE 600 RUBY vertical unit (GE Healthcare)
in 4.5 L running buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, 192 mM glycine) supplemented
with 2 mM DTH. For NafY binding, 6 μg of NafY was added to 400
μg of anoxic yeast protein extract (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0,
20% glycerol, supplemented with 2 mM DTH, 1 mM PMSF, 1 μg/mL
leupeptin, and 5 μg/mL DNase I), or 30 μg pure  NifDK, at a final volume of 75 μL and
incubated at room temperature for 60 min. For FeMo-co insertion, 5
μL of pure FeMo-co (at 294 μM, based on iron concentration)
was added to 185 μL of yeast extract in a final volume of 400
μL and incubated at 30 °C for 60 min. Before electrophoresis,
2× loading buffer was added to all samples. Gels of 18 cm (7%
resolving gel, pH 8.6 and 4% stacking gel, pH 7.0) were made anaerobic
at constant current, 12.5 mA per gel for 2 h. Protein samples (20
μL) were separated at constant current, 25 mA per gel, for 6
h at 4 °C. Following gel electrophoresis, proteins were transferred
to nitrocellulose membranes and analyzed by immunoblotting following
standard methods. NifDK activity of
protein purified from  cells was analyzed
by acetylene reduction
assay following incubation of pure FeMo-co, and after addition of excess of purified  NifH protein and ATP-regenerating mixture (1.23 mM ATP, 18 mM phosphocreatine,
2.2 mM MgCl, 3 mM DTH and 40 mg of creatine phosphokinase). Positive control reactions were carried out
with pure preparations of  NifH and
NifDK (apo and holo forms) proteins. His-tagged NifD was purified by
Co affinity chromatography under anaerobic conditions
(<0.1 ppm of O) using an AKTA Prime FPLC system (GE
Healthcare) inside a glovebox (MBraun). All buffers were previously
made anaerobic by sparging with N. Anaerobic cell-free
extract from 50 to 100 g of cell paste was loaded at 2 mL/min onto
a column filled with 5 mL of IMAC resin (GE Healthcare) equilibrated
with buffer A (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 400 mM NaCl, 20% glycerol) and
washed with three successive washes of Buffer B supplemented with
0, 10, and 30 mM imidazole, respectively. Bound protein was eluted
with buffer A containing 250 mM imidazole. The eluted fractions were
concentrated using a 100 kDa cutoff pore (Amicon Ultra-15, Millipore)
and then desalted in PD10 columns equilibrated with buffer A. Purified
NifDK was frozen and stored in liquid N..