Centromeres define the site
of the assembly of the kinetochore, a multiprotein complex that directs
chromosome segregation during cell division. In humans, endogenous centromeres typically form on chromosome-specific
higher-order alphoid DNA arrays, which are composed of 171 bp alpha-satellite
monomer units that are tandemly arranged in a directional head-to-tail
fashion. Independent of this sequence
preference, specific deposition of the centromere-specific histone
H3 variant CENP-A forms the basis for an epigenetic maintenance of
centromere identity. The epigenetic control of centromere
activity is illustrated by the inactivation of centromeres on dicentric
chromosomes and by the formation of rare
neocentromeres that recruit CENP-A and assemble fully functional kinetochore
structures on nonalphoid DNA. Microscopic
investigation of stretched kinetochore fibers revealed
that blocks of CENP-A nucleosomes are interspersed with canonical
histone H3 nucleosomes that contain transcription-associated modifications,
such as H3K4me2 and H3K36me2. This special chromatin was termed
“centrochromatin” and suggests
a functional link between the local chromatin environment and kinetochore
function. These observations raise several
questions about the exact nature of the chromatin that specifies kinetochore
assembly and propagation. (1) What combination of histone modifications
defines the elusive epigenetic state that is centrochromatin? (2)
Can histone modifications be manipulated to turn normal chromatin
into centrochromatin or, inversely, to inactivate established centromeres?
(3) What barriers prevent heterochromatin spreading into centromeres?
Answering these questions with native human chromosomes is extremely
challenging. Knowledge of the structure and function of human
centromeres has
dramatically increased since the first reconstitution of functional
human centromeres, when DNA satellite repeats were transfected into
human cells, forming the first human artificial chromosomes (HACs). Subsequently, many HACs have been constructed using different strategies
of satellite DNA cloning and delivery into human cells The development of RCA-TAR cloning by our group provided the
first
method for constructing synthetic alphoid DNA arrays with precisely
defined DNA sequence variation and the possibility of manipulating
alphoid DNA arrays. This approach involves
rolling circle amplification (RCA) of alphoid DNA oligomers as small
as a dimer followed by assembly of the amplified fragments by transformation-associated
recombination (TAR) in yeast. Using the RCA-TAR method,
synthetic alphoid DNA arrays up to 140 kb have been generated and
used for de novo HAC formation. The method
also permitted generation of a synthetic HAC with a conditional centromere,
the alphoid-HAC, which
has been instrumental in resolving a role for chromatin structure
in kinetochore function. The alphoid-HAC is based on a dimeric alphoid DNA array that contains
alternating monomers with either CENP-B boxes or tetracycline operator
(tetO) sequences. The latter sequences allow specific engineering
of the alphoid-HAC using chromatin modifiers fused
to the tetracycline repressor (tetR). The alphoid-HAC
has been extensively used to investigate protein interactions within
the kinetochore and to define the epigenetic signature of centromeric
chromatin to maintain a functional kinetochore. Studies with this HAC revealed that nucleating heterochromatin or
high levels of active transcription within centrochromatin disrupts
kinetochore function and that a low level of transcription is needed to
maintain an active kinetochore. Recent studies using
the alphoid-HAC showed that histone modifications and
centromeric transcription block heterochromatin spreading into centrochromatin,
thus preventing kinetochore inactivation. Histone modifications linked to transcription might act as an epigenetic
barrier between centrochromatin and pericentromeric heterochromatin. Although heterochromatin occurs in close proximity to centromeres,
its role in chromosome segregation varies among species.  may provide an extreme example with its dependence
on heterochromatin for de novo deposition of CENP-A and for proper
cohesion dynamics. In contrast, the role
of pericentromeric heterochromatin on kinetochore function in humans
remains poorly understood. Results from different groups showed that
disruption of pericentromeric heterochromatin is associated with chromosome
mis-segregation and tumorigenesis. In this work,
we have constructed a new alphoid-HAC containing
two distinct synthetic alphoid arrays to investigate
the role of heterochromatin domains on kinetochore maintenance and
function. This HAC is based on a synthetic hybrid array consisting
of an alphoid array linked to a novel alphoid DNA array
derived from monomeric alpha-satellite DNA lacking CENP-B boxes and
containing lac operators (lacO) and yeast Gal4 binding sites. Transfection
of the hybrid array into human HT1080 cells resulted in HAC formation.
The alphoid-HAC was used to examine whether heterochromatin
or centrochromatin can be induced to spread laterally by targeting
chromatin modifiers. Construction of the Hybrid
tetO/lacOgal4 Synthetic Arrays by
RCA-TAR Cloning We wished to construct a human artificial
chromosome (HAC) containing centrochromatin and pericentromeric heterochromatin
domains (alphoid-HAC) to manipulate the epigenetic
status of both domains independently. As the basis for the kinetochore
domain, we designed a 343 bp alphoid 21-I dimer from high-order repeats
(HORs) of chromosome 21 in which sequences corresponding to the CENP-B
box in one monomer were replaced by a 42 bp tetracycline operator
sequence (tetO), the binding site for  tetracycline
repressor (tetR) (). As the basis for the pericentromeric heterochromatin domain,
we synthesized a novel 2,078 bp alphoid 21-II-lacOgal4 12-mer that
lacked CENP-B boxes but contained four gal4 binding sites (each 21
bp in size) and four lacO sequences (each 36 bp in size). These permit
targeting the heterochromatin domain with chimeric proteins containing
the yeast gal4 protein and/or  lactose repressor
(lacI) (). HAC formation requires input naked alphoid DNA of at least
30 kb
in size for functional CENP-A core assembly. For this purpose, an artificial alphoid 21-I (α21-I) dimer
and a synthetic α21-II-lacOgal4 12-mer were extended by rolling
circle amplification (RCA) using phage ϕ29 DNA polymerase followed
by yeast Transformation-associated recombination (TAR) cloning (). These steps yielded two arrays, i.e. ∼ 40 kb α21-I-tetO
and ∼40 kb α21-II-lacOgal4 arrays, cloned into the 10,209
bp YAC/BAC-based RCA-Sat43 vector containing the mammalian selectable
marker blasticidin (Bsr) (b, ,a and b; see  for details). The tandem repeat structure of the
α21-II-lacOgal4 array was confirmed by AlwN1 digestion, which
revealed a 2,078 bp 12-mer (c). The tandem repeat structure of the α21-I-tetO
array was confirmed by RI digestion, which revealed
a 343 bp 2-mer (d). To generate a hybrid array containing both α21-I-tetO
and
α21-II-lacOgal4, the two arrays were combined by recombination
in yeast. After screening ∼190 colonies by CHEF gel electrophoresis,
we obtained a molecule consisting of 25 kb α21-II-lacOgal4 and
30 kb α21-I-tetO arrays in the RCA-Sat43 vector (c and e). This hybrid YAC/BAC DNA molecule of ∼65 kb in size (∼55
kb alphoid array plus ∼10 kb vector) was moved to bacterial
cells and served as the input DNA for further HAC formation. Sequence
of the alphoid dimer used for construction of the α21-I-tetO
array. Both monomers are derived from a chromosome 21 alphoid type
I (HOR). One monomer contains a CENP-B box (shaded blue). In the second
monomer, the position corresponding to the CENP-B box sequence was
replaced by a 42 bp tetO motif (shaded yellow). Sequence of the alphoid 12-mer used for construction of the α21-II-lacOgal4
array. All monomers were derived from a chromosome 21 alphoid type
II array. Four gal4 sequences (two 21 bp in size and two dimers 42
bp in size; shaded green) and four lacO sequences (each 36 bp in size;
shaded red) were incorporated into a 12-mer. Fifteen MseI sites are
present in the 12-mer. Schematic representation of construction of synthetic tandem arrays.
(a) Step one includes amplification
of either a 2,078 bp 21-II-lacOgal4 12-mer or a 343 bp 21-I-tetO dimer
by rolling circle amplification (RCA) reaction up to 1–3 kb
fragments. (b) Step two includes construction of long alphoid arrays
by transformation-associated recombination (TAR) cloning in yeast.
The RCA-amplified fragments are cotransformed into yeast cells along
with the MluI-linearized RCA-Sat43 vector (the MluI restriction site
is located between the hooks). This vector contains a BAC cassette
(a BAC replicon and a  marker), a YAC cassette
(a selectable marker , a centromere sequence  from yeast chromosome VI, and yeast origin of replication ), and a mammalian marker Bsr (the blasticidin gene)
that allows the vector to propagate in yeast, bacterial, and mammalian
cells and alphoid-specific hooks of 40 bp each (Ebersole et al. 2005).
Recombination of the RCA-amplified fragments accompanied by their
recombination with the hooks results in the rescue of long arrays
as circular YAC/BACs, and 40 kb α21-I-tetO and 40 kb α21-II-lacOgal4
arrays were chosen for further experiments. (c) Construction of the
hybrid tetO-CENPB-lacOgal4-CENPB array.
Recombination between the arrays accompanied by their recombination
with the vector hooks leads to formation of the hybrid arrays. Ultimately,
a molecule containing a 20 kb lacOgal4 array and 25 kb tetO array
was chosen for HAC formation. Hybrid alphoid-DNA array construction. (a) CHEF analysis of 13
BACs with α21-II-lacOgal4 arrays of different size. The BAC
DNAs were linearized by II to release a vector
part and an array. BAC #12 has an array of ∼40 kb in size.
(b) CHEF analysis of the BAC with the α21-I-tetO array of ∼40
kb in size. The BAC DNA was digested by NheI/SpeI to release a vector
fragment and the array. (c) Confirmation of the tandem repeat structure
of 40 and 60 kb α21-II-lacOgal4 arrays by AlwN1 digestion. CHEF
analysis revealed 2,461 bp 12-mer α21-II-lacOgal4 repeat units.
(d) Conformation of the tandem repeat structure of a 40 kb α21-I-tetO
array by RI digestion. CHEF analysis revealed
343 bp 2-mer 21-I-tetO repeat units. (E) CHEF analysis of the hybrid
α21-I-tetO/a21-II-lacOgal4 arrays. (Lane 1) Array consisting
of 10 kb of the α21-II-lacOgal4 array and 30 kb of the a21-I-tetO
array. (Lane 2) Array consisting of 25 kb α21-II-lacOgal4 array
and 30 kb α21-I-tetO array. The array in lane 2 (in red) was
chosen for HAC formation. (Lane 3) Array consisting of 15 kb α21-II-lacOgal4
array and 40 kb α21-I-tetO array. HAC Formation
Using the Hybrid α-Satellite Array in Human
HT1080 Cells For HACs to be obtained, the RCA-Sat43 vector
containing the hybrid array was purified from large-scale bacterial
cultures (see ). The
quality of the hybrid array DNA was checked by CHEF gel electrophoresis
(data not shown). Input DNA was transfected into human HT1080 cells,
and blasticidin S (BS)-resistant clones were selected for cytogenetic
analysis. A total of 17 BS-resistant clones were obtained and expanded
after transfection of the hybrid array DNA construct. To determine
the fate of the hybrid array in HT1080 cells (expected to be either
episomal HACs or chromosome integrations), these clones were processed
for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using the RCA-Sat43
vector backbone as DNA probe directly labeled with  (Abbott Molecular) (a). FISH analyses showed that most of the
BS-resistant clones (13 out of 17; 76.5%) contain array integrations
into endogenous chromosome arms (b). Indeed, the most common fate of the input
DNA construct in HAC formation experiments is integration into endogenous
chromosome arms (b). No preferential chromosomes or chromosome positions
were observed for these array integrations. FISH analysis revealed that the
hybrid array formed HACs in 2 of
17 BS-resistant cell lines (clones 20.05 and 20.07), showing 11 and
60% of HAC-containing metaphases, respectively (b). Clone 20.05 also showed metaphases containing
array integrations into endogenous chromosomes. A third clone (clone
20.22) showed a single HAC-containing metaphase plus 40% of metaphases
containing array integrations (b) and was not considered as a HAC-containing cell
line. Only clones showing a minimum of 5% of metaphases with detectable
HACs (at least 2 out of the 25 metaphases analyzed) were considered.
The remaining BS-resistant clones showed neither HACs nor array integrations
in any metaphase analyzed, suggesting that the clones may have acquired
only the BSR gene. Overall, we observed HAC formation with an efficiency
of 11.7% after transfection of the hybrid alphoid DNA array. This
is consistent with the efficiency observed previously by others using
synthetic alphoid DNA arrays for HAC formation experiments. These results showed that the hybrid array can form HACs in
human
HT1080 cells with an efficiency similar to those of other synthetic
alphoid DNA arrays. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00018/suppl_file/sb8b00018_si_001.pdf Hybrid HAC formation
in HT1080 cells. (a) Representative FISH images
of clones containing a HAC (left) and an array integration in an endogenous
chromosome (right). (b, c) Screening of blasticidin-resistant clones
by FISH. Diagrams represent the frequency of metaphases with HACs
(black bars) and array integrations (gray bars) ( = 25) in HT1080 cells without (b) and with (c) CENP-A overexpression.
(d) Frequency of HAC-containing clones with (CENP-A OE) and without
(CENP-A WT) transient CENP-A overexpression during HAC formation.
Only clones with a minimum of 10% metaphases containing HACs were
considered as positive (10 vs 33%). (e) Representative two-color oligo-FISH
images showing different hybrid HACs (clone 20.CA.07-top and 20.CA.24-bottom)
containing tetO (red) and lacOgal4 (green) domains. Images were captured
at optimized exposure times to clearly distinguish both signals in
either clone (for signal intensity comparison between clones, see ). (f) Representative image of an HT1080
cell containing HAC clone 20.CA.24 and expressing both lacI-GFP (green)
and tetR-mCherry (red) fusion proteins. Merged image (right panel)
represents the overlay of GFP, mCherry, and DAPI channels. (g) Frequency
of HAC-containing metaphases in the indicated clones containing HACs
in the presence of blasticidin and after 30 days after blasticidin
washout. The HAC loss rate is indicated in red. (h) Representative
immunofluorescence images on metaphase spreads of HAC clone 20.CA.24
and stained with the indicated antibodies. Scale bars = 10 μm. CENP-A Overexpression Significantly Increases
the Efficiency
of HAC Formation The low efficiency of de novo HAC formation
is one limitation for the wider application of HAC technology. We were therefore interested
when it was recently reported that elevated levels of CENP-A increase
the frequency of centrochromatin assembly and minichromosome formation
in . Moreover,
we previously observed that seeding of centromeric chromatin at ectopic
array integrations under different conditions is enhanced in cells
overexpressing CENP-A. To investigate
the effect of CENP-A levels on the efficiency of de novo HAC formation,
we transfected the hybrid array into HT1080 cells transiently overexpressing
CENP-A. As in previous HAC formation experiments, BS-resistant clones
were selected and further expanded for cytogenetic analysis. FISH
experiments revealed HACs in 11 of the 23 BS-resistant clones obtained
after transfection with a range of 8–76% of HAC-containing
metaphases (c). Two additional clones showed HACs in a single metaphase and therefore
were not considered as HAC-positive cell lines (c). Some clones showed both array integrations
and HACs as previously described for other HACs. For further analysis, we chose two clones, 20.CA.07 and 20.CA24
(c), that contained
only autonomously replicating HACs. Thus, transient CENP-A overexpression
increases the efficiency
of HAC formation by 3-fold (d), overcoming an important limitation of the HAC technology. The Alphoid-HAC Contains Both Alphoid DNA Arrays Previous molecular analyses have revealed that HACs are formed
by amplification of the input DNA that may be accompanied by structural
rearrangements, generating complex structures containing alternating
blocks of α-satellite DNA and vector backbone. Because we used a hybrid α-satellite array as input DNA for
HAC formation, it was possible that the resulting alphoid-HAC could have lost one of the two original arrays as a consequence
of DNA reorganization in HT1080 cells. Therefore, we used oligo-FISH
with labeled oligonucleotides that specifically recognize the tetO,
lacO, and gal4 sequences to examine whether the HAC contains both
α-satellite arrays. Oligo-FISH was first developed by Matera
and Ward to detect repetitive sequences
such as specific α-satellite DNA families. The use of small
oligonucleotide probes, which show superior hybridization kinetics,
has proven to be superior for faster and more sensitive FISH protocols.
In our case, the repetitive nature of the hybrid HAC allows the visualization
of oligonucleotide probes, as they hybridize in large numbers, thus
allowing specific detection of the two different arrays in the HAC. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00018/suppl_file/sb8b00018_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00018/suppl_file/sb8b00018_si_001.pdf This experiment revealed that the HACs in both selected clones
(20.CA.07 and 20.CA.24) have FISH signals for tetO and lacO + gal4
oligonucleotide probes (e and ). Therefore, the
novel HACs contain both synthetic α-satellite DNA arrays. Importantly,
a control experiment using the 1C7 cell line, which contains the alphoid-HAC, showed a signal only
for the tetO DNA array with no signal for the lacO + gal4 DNA array.
This confirms the specificity of the probes used for oligo-FISH (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00018/suppl_file/sb8b00018_si_001.pdf To further confirm the presence
of both synthetic arrays in the
alphoid-HAC, we expressed tetR-mCherry and lacI-EGFP
in these HT1080 cell lines and then analyzed the tethering of these
fusion proteins to the hybrid HACs. As expected, the results showed
the presence of signals for both tetR-mCherry and lacI-EGFP in interphase
nuclei (f).
The signals were also detected on the HACs in metaphase chromosome
spreads, where the HACs can be identified by DAPI staining (). These data demonstrate the
successful construction of novel synthetic
HACs containing both α21-I-tetO and α21-II-lacOgal4 synthetic
alphoid-DNA arrays. Such alphoid-HACs represent a
novel targeting system for future epigenetic engineering studies of
the centromere. The Alphoid-HAC Segregates
Accurately during
Cell Division Two independent clones containing alphoid-HACs (clones 20.CA.07 and 20.CA.24) were selected for
further studies. In clone 20.CA.24, only 20% of the cells carry the
alphoid-HAC; for this reason, we subcloned this cell
line by limiting dilution to obtain a homogeneous population of HAC-containing
cells. A total of 37 BS-resistant subclones were analyzed by FISH
for the presence of the alphoid-HAC. Among them,
one subclone (subclone 5B10) was shown to carry single alphoid-HACs in 100% of the metaphases analyzed ( = 25). The other subclones showed neither HACs nor integration in
chromosome arms, suggesting that only the bsr gene was integrated. To analyze the mitotic stability of these HACs, we grew the cells
in the presence and absence of BS selection for 30 days (∼30
cell divisions) and monitored the presence of HACs by FISH. As a positive
control, we included the 1C7 cell line, which contains the previously
constructed alphoid-HAC. The daily
loss rate of the HAC (R) was calculated using the formula =  × (1 – ), where  is the number of metaphase chromosome spreads
showing HAC in the cells cultured under selection,  is the number of HAC-containing metaphase
chromosome spreads after  days of culture in the
absence of selection. In 1C7 cells, the alphoid-HAC was present in 22
out of 25 metaphases analyzed (88%) when cells were grown in the presence
of BS. In the absence of BS selection for 30 days, the alphoid-HAC was present in 20 out of 25 metaphases (80%). Thus,
the daily loss rate of the alphoid-HAC was established
at 0.0032 (g). This is consistent with the values previously observed (0.0021–0.0054). The alphoid-HAC in clone
20.CA.07 showed a decrease
of HAC-containing metaphases from 76 to 72% when BS selection was
removed for 30 days, and the frequency of metaphases with the HAC
in clone 20.CA.24–5B10 decreased from 96 to 80% after BS washout
(g). Thus,
the daily rates of loss observed in clones 20.CA.07 and 20.CA.24–5B10
were 0.0018 and 0.0054, respectively, showing a mitotic behavior similar
to that of the alphoid-HAC. These results indicate
that the alphoid-HACs have a high mitotic stability
in the absence of selection, indicating that these HACs replicate
and segregate accurately during cell division. The high mitotic
stability observed for the alphoid-HACs suggests
that these synthetic chromosomes contain the basic
elements to maintain chromosome function. To confirm this, we performed
immunofluorescence (IF) on unfixed metaphase spreads with antibodies
that recognize different complexes that are important for chromosome
segregation (h). IF showed the presence of the outer kinetochore protein HEC1
on the alphoid-HAC (h). Other protein complexes important for
centromere function were also detected on the HAC at levels similar
to endogenous chromosomes: specifically, the chromosome passenger
complex shown by the presence of survivin staining of the HAC, the
chromosome scaffold compartment shown by SMC2 staining of the HAC,
and pericentromeric heterochromatin shown by the presence of HP1α
in the HAC (h). We thus conclude that the alphoid-HAC contains
a functional kinetochore resembling that of endogenous chromosomes. The alphoid-HAC has a high mitotic stability comparable
to the synthetic alphoid-HAC described previously. Furthermore, the alphoid-HAC
resembles natural chromosomes, containing the basic protein complexes
necessary for chromosome structure, function, and stability. Structural
Characterization of the Alphoid-HAC
Shows Contiguous Tandem Copies of the Input DNA http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00018/suppl_file/sb8b00018_si_001.pdf Because the
alphoid array forms mitotically stable HACs that
resemble natural chromosomes, we went on to perform cytogenetic and
molecular biology experiments to characterize the molecular organization
of both alphoid-HAC clones. Oligo-FISH experiments
on metaphase spreads clearly showed that the HAC in clone 20.CA.24–5B10
is larger than the HAC in clone 20.CA.07, as shown by DAPI and FISH
signal intensities for both the tetO and lacOgal4 domains (). Importantly, these results were confirmed
by expressing tetR-EYFP and lacI-mCherry fusion proteins in HT1080
cells containing the alphoid-HACs. Whereas the alphoid-HAC in clone 20.CA.24–5B10 showed clear signals
for both fusion proteins tethered to tetO and lacO sites, those signals
were hardly visible in clone 20.CA.07 (data not shown). For this reason,
we used the 20.CA.24–5B10 alphoid-HAC for
further characterization. Interestingly, although alphoid-HAC 20.CA.07 is significantly smaller, its mitotic stability is
higher compared to those of other synthetic HACs. Therefore, HAC size
does not correlate in a simple manner with mitotic stability. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00018/suppl_file/sb8b00018_si_001.pdf As shown above, FISH analysis of interphase and metaphase cells revealed
the presence of lacOgal4 and tetO arrays in the alphoid-HAC in clone 20.CA.24 (e). We performed high-resolution fiber-FISH analysis
to see how the arrays are organized in this HAC. DNA fibers were prepared
from HT1080 cells containing the HAC and hybridized with either tetO-specific
or a mixture of the lacO plus gal4-specific oligonucleotide probes (see ). Representative images are shown in a. This fiber-FISH analysis revealed alternating
blocks of α21-I-tetO and α21-II-lacOgal4 arrays. The results
are consistent with those obtained by interphase FISH analysis of
the 20.CA.07 alphoid-HAC (), which show α21-I-tetO and α21-II-lacOgal4
blocks that are repeated in tandem. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00018/suppl_file/sb8b00018_si_001.pdf Structural analysis of the alphoid-HACs
in both
clones was also carried out by Southern blot hybridization. Genomic
DNA containing the alphoid-HACs was digested by SpeI
endonuclease. This endonuclease cuts the vector RCA-Sat43 sequence
once but does not have recognition sites in the alphoid α21-I-tetO
or α21-II-lacOgal4 DNA arrays. SpeI-digested genomic DNA was
separated by CHEF gel electrophoresis and hybridized with two different
probes. One probe was specific to the tetO-alphoid sequence. The other
was specific for both the lacO and gal4 sequences (see  for details). If the HACs were formed
by simple concatenation involving rolling-circle amplification of
the input DNA and had not undergone structural rearrangements, only
one band of 65 kb in size (∼55 kb alphoid array plus ∼10
kb vector part) would be observed on the Southern blot after SpeI
digestion. For the original clone 20.CA.24 (containing ∼25%
of HAC-containing metaphases; see ), four major bands of 95, 65, 40, and 30
kb were detected with the tetO probe, and a similar profile with two
additional minor bands of 60 and 8 kb was observed with the lacOgal4
probe (b).
For clone 20.CA.07, two major bands of 95 and 65 kb were detected
with the tetO and lacOgal4 probes (). Unexpectedly, for 20.CA.24 subclone 5B10, only one major
band of
65 kb in size was observed (∼55 kb array plus ∼10 kb
vector). These results indicate that the original clones 20.CA.24
and 20.CA.07 are likely a mixture of the cells with different-sized
HACs. In contrast, the 5B10 subclone contains only one HAC with a
regular structure containing alternating tetO and lacOgal4. This could
suggest a rolling circle amplification mechanism of formation of this
HAC. These results are in agreement with the alternating organization
of α21-I-tetO and α21-II-lacOgal4 DNA blocks observed
by fiber-FISH analysis (a). Taking these data together, a proposed diagram
of the hybrid HAC in subclone 5B10 is presented in c. Interestingly, this
novel alphoid-HAC (subclone
5B10) had much more regular structure than the original synthetic
alphoid-HAC (subclone AB2.218.21). Southern blot hybridization of the SpeI-digested genomic
DNA harboring the alphoid-HAC revealed 15 fragments
of different size, indicating complex rearrangements of 50 kb input
alphoid-DNA array during HAC formation. It also contained a large region from the long
arm of chromosome 13, suggesting that at one point during its formation
it may have integrated into that chromosome. It is possible that the
more regular structure of the alphoid-HAC may be
due to a more efficient process of de novo HAC formation, possibly
as a result of CENP-A overexpression. These results show that
de novo alphoid-HAC formation
was accompanied, as expected, by amplification of the input DNA molecule
but that amplification can occur without gross structural rearrangements.
Future experiments will determine whether this is due to HAC formation
in the presence of overexpressed CENP-A. Structural analysis of the hybrid HAC
propagated in human HT1080
cells. (a) Representative fiber-FISH images of clone 20.CA.24 HAC
using oligonucleotide probes for tetO (red) and lacO + gal4 sequences
(green). Different degrees of fiber stretching are shown (compare
upper and lower panels). (b) Genomic DNA possessing the original HAC
clone 20.CA.24 (left panel) and its subclone (5B10; right panel) were
digested with SpeI endonuclease and separated by CHEF gel electrophoresis
(range 10–100 kb). The SpeI recognition site is present once
in the RCA-SAT43 vector at position 812 but not in the hybrid array.
The transferred membrane was hybridized with radioactively labeled
tetO-specific or lacO + gal4-specific probes. The 5B10 subclone has
a HAC with a remarkably conserved array. Arrows indicate fragments
of 95, 65, 40, and 30 kb in size that are specific to both probes.
(c) Diagram illustrating multimerization of input DNA during de novo
HAC formation in human HT1080 cells. Input DNA consists of 65 kb hybrid
array and 10,209 bp RCA-Sat43 vector sequence. Epigenetic Engineering
Showed a Functional Two-Domain Kinetochore
in Alphoid-HAC That Can Be Manipulated with Different
Targeting Systems As shown above, the alphoid-HAC in 20.CA24 subclone 5B10 is composed of regular alternating
tandem blocks of α21-I-tetO and α21-II-lacOgal4 repeats. We next asked where the kinetochore is localized in this HAC using
chromatin immunoprecipitation with CENP-A antibodies followed by qPCR
(ChIP-qPCR). Surprisingly, the results showed equal amounts of CENP-A
on both the α21-I-tetO and α21-II-lacOgal4 arrays (a). It was previously
demonstrated that CENP-B box sequences are a requisite for de novo
kinetochore nucleation. This suggested that
either (i) seeding of CENP-A chromatin on the alphoid-HAC was initiated on both consecutive α21-I-tetO and α21-II-lacOgal4
blocks or (ii) CENP-A chromatin assembled first on the α21-I-tetO
domains containing CENP-B boxes and subsequently spread to the flanking
α21-II-lacOgal4 domains that lack CENP-B. To look at the ability of proteins
to spread across the two arrays
(array “cross-talk”), we transiently expressed KAP1
fused to either tetR-EYFP or lacI-GFP in 5B10 cells. KAP1 is a chromatin
modifier that disrupts the kinetochore by seeding heterochromatin
marks, including H3K9me3. Expression
of tetR-EYFP-KAP1 caused a significant decrease of CENP-A levels on
the alphoid-HAC compared to that of control experiments
tethering tetR-EYFP (b and c). The decrease of CENP-A levels observed after tethering
tetR-EYFP-KAP1 was accompanied by an increase of HAC mis-segregation,
as revealed by a significantly increased frequency of cells showing
an abnormal number of HACs compared to controls (c). On the other hand, tethering
lacI-GFP-KAP1 to the alphoid-HAC did not result in
significant differences in CENP-A levels compared to control tethering
of either lacI-GFP or tetR-EYFP (b and c). LacI-GFP-KAP1 tethering also did
not cause an increase in HAC segregation defects, as the cells maintained
a stable HAC number (c). These results are consistent with the previous results
using the alphoid-HAC. This suggests that heterochromatin nucleated on
the α21-II-lacOgal4
array did not spread efficiently into the core centromere domain on
the α21-I-tetO array. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00018/suppl_file/sb8b00018_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00018/suppl_file/sb8b00018_si_001.pdf Recent models suggest that chromatin
modifications present at centrochromatin
allow CENP-A and kinetochore assembly and maintenance. In particular, chromatin modifications associated
with transcriptionally active chromatin, such as H3K4me2 and H3K9
acetylation, increase the CENP-A level and prevent heterochromatin
spreading to centrochromatin that can ultimately inactivate the kinetochore. To examine the functional interactions between centrochromatin containing
CENP-A and flanking heterochromatin, the alphoid-HAC
was targeted with combinations of chromatin modifiers binding to the
two different HAC domains. As a proof of principle, we simultaneously
targeted the C-terminal transactivation domain of NF-ΚB p65
to the α21-I-tetO domains and KAP1 to the α21-II-lacOgal4
domains as tetR-SNAP and lacI-GFP fusion proteins, respectively. Tethering
of tetR-SNAP-p65 together with lacI-GFP significantly increased CENP-A
levels on the alphoid-HAC compared to that of a control
tethering of tetR-SNAP with lacI-GFP (a and b). As previously reported for the
alphoid-HAC, tethering
tetR-SNAP-p65 to the alphoid-HAC increases levels
of H3K9ac (). In parallel experiments,
tethering lacI-GFP-KAP1 to the alphoid-HAC increased
the H3K9me3 level (). Simultaneous
tethering of lacI-GFP-KAP1 together with tetR-SNAP maintained the
CENP-A level similar to that observed in controls (a and b). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00018/suppl_file/sb8b00018_si_001.pdf Strikingly,
simultaneous tethering of tetR-SNAP-p65 with lacI-GFP-KAP1
seems to balance the levels of H3K9ac and H3K9me3 (), and the levels of CENP-A are maintained similar
to those observed in controls (a and b). Thus, although there does appear to be cross-talk
between the two domains of the HAC, kinetochore function is preserved
as demonstrated by the proper segregation of the alphoid-HAC when these fusion proteins were tethered together (c). The epigenetic
environment in the centromere is important for kinetochore
assembly and maintenance. To study the
epigenetic differences between the different centromeric domains in
the alphoid-HAC, we performed ChIP-qPCR experiments
pulling down different histone H3 modifications typically associated
with centromeric chromatin, such as H3K4me2, H3K36me2, and H3K9me3
(d). The results
showed that there is no difference in the amount of the heterochromatin
marker H3K9me3 between α21-I-tetO and α21-II-lacOgal4
domains or between the alphoid-HAC and the centromere
of the endogenous chromosome 17 (d). Thus, the level of heterochromatin is
similar between the alphoid-HAC centromere and endogenous
centromeres. The lower level of H3K9me3 in the Sat2 region could be
explained by the lower level of heterochromatin in HT1080 cells (d). We also observed different levels of chromatin marks associated
with actively transcribed chromatin on the α21-I-tetO and α21-II-lacOgal4
arrays. Whereas H3K4me2 is preferentially enriched on the α21-II-lacOgal4
arrays, H3K36me2 was preferentially enriched on the α21-I-tetO
arrays (d).
The different localizations of H3K4me2 and H3K36me2 on centrochromatin
suggest that these histone modifications may play different roles
in kinetochore assembly and/or maintenance. Previous results showed
that removing H3K4me2 from the alphoid-HAC centromere
disrupts kinetochore maintenance and function. The present results suggest that it will be important in
the future to explore the role of H3K36me2 in centrochromatin in greater
detail. Our proof of principle experiments reveal that the alphoid-HAC containing two synthetic domains can be manipulated
for epigenetic engineering studies. Our results with this novel HAC
reinforce the model that centromeres are assembled and maintained
by a specific chromatin environment. Moreover, our experiments combining
the opposing chromatin modifiers p65 and KAP1 revealed that, although
there is cross-talk between the kinetochore and heterochromatin domains,
induced heterochromatin disrupts the centromere only when it is nucleated
within centrochromatin. Inducing heterochromatin in the pericentromeric
domains did not disrupt the kinetochore, possibly due to the presence
of specific histone modifications and/or active RNAP II transcription
at centrochromatin that protects it from heterochromatin spreading. Epigenetic engineering
shows the presence of a two-domain centromere
in the alphoid HAC. (a) ChIP-qPCR analysis of CENP-A
levels in HT1080 clone 5B10 containing the alphoid HAC. The α21-I-tetO (tetO), α21-II-lacOgal4 (lacOgal4) HAC domains, satellite D17Z1 (Chr17), and degenerate
satellite type-II (Sat2) repeats were assessed. (b) Representative
images of HT1080–5B10 cells expressing the indicated tetR and
lacI-fusion proteins and stained with H3K9me3 (second panel) and CENP-A
(third panel) antibodies. Merge images represent the overlay of GFP
(green), H3K9me3 (blue), and CENP-A (red). (c) Quantification of HAC-associated
CENP-A staining in individual cells transfected with the indicated
fusion proteins and plotted as A.F.U. Solid bars indicate the medians,
and error bars represent the s.e.m.  = two independent
experiments for each time point and staining. Asterisks indicate a
significant difference (* < 0.05; ** < 0.01; Mann–Whitney test). Scale bars = 10 μm. Alphoid HAC shows epigenetically distinct centromeric
domains. (a) Representative images of HT1080–5B10 cells expressing
the indicated tetR (first panel) and lacI-fusion proteins (second
panel) and stained with antibodies recognizing H3K9me3 (third panel)
and CENP-A (fourth panel). Merged images represent the overlay of
TMR-SNAP, GFP, and H3K9me3 (MERGE 1; fifth panel) and GFP, H3K9me3
and CENP-A (MERGE 2; sixth panel). (b) Quantification of HAC-associated
CENP-A staining in individual cells transfected with the indicated
fusion proteins and plotted as A.F.U. Solid bars indicate the medians,
and error bars represent the s.e.m.  = two independent
experiments for each time point and staining. Asterisks indicate a
significant difference (** < 0.01; Mann–Whitney
test). (c) Quantification of alphoid HAC copy-numbers
as determined by counting the GFP and/or TMR-SNAP spot in interphase
nuclei of cells transfected with the indicated fusion proteins. Data
represent the mean (and s.e.m.) of three independent assays of each
time point after doxycycline washout ( = 1,000 nuclei
per condition; * < 0.05, ** < 0.0001; χ-test). (d) ChIP-qPCR analysis in
HT1080–5B10 cells using the indicated antibodies. The α21-I-tetO
(tetO), α21-II-lacOgal4 (lacOgal4) HAC domains,
the satellite D17Z1 (Chr17), and the degenerate satellite type-II
(Sat2) repeats were assessed. Scale bars = 10 μm. We developed and characterized a novel synthetic
alphoid-HAC (human artificial chromosome) containing
two distinct alphoid
DNA arrays. The two synthetic arrays can remain remarkably preserved
during HAC formation in contrast to the gross rearrangements observed
with the previous generation of alphoid HACs. The alphoid-HAC allows simultaneous independent targeting of chromatin
modifiers to different centromeric compartments using independent
tetO and lacO/gal4 targeting systems, and our preliminary experiments
reveal that there is some cross-talk between the chromatin in two
arrays. The alphoid-HAC may be used in future studies
to clarify whether the endogenous CENP-A chromatin is continuous or
interrupted with blocks of heterochromatin in natural human chromosomes. Construction of α21-I-tetO and α21-II-lacOgal4 Alphoid
Arrays by Rolling-Circle Amplification (RCA) Followed by Transformation-Associated
Recombination (TAR) in Yeast A method to rapidly convert
any desirable DNA fragment, as small as 100 bp, into long tandem DNA
arrays up to 140 kb in size is described in detail in a previous publication. The method includes rolling-circle phi29 amplification
(RCA) of the sequence in vitro and assembly of the RCA products in
vivo by homologous recombination in the yeast . In our case, for the RCA reaction we used a 343
bp 21-I alphoid dimer from high-order repeats (HORs) of chromosome
21 containing CENP-B boxes and a 2,078 bp synthesized 21-II-lacOgal4/CENPB
minus-12-mer. In one of the monomers of the 21-I alphoid dimer, a
CENP-B box was replaced by a 42 bp tetO motif (see ). In the 21-II alphoid 12-mer,
four gal4 sequences (each 21 bp in size) and four lacO sequences (each
36 bp in size) were incorporated (see ). RCA reactions were performed using an
Amersham TempliPhi kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions
except that reactions were scaled up to 100 μL and were spiked
with a template-specific primer mix to a final concentration of 2
pmol/μL (a). Reaction products were phenol/chloroform extracted and ethanol
precipitated prior to recombinational cloning. As a second step, the
length of the resulting RCA products was extended by transformation-associated
homologous recombination (TAR) in yeast using a targeting RCA-Sat43 vector (B). The RCA-Sat43 vector (10,209 bp in size) contains YAC (HIS3,
CEN6, ARSH4) and BAC (, ori F) cassettes as well
as a mammalian selectable marker (BSR). Also, the RCA-Sat43 vector
contains the appropriate alphoid satellite hooks of ∼40 bp
each. Before yeast transformation, the vector was linearized by MluI
to release targeting hooks. The highly transformable  strain VL6–48N (, , , ), which has  and  deletions, was used for transformation.
Conditions for spheroplast transformation were described previously. Typically, each transformation used 2–3
μg of RCA product and 0.02 μg of the linearized vector.
Under such conditions, 200–1000 His+ transformants were usually
obtained. As a third step, yeast transformants were combined into
pools, and then purified genomic DNA from the yeast clones was electroporated
into  cells (DH10B, Invitrogen).
The insert size of α21-II-lacOgal4 arrays was determined by
CHEF (Bio-Rad) after II digestion, which releases
an ∼6.5 kb vector fragment and an array plus ∼3.5 kb
vector fragment. Representative CHEF analysis of 13 BACs is shown
(a). Digestion
of the α21-II-lacOgal4 arrays by AlwNI reveals 12-mers of 2,078
bp in size (b). The insert size of α21-I-tetO arrays was determined by
CHEF (Bio-Rad) after NotI digestion that releases an ∼2 kb
fragment of the RCA-Sat43 vector and an array plus ∼7 kb vector
fragment. Representative CHEF analysis of one BAC is shown (c). Digestion of
the α21-I-tetO arrays by RI reveals 2-mers
of 343 bp in size (d). Construction of the Hybrid tetO-CENPB+/lacOgal4-CENPB–
Array by Recombinational Cloning in Yeast A general scheme
of construction of the synthetic hybrid tetO-CENPB+/lacOgal4-CENPB-
array is presented in c. The ∼40 kb α21-II-lacOgal4 array (a; lane 12) and ∼40
kb α21-I-tetO array (c) were chosen for construction of the hybrid tetO-CENPB+/lacOgal4-CENPB–
array. Restriction of BAC DNAs was done by endonucleases that cleave
the molecule at insert/vector junctions and by an endonuclease that
cuts the vector part completely. The 40 kb α21-II-lacOgal4 array
was released by digestion with MspI/NsiI endonucleases (33 MspI recognition
sites are present in the RCA-Sat43 vector). The 40 kb α21-I-tetO
array was released by digestion with MseI/SpeI/NheI endonucleases
(57 MseI recognition sites are present in the RCA-Sat43 vector). The
α21-II-lacOgal4 and α21-I-tetO arrays were gel-purified
after CHEF separation, mixed with MluI-digested RCA-Sat43 vector (the
MluI site is present between the hooks and not present in the arrays)
and transformed into  strain
VL6–48N. Typically, 0.5 μg of each array and 0.02 μg
of the linearized RCA-Sat43 vector were used for one transformation.
Under such conditions, 100–300 His+ transformants were usually
obtained. Next, genomic DNA from yeast clones washed from plates was
isolated and electroporated into  cells (DH10B, Invitrogen). Because homology between α21-II-lacOgal4
and α21-I-tetO arrays is ∼70–74%, the percentage
of the hybrid arrays was very low, i.e., ∼0.1%. The insert
size of the entire hybrid arrays in the BACs was checked by MspI digestion.
The size of the α21-I-tetO part in the hybrid arrays was checked
by MseI digestion (this endonuclease completely digests a vector part
and a α21-II-lacOgal4 array). The size of the α21-II-lacOgal4
array in the hybrid arrays was checked by MslI or AlwI (these endonucleases
digest a vector part and the α21-I-tetO array). A BAC containing
a hybrid array consisting of ∼25 kb α21-II-lacOgal4 array
and ∼30 kb α21-I-tetO array was chosen for further HAC
development experiments (e). Southern Blot Hybridization Analysis Southern blot
hybridization was performed with a P-labeled probe as
described previously with minor changes.
Genomic DNA was prepared in agarose plugs and restriction-digested
by I in the buffer recommended by the manufacturer.
The digested DNA was CHEF (CHEF Mapper, Bio-Rad) separated (autoprogram,
5–150 kb range, 16 h transfer), transferred to membrane (Amersham
Hybond-N+), and blot-hybridized with an 82 bp probe for tetO and a
74 bp probe for lacO and gal4. DNA sequences for the probes were amplified
by PCR using the primers and synthetic DNA fragment as a template
(tetO_south_21_M: 5′-TTTGTGGAAGTGGACATTTACTAGCAGCAGAGCTCTCCCTATCAGTGATAGAGACTAGCCCATAAAAATAGACAGAAGCATT-3′,
tetO_south_21_F1: 5′-TTTGTGGAAGTGGACATTTC-3′,
tetO_south_21_R1: 5′-AATGCTTCTGTCTATTTTTA-3′;
lacO_south3_M: 5′-TGTGGAAGTGGACATTTCGACCACATGTGGAATTGTGAGCGGATAACAATTTGTGGCCCATAAAAATAGACAGA-3′,
lacO_south3_F1: 5′-TGTGGAAGTGGACATTTCGA-3′,
lacO_south3_R1: 5′-TCTGTCTATTTTTATGGGCC-3′;
gal4_south1_M: 5′-AATGGACATTTCGACGGAGGACAGTCCTCCGTCGACGGAGGACAGTCCTCCGCATAAAATCTA-3′,
Gal4_south1_F1: 5′-AATGGACATTTCGACG-3′,
gal4_south1_R1: 5′-TAGATTTTATGCGGAG-3′).
The blot was incubated for 2 h at 65 °C for prehybridization
in Church’s buffer (0.5 M Na-phosphate buffer containing 7%
SDS and 100 μg/mL of unlabeled salmon sperm carrier DNA). The
labeled probe was heat denatured in a boiling water bath for 5 min
and snap-cooled on ice. The probe was added to the hybridization Church’s
buffer and allowed to hybridize for 48 h at 65 °C. Blots were
washed twice in 2× SSC (300 mM NaCl, 30 mM sodium citrate, pH
7.0), 0.05% SDS for 10 min at room temperature, then twice in 2×
SSC, 0.05% SDS for 5 min at 60 °C. Blots were exposed to X-ray
film for 5 days at −80 °C. Cell Culture, Transfections,
and HAC Formation Human
HT1080 cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS (Invitrogen)
plus 100 U/ml penicillin G and 100 μg/mL of streptomycin sulfate
(Invitrogen). Cells were grown at 37 °C in 5% CO in
a humidified atmosphere. Transfections were performed using Xtremegene-9
(Roche) following the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief,
for transfections of cells growing in 10 cm dishes, transfection complexes
containing 15 μL of Xtremegene-9 reagent and 5 μg of plasmid
DNA were prepared in 500 μL of OptiMEM (Invitrogen). After 20
min of incubation at room temperature, 500 μL of transfection
complexes was added dropwise in 10 mL of media. After 24 h, transfected
cells were selected adding 4 μg/mL of blasticidin S (Sigma)
and grown for 2–3 weeks until separate resistant colonies were
present. Resistant colonies were isolated by trypsinization in cloning
cylinders (Thermo Scientific). Isolated clones were expanded in the
presence of 4 μg/mL of blasticidin S. For cotransfection experiments
with the CENP-A-SNAP plasmid, 5 μg of plasmid DNA was added
to the transfection reaction. Fluorescent in Situ Hybridization
(FISH) Samples were
processed as previously described by us. In brief, metaphase chromosomes were obtained following standard
procedures: 3 h before harvesting, cells were treated with Colcemid
(Invitrogen) at a final concentration of 0.2 μg/mL. They were
then resuspended in warm hypotonic solution (0.075 M KCl) for 10 min
at 37 °C and fixed in methanol:acetic acid (3:1). To obtain stretched
chromatin fibers, 2 mL of a cell culture was centrifuged, and the
pellets were washed in 1× PBS. Pellets were resuspended in 1×
PBS to reach a final concentration of 2 × 10 cells/mL
and spread on slides. Once the slides were mounted on the Shandon
Sequenza cover plates (Thermo Scientific), DNA fibers were released
applying a lysis solution (0.07 M NaOH in ethanol) and fixed in methanol.
Slides were kept at −20 °C until they were processed for
FISH. The RCA-Sat43 vector backbone was used as DNA probe. BAC
DNA extraction was performed using the EndoFree Plasmid Maxi kit (Qiagen
GmBh; Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
BAC DNA was labeled by Nick translation using  dUTPs (Abbott Molecular) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Probes were mixed with 10 μg of Cot 1 DNA (Invitrogen; Carlsbad,
USA), ethanol precipitated, and resuspended in 1× hybridization
buffer (50% formamide, 1× SSC, and 10% dextran sulfate) to a
final concentration of 40 ng/μL. For oligo-FISH experiments,
oligonucleotides recognizing the tetO sequence (5′- ACTAGCAGCAGAGCTCTCCCTATCAGTGATAGAGACTAG-3′)
labeled with Digoxigenin, and oligonucleotides recognizing both lacO
(5′- CATGTGGAATTGTGAGCGGATAACAATTTGTGG-3′)
and Gal4 (5′- TCGACGGAGGACAGTCCTCCG-3′)
sequences labeled with Biotin were synthesized (Sigma). Oligonucleotides
were mixed at 100 ng/ μL and resuspended in 2× hybridization
buffer (Cellay Inc.), 10× blocking reagent (Cellay Inc.), and
50 μg/mL of salmon sperm DNA (Sigma). FISH was carried
out following standard procedures. Briefly,
the DNA probe was denatured at 80 °C
for 5 min and preannealed at 37 °C for 30 min. Slides were denatured
in 70% formamide/2× SSC at 70 °C for 1 min and hybridized
in a humid chamber at 37 °C overnight. Slides were washed in
0.7×SSC/0.03%NP40 for 1 min at 70 °C and in 2×SSC/0.03%NP40
for 2 min at room temperature. For Oligo-FISH experiments, slides
were denatured in 70% formamide/2×SSC at 70 °C for 1 min
and hybridized in a humid chamber at 37 °C for 2 h. Slides were
thereafter washed in 20%formamide/2×SSC for 5 min and in 2×SSC/0.1%Tween-20
for 5 min at 37 °C. Oligonucleotide probes were detected with
rhodamine-conjugated antidigoxigenin (Roche) and fluorescein-conjugated
streptavidin (Vector Laboratories). Slides were mounted with Vectashield
(Vector Laboratories) containing 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) for chromosome counterstaining. Indirect Immunofluorescence
Staining and Microscopy Indirect immunofluorescence staining
of cells fixed in 4% formaldehyde/1×PBS
was performed following standard procedures. Immunofluorescence on
unfixed metaphase spreads was performed as described previously. The following antibodies were used: mouse anti-CENP-A
(clone A1, 1:500), mouse anti-HP1α (Millipore MAB3584, 1:1000),
mouse anti-HEC1 (abcam AC3612, 1:1000), rabbit anti-SMC2 (A. Losada,
1:1000), rabbit anti-Survivin (Cell Signaling, 1:400), rabbit anti-H3K9me3
(abcam 8898; 1:200), and rabbit anti-H3K9ac (B. Turner, 1:200). Microscope images were acquired on a DeltaVision Core system (Applied
Precision) using an Olympus IX-71 inverted microscope stand with an
Olympus UPlanSApo 100× oil immersion objective (numerical aperture
(NA) 1.4) and an LED light source. Camera (Photometrics Cool Snap
HQ), shutter, and stage were controlled through SoftWorx (Applied
Precision). Z-series were collected with a spacing of 0.2 μm,
and image stacks were subsequently deconvolved in SoftWorx. For CENP-A
signal quantification, a custom-made macro in ImageJ (National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD) modified from Bodor et al. was used. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation and Quantitative
PCR (ChIP-qPCR) Exponentially growing cells were washed in
D-PBS (Gibco) and subsequently
harvested with TrypLE Express (Gibco). Cells were resuspended in D-PBS
up to a concentration of 1 × 10 cells/ml and cross-linked
in a final 1% formaldehide solution (Sigma) for 5 min at room temperature,
followed by quenching with 2.5 M glycine for 5 min at room temperature.
Cells at a concentration of 5 × 10 cells/ml were
lysed in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.0; 10 mM NaCl; 0.5% NP-40)
containing protease inhibitors (1 μg/mL of CLAP; 0.5 μg/mL
of Aprotinin; 1 mM PMSF) for 10 min on ice. Nuclei were briefly washed
in lysis buffer with protease inhibitors in 300 μL of dilution
buffer 1 (50 mM Tris pH 8.0; 2 mM EDTA; 0.2% SDS; 134 mM NaCl; 0.88%
Triton X-100; 0.088% Na-deoxycholate). Chromatin was sheared by sonication
in a Bioruptor sonicator (Diagenode) for 14 cycles (30s ON/30S OFF)
at high setting and 4 °C. Supernatant products of sonication
were diluted with 300 μL of dilution buffer 1, 500 μL
of dilution buffer 2 (50 mM Tris pH 8.0; 167 mM NaCl; 1.1% Triton
X-100; 0.11% Na-deoxycholate), and 500 μL of RIPA buffer containing
150 μL of NaCl (RIPA-150) and protease inhibitors. Antimouse
IgG Dynabeads (Invitrogen) were coated with the relevant antibodies
for 6 h with RIPA-150/0.5% BSA at 4 °C and washed twice with
RIPA-150/0.5% BSA, and 500 μL of sheared chromatin was incubated
with the beads at 4 °C overnight. Beads were afterward washed
twice with RIPA-150 and RIPA buffer containing 500 mM NaCl (RIPA-500)
and a final wash with TE pH 8.0. Antibody/chromatin complexes were
de-cross-linked with 10% Chelex-100 resin (BioRad) in water at 93
°C and treated with RNase A and Proteinase K. DNA was subsequently
recovered by aliquoting 60 μL of the supernatant in a new eppendorf
tube. ChIPed DNA was subjected to RT-PCR using a SYBR Green Master
Mix (Roche) using the following oligonucleotides: tetO-Fw (5′-CCACTCCCTATCAGTGATAGAGAA-3′),
tetO-Rv (5′-TCGACTTCTGTTTAGTTCTGTGCG-3′)
for the α21-I-tetO domain of the hybrid HAC, lacOgal4-Fw (5′-TATGGTGTCGACGGAGGACA-3′),
and lacOgal4-Rv (5′-CCGCTCACAATTCCACATGTG-3′)
for the α21-II-lacOgal4 domain of the hybrid HAC, chr17-Fw (5′-TTGTGGTTTGTGGTGGAAAA-3′)
and chr17-Rv (5′-CTCAAAGCGCTCCAAATCTC-3′)
for the alphoid array, bsr-Fw (5′-CAGGAGAAATCATTTCGGCAGTAC-3′)
and bsr-Rv (5′-TCCATTCGAAACTGCACTACCA-3′)
for the blasticidin resistance gene, sat2-Fw (5′-TCGCATAGAATCGAATGGAA-3′)
and sat2-Rv (5′-GCATTCGAGTCCGTGGA-3′)
for the pericentromeric alphoid, act-Fw (5′-GCCGGGACCTGACTGACTAC-3′)
and act-Rv (5′-AGGCTGGAAGAGTGCCTCAG-3′)
for actin..