In biotechnology and bioengineering, the yield of microbial bioproducts can be increased by several ways such as metabolic engineering, enzyme engineering and process optimization. Besides these classic strategies, morphology engineering that regulating the genes in maintaining the cellular shapes of the bacteria becomes a novel approach to improve bio-manufacture. These cellular-shape-related target genes are also involved in cell growth, cell elongation or cell division , therefore cell morphology engineering can conversely be regulated by the processes of cell division and cell elongation . Through morphology engineering, the bacterial cell-shapes can be shifted as expected from such as fibers to spheres, or small to large. These morphology changes subsequently influence the synthesis of target products , as well as cell growth, inclusion body accumulation and separation of products . One of the most successful examples of cell morphology engineering in industrial biotechnology is the production of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA), an important polyester material accumulated as non-dissolved solid particles in the inner space of microorganism cells. The volume of bacterial cells is one of the limiting factors for PHA synthesis in host. Researchers therefore proposed different genetic strategies, i.e., inhibiting the expression of the cell-elongation-relevant cytoskeleton protein MreB and cell-division-relevant protein FtsZ, to achieve the changes in cell shape and cell volume in both  and  . Through MreB regulation, the cells were rods in the early stage, then became spherical in later; at the same time, the cell volume increased correspondingly, and the intracellular PHA titer enhanced to 8.11 g/L from previous 4.44 g/L . Through FtsZ inhibition (that is. The cell division ring is blocked), the shapes of the engineered cells changed from rods to fibers; meanwhile the titer of PHA products increased to 10.67 g/L. And also, the elongated cells can be precipitated naturally, thereby the cell harvesting process (e. g. centrifugation) can be simplified and the separation cost can be reduced . Hyaluronic acid (HA) is a glycosaminoglycan used in many industries such as food, cosmetics and clinical medicine . The hyaluronic acid synthase (HAS) is a membrane-binding protein, responsible for both HA polymerization and translocation .  is the natural HA-producing strain as industrial microorganisms at present . After mutation breeding and cultivation process optimization, HA was produced in a 100 L fermentation tank with a yield of 6–7 g/L and a molecular weight of 3.2 MDa . Recently, heterologous biosynthesis of HA was achieved in the engineered , ,  and  [, , , ]. Unlike ,  is a Generally-Recognized--Safe (GRAS) strain widely used in the food industry . By introducing the HAS genes and optimizing the metabolic pathways, the high titer production of HA (28.7 g/L, 210kD Mw) was achieved in a 5 L fermentor with the engineered  ATCC13032 . Further by introducing into the hyaluronidase, 74 g/L small 54kD Mw HA was also obtained . The available membrane surface area can significantly influence the folding and yield of a membrane protein . Considering that HAS is a membrane binding protein and the surface area of cell membrane would affect the HA synthesis capacity of single cell , the genes related to the cell morphology of  might be regulated to change the cell membrane amount, so as to enhance the HAS expression and single-cell HA synthesis capacity. Different from  , DivIVA is another essential protein for cell elongation in . The DivIVA oligomers are located at the two poles of cell and provide scaffolds for the peptidoglycan synthesis proteins. The changes in DivIVA expression can change the cells into sphere or “light bulb” shape . Similar to the other microorganisms, FtsZ is a core component in cell division of , aggregating in the middle of the cell to form a Z ring which causes the cell to divide. Inhibition of FtsZ expression let the whole cell get longer . In this paper, we for the first time proposed a new idea that to enhance HA synthesis in the engineered  via cell morphology engineering. Through up- or down-regulating the expression levels of  gene and  gene, respectively, the cell morphology of  was successfully changed and the cell volume was enlarged. And further, the effects of cell morphology changes on HA synthesis capacity and HAS expression of single cell was investigated. DNA electrophoresis, Gibson assembly reaction, DNA enzyme digestion and ligation, and plasmids transformation were performed in accordance with the standard laboratory protocols. Phanta high-fidelity DNA polymerase (Vazyme, Biotech Co., Ltd., China) was used in PCRs (Polymerase Chain Reaction). Plasmid extraction kit, gel extraction kit and total bacterial RNA extraction kit were purchased from Omega Bio-tek (Norcross, GA, United States). Gibson assembly reaction kits were purchased from Clonesmarter Technologies (Scottsdale, AZ, United States). QuickCut restriction enzymes were purchased from Takara (Dalian, China). The reverse transcription kit and qRT-PCR master mix were purchased from Vazyme (China). Plasmids and strain construction Plasmids and strains used in current study. from native plasmid pGA1(GenBank: ) of , Kana, P, F-mcrAΔ()ϕ80  ΔM15 Δ X74  Δ()  () Wild type derivate, P replaced by P, Kana Wild type derivate, P replaced by P, Kana . -P: P derivate, pX-AB, Kana, Cm . -P: P derivate, pX-AB, Kana, Cm Wild type derivate, pEC-DivIVA, Kana Wild type derivate, pEC-FtsZ, Kana Wild type derivate, pEC-AB, Kana Wild type derivate, pEC-AB-DivIVA, Kana Wild type derivate, pEC-AB-FtsZ, Kana Wild type derivate, pEC-RFP:AB, Kana Wild type derivate, pEC-RFP:AB-FtsZ, Kana The plasmids and strains used in this study are listed in . The primers used for gene amplifications are listed in . Plasmid pEC-Ptac was served as the backbone for  gene and  gene. Plasmid pk18mobsacB with sacB which produced levansucrase was used to edit genome via double crossover homologous recombination. Shake flask culture of recombinant The seeds of different engineered  were all cultured overnight at 30 °C with 50 μg/mL kanamycin in the LBG20 medium (NaCl: 10 g/L, yeast extract: 5 g/L, peptone: 10 g/L, glucose: 20 g/L). When OD of the seed broth reached 2.5, it was added into 50 mL of fermentation medium with 2.5%v/v inoculum in 300 mL flask. The fermentation medium contained: corn syrup powder: 20 g/L, glucose: 40 g/L, (NH)SO: 30 g/L, KHPO: 1 g/L, KHPO: 0.5 g/L, MnSO·7HO: 10 mg/L, FeSO·7HO: 10 mg/L, and kanamycin, 50 μg/mL. After 3 h culture at 28 °C, 1 mM isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactoside (IPTG) was supplemented to induce the HAS expression and HA biosynthesis. HA titer and HA average molecular weight determination 1 mL of fermentation broth was treated with 3 mL of ethanol and placed at 4 °C for 2 h. The supernatant was discarded by centrifugation (room temperature, 10000 rpm, 3min). The precipitate was dried at room temperature for 1 h and dissolved with 1 mL of deionized water. Then the HA titer in the supernatant obtained after centrifugation (room temperature, 10000 rpm, 3min) was measured by the modified CTAB method, as previously described . Gel filtration chromatography (GFC) combined with a differential refraction detector was used to measure the weight-average molecular weight (Mw) of the HA. The details were reported previously as well . RNA isolation, reverse transcriptase PCR, quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) assay RNA isolation, reverse transcriptase PCR and qRT-PCR were performed as illustrated in our previous study . The housekeeping gene was  to normalize the target gene expression by using dnaE (qRT)-s/dnaE (qRT)-as. The target genes  and  were analyzed by divIVA (qRT)-s/divIVA (qRT)-as and ftsZ (qRT)-s/ftsZ (qRT)-as, respectively. Plate counting method and the fluorescence determined by flow cytometry After measuring OD600, the fermentation broth was serially diluted 10, 10, 10 and 10 times with sterile water. Three LB plates were inoculated each with 0.2 ml dilutions of various concentrations and cultured overnight at 37 °C in incubator. Visible colonies were counted at 48 h. The diluted multiple of the plates which the number of single colonies between 100 and 500 were recorded. The relationship between OD600 and cell numbers was also calculated by diluted multiple and colonies. The fermentation broths were diluted to 10 cells/mL with deionized water, and the fluorescence value of single cell was determined by flow cytometer S3e™(bio-rad) with the mCherry (RFP) channel. The bacterial solution without fluorescent gene was used as the negative control. The number and intensity of cells with fluorescence value greater than 10 were counted, and the fluorescence value of single cell was analyzed. The cell morphology observed by optical microscope and TEM 2 μL fermentation broth was smeared on a glass slide. After heat-fixing of the cells over an alcohol burner flame for 10 s, the slide was stained in 0.1% fuchsin dye for 1 min, washed with the distilled water for 1 min, air-dried. Dropping 20 μL pine tar on the dyed cell, the cell morphology was directly observed with 100 × objective lens by NIKON Eclipse 50i. TEM images of cell morphology at 48 h were gotten by HITACHI TEM(H–7650B) in the center of Biomedical Analysis, Tsinghua University. Down-and–up dual regulation strategies of FtsZ and DivIVA to obtain enlarged cells with enhanced surface-area Morphology engineering design of DivIVA and FtsZ to obtain enlarged cells with enhanced surface-area. (a) The locating positions of DivIVA and FtsZ in a cell. (b) Deduced morphology shifts of  after reducing or enhancing expression of DivIVA and FtsZ. (c) Morphology-regulated cells would improve the HAS expression and HA synthesis due to the enhanced surface-area. The most common way to change cell morphology is to regulate the expression of genes related to cell elongation and cell division, e.g.  and . As we know, DivIVA is an essential protein in  cell elongation. The oligomer-DivIVA proteins are located at the two poles of the cell, as scaffolds for the proteins which synthesizing peptidoglycan (as shown in a). Down/up dual regulation of DivIVA was both proposed to obtain sphere-like enlarged cells or “light-bulb” shape cells, respectively (b). When reducing the expression of DivIVA, the synthesis-direction of the cell wall will be no longer limited, thereby the cells can't maintain the short rod shape and become spheres. But when increasing the expression of DivIVA, it will be unevenly distributed at the two poles of the cell, resulting in higher synthesis rate of peptidoglycan on one side than the other, consequently forming the asymmetric “light-bulb” shapes. FtsZ is a core component in cell division of  and it is homologous to microtubulin in higher biological cells. The FtsZ proteins aggregate in the middle of the cell to form a Z-division ring, producing a contractile force that causes the cell to divide (a). Down-expression of FtsZ, that is, blocking the formation of cell division rings and forming conjoined multinucleated cells, is the regular idea to obtain elongated cells and thus obtain enhanced surface area of the cell membrane. On the contrary, we further proposed a new idea to obtain dumbbell-like enlarged cells through up-expression of FtsZ. In this design, the Z-ring will be overproduced, consequently disturbing the cell division and causing the long axis length of the  cells even longer (b). Since HA synthase is a kind of transmembrane enzyme, the enhanced cell volume means the enhanced surface area of individual cell and also the enhanced amount of HAS expression, consequently obtaining the enhanced capability of HA accumulation, as shown in c. Construction of the morphology-regulated  recombinants In  ATCC13032 host, the common promoter P was weak compared with promoter P and P . To down-express the DivIVA and FtsZ, P was thus selected to  substitute the natural P and P, respectively. Down or up expression strategies of  and . (a,b) Down-regulated strain: -P: P and -P: P, respectively, constructed by in situ promoter replacement through single crossover homologous recombination. (c,d) Up-regulated strain: /pEC-DivIVA and /pEC-FtsZ, respectively, constructed by plasmids overexpression. Suicide plasmid P-DivIVA (part) and P-FtsZ (part) with weak promoter P and homologous arm of  and  were both constructed, as shown in . After transforming into wild-type  ATCC13032, single crossover homologous recombination was occurred and the positive clones on kanamycin plate were selected. Colony PCR and gene sequencing results (as shown in ) verified that two engineered strains: -P: P and -P: P, with weakened promoter of  and  in genome, were successfully obtained (as shown in a and b). On the other hand, overexpression of  and  was achieved by recombinant plasmids pEC-DivIVA and pEC-FtsZ with P promoter and strong RBS sequences, as shown in c and d. Recombinant strain /pEC-DivIVA and /pEC-FtsZ overexpressing the DivIVA and FtsZ, respectively, was subsequently constructed after plasmid transformation. Cell morphology changes of engineered  via down/up dual regulation of FtsZ and DivIVA Relative expression of  and  in .  after down/up-regulation of DivIVA and FtsZ with control strain (wild-type) by qRT-PCR. Relative expression levels were measured in triplicate at 24 h by qRT-PCR, and the error bars are the standard deviation. Control: wild-type; DivIVA reduced: . -P: P; DivIVA enhanced: /pEC-DivIVA; FtsZ reduced: . -P: P; FtsZ enhanced: /pEC-FtsZ. Cell morphology changes of the  cells before and after down/up-regulation of DivIVA and FtsZ. Cell morphology were observed at 24 h/48 h by optical microscope, and at 48 h by TEM. Original cell: wild-type; DivIVA reduced expression: -P: P; DivIVA enhanced expression: /pEC-DivIVA; FtsZ reduced expression: -P: P; FtsZ enhanced expression: /pEC-FtsZ. With the wild-type strain as control, the four morphometric-regulatory strains: -P: P, -P: P, /pEC-DivIVA and /pEC-FtsZ, were cultured in flask for 48 in parallel. Cell samples at 24 h or 48 h were observed with both qRT-PCR () and optical microscope (). As shown in , the results of qRT-PCR showed that the expression of  gene and  gene was significantly reduced, only 0.12 and 0.42 of the wild gene, respectively, after P substitution (). As shown in , cells of the wild-type showed short rod shape under the optical microscope, with an axial length of 1.5 ± 0.2 μm and a radial length of 0.7 ± 0.1 μm. After reduced expression of , the cells obviously became spherical, with a diameter of 1.2 ± 0.2 μm. After enhanced expression of , however, the engineered cells looked like “light bulb” as deduced. The axial length increased to over 2.7 μm, and the radial length increased from 0.7 μm to over 1 μm. For the  gene, the down or up expression regulation harvested even larger cell morphology changes. When expression of the  was reduced, the engineered cells were elongated and the axial length of some elongated cells reached 2.0 μm. When the  gene was overexpressed, the engineered cells were not only elongated, but also enlarged at two terminals, forming dumbbell-like engineered cells with the longest axial length even up to 7.0 μm (b). The estimated single-cell membrane area of each recombinant strain. Note: The length and diameter parameters of single cell were estimated by microscopic observation. Tens of cells for each strain were observed and the mean value of the length and diameter was calculated. Different area formulas for various shapes were described in . According to the microscopic observed cells, we roughly estimated the length and diameter parameters of tens of cells for each strain, then roughly calculated the surface (membrane) area of a single cell before and after morphology changes, as summarized in  (The parameters and area formulas for various shapes were shown in ). After morphological regulation, both reduced and enhanced expression of DivIVA and FtsZ increased the surface area of cell membrane. Relatively, up-regulation both showed remarkably larger cell surface area than down-regulation. For example, when overexpressing the , the membrane area of single cell was 2.9 folds of that of the original control; when overexpressing the , it was even enhanced to 5.2 folds of the control. HA biosynthesis with the morphology-changed  strains Using the successfully constructed  strains with obvious morphology changes through down/up dual regulation of  and  as hosts, we further introduced the biosynthetic genes of HA ( and ) via plasmid and enabled the novel engineered strains to produce HA. We had tested different clone strategies harboring different HA synthase genes, and finally we chose one  from  subsp.  and one  form  as the superior biosynthetic genes . Cell morphology and HA biosynthesis with the morphology-changed engineered  strains. Cell morphology were observed at 24 h/48 h by optical microscope, and at 48 h by TEM. OD600 were measured in triplicate from 8 h to 48 h. HA titers were measured in triplicate at 24 h and 48 h and the error bars are the standard deviation. Original cell: wild-type; DivIVA reduced expression: -P: P/pX-AB; DivIVA enhanced expression: /pEC-AB-DivIVA; FtsZ reduced expression: -P: P/pX-AB; FtsZ enhanced expression: /pEC-AB-FtsZ. Four engineered strains carrying down/up regulated  and  in genome or plasmid, i.e. -P: P/pX-AB, /pEC-AB-DivIVA, -P: P/pX-AB and /pEC-AB-FtsZ, were obtained (as shown in ). Parallel cultures of the engineered strains were performed in flask with /pX-AB without morphology regulation as control. Cell morphology, cell growth in term of the optical density (OD) and HA titer were observed or measured, as shown in . When down-expressed the  gene, the engineered cells still changed into small spherical in diameter 1.1–1.3 μm after introduction of the HA synthesis pathway; but when it was overexpressed, the morphology of the engineered cells only showed slightly difference from the control. And also, down-regulating the  gene significantly inhibited the cell growth, resulting into very low cell biomass (the OD at 48 h decreased from 26.6 to 8.1) and thereby very low accumulated HA titer (<2 g/L). On the contrary, up-regulating the  didn't obviously affect the cell biomass and final HA titer (6.3 g/L), corresponding to the slight changes of their cell morphology. The  dual regulation on HA production showed varied results. Down-expression of  gene significantly changed cell morphology into elongated cells as expected; but similar to -down regulation, cell growth was inhibited and thereby the final HA titer was significantly reduced. Interestingly, overexpression of the  gene remarkably enlarged the cells at even early 24 h (the axial length increased to 6–8 μm). The cell growth was again inhibited, but just slightly (OD600 reduced to 21.1 from 25.9); correspondingly, we harvested weakly reduced total HA titer (4.8 g/L). The number of cells corresponding to 1 OD and HA synthesis amount of single cell. The number of cells corresponding to 1OD (10 cells/L) HA synthesis amount of single cell (ng HA/cell) We further calculated its HA synthesis amount of single cell through bacterial plate counting, and he results were summarized in . The average HA yield per cell was highly enhanced to 7.12 ng of /pEC-AB-FtsZ from 0.49 ng of the control strain, which was as high as 13.5-fold increase. Enhanced HAS expression on cell membrane contributes to the enhanced single cell HA synthesis capacity HAS synthesis in single cell indirectly determined by flow cytometry. A: wild-type; B: /pEC-RFP:AB; C: /pEC-RFP:AB-FtsZ. The bacteria were cultured in the fermentation medium for 24 h, then diluted to 10/mL with deionized water for flow cytometry. The fluorescence less than 100 was considered as background. The abscissa represented the fluorescence value; the ordinate represented the number of cells. The white line represented the average fluorescence intensity. For the FtsZ up-regulated strain, a red fluorescent protein RFP gene was further cloned and fused at the N-terminal of HAS gene (), to test if the HAS amount expressed on the membrane was enhanced due to the increase of the cell membrane surface area. The target RFP-positive strain /pEC-RFP:AB-FtsZ and two control strains, /pEC-RFP:AB (with RFP) and /pEC-AB (without RFP), were cultured in parallel in flask, and the single cell fluorescence value of each strain was measured by flow cytometry, as shown in . Compared with /pEC-RFP:AB, the fluorescence intensity distribution of /pEC-RFP:AB-FtsZ that overexpressed FtsZ shifted significantly to the right, and the average fluorescence intensity of a single cell increased from 431 units to 1345 units. This demonstrated that the FtsZ up-regulation did increase the HAS amount by 2.1 folds, accompanying with its enlarged cell size. That is, the overexpression of  gene successfully achieved higher HAS expression through larger cell size, consequently achieved higher HA production capacity of a single engineered cell. Fundamental research on cell morphology regulation have been reported in many literatures. The change of cell morphology in eukaryotic cells is mostly based on the change of cytoskeleton. Microfilaments, microtubules and intermediate filaments are the components of cytoskeleton . Most bacterial species have structural homologs of actin, tubulin and coiled coil filaments. The actins including MreB, FtsA, MamK, ParM and Alps, are assembled into helical or straight filaments in the bacterial cytoplasm. The essential cell division protein FtsZ forms a dynamic ring at mid-cell. It belongs to tubulins which also contain CetZ, TubZ and others . And coiled coil filaments are more complex, for instance CreS, Scy, FilP, DivIVA, ESCRT-III and CrvA . These proteins can all be used to regulate cell morphology. In , , and , overexpression of MreB caused cells becoming larger [, , ]. In , ,  and , inhibition of FtsZ made the cells into long strips; while overexpression of FtsZ let the cells become dumbbell-shapes [,, , ]. In addition to cytoskeleton related genes, we can also control each period of cell division by regulating cell cycle related genes, so as to obtain cells with different sizes and different specific surface areas as well . But so far, only very few studies on enhancing the yield of target products by morphology engineering were reported. The most successful case was the production of PHA, a solid particle-like intracellular product. When morphological regulation made the volume of the single cell larger, the engineered cells could accommodate more PHA particles and thereby improve its productivity . Besides, the poly-γ-glutamic acid (γ-PGA) titer of engineered  was increased by 55.7% through MreB inhibition . Unlike PHA, HA is a kind of extracellular products. That is, the cell volume is not a constraint limiting its yield. But HAS is a membrane-binding enzyme. Its expression amount on membrane is the key factor determining HA production capacity. Therefore, the larger surface area of cell (membrane) means the higher HAS expression capacity, thereby the higher HA titer probable. Based on this consideration, we proposed the novel idea in this work that regulating the cell size and membrane area to improve the HA production capacity of the single cell through cell morphological engineering. Down-and-up dual regulation of both DivIVA and FtsZ in engineered  were proposed for the first time to change the morphology of cells. With respect to the down-regulation, up-regulation strategy was easier to achieve via plasmid expression. When DivIVA or FtsZ expression was up-regulated, bulb-shaped and dumbbell-shaped cells was formed, respectively. But surprisingly, after the introduction of HA synthesis pathway, the morphology of the engineered cells changed for the similar DivIVA and FtsZ up-regulated cells. Instead of bulb-shape or dumbbell-shape, the engineered cells became “small ellipsoid " or “long rods”, respectively. Particularly, up-regulation of FtsZ significantly enlarged the cells even at 24 h; for example, the axial length of the engineered cells increased to 6–8 μm from original 1–2 μm, which is far more effective than that of DivIVA control. Cell morphology changes greatly affected cell division, thus reduced the number of cells and correspondingly reduced the total HA titer, no matter up- or down-regulation of DivIVA and FtsZ. To improve the final HA titer, the contradiction between the enlarged cell surface area and the reduced cell density must be solved. In the study of PHA, Jiang et al. introduced a temperature-induced  gene into the -knockout cells to precisely control the expression of MreB through temperature , thereby successfully removed the cell growth inhibition arising from MreB overexpression. Similar strategy can also be applied in this HA production system. FtsZ can be lately-induced for overexpression via diverse inducers, and also dynamic metabolic regulation. Dynamic metabolic regulation can use designed regulatory elements to correlate the growth of bacteria, intracellular metabolites, signal molecules and other factors that changed with fermentation time, or controllable fermentation conditions such as temperature and light, with the target regulatory response . For example, acetic acid, succinic acid and other by-products will be increasing produced during the production of HA. These by-products can be designed as ribose switches for dynamic regulation  of cell morphology-related genes, which would enlarge the engineered cells as expected in one hand; and didn't significantly affect the cell division and biomass accumulation in the other hand, therefore minimize the impact of morphogenetic changes on HA production. Excitingly, the single-cell HA production capability was remarkably enhanced due to the cell enlarging regulation from FtsZ overexpression, although it reduced the cell numbers. By overexpression of , the cell membrane area of a single cell was increased to 5.2 folds of the control; meanwhile, the expression of HAS in the membrane increased by 2.1 folds; and finally, the amount of HA synthesis titer of single cell highly increased by 13.5 folds as well. We deduced that this significant enhancement is because that not only the cell membrane area, but also the precursor materials, energy and production machines for HA synthesis in a single cell factory are all increased accompanying with enlargement of the cell size. Thus we can say that up-regulation of FtsZ is the optimal strategy to further enhance HA yield in the near future, after removing the morphological-change-resulted cell growth inhibition. Cell morphology engineering will be a powerful new technology for enhanced production of various valuable products in green biomanufacturing, with the fast development of synthetic biology. Cell morphology regulation toward  was carried out to try to enlarge the engineered cells, increase the HAS expression on cell membrane and thereby improve the single-cell HA producing capacity. DivIVA, the cell-elongation-related peptidoglycan supporting protein, and FtsZ, the cell division related protein, were both selected as regulation targets. Down/up dual regulation was performed via weak promoter substitution or plasmid overexpression, respectively. Under non-HA synthesizing conditions, both reduced and enhanced expression of DivIVA and FtsZ significantly changed the cell morphologies of engineered  from natural short rod into morphology of small-ellipsoid-like (DivIVA-reduced), bulb-like (DivIVA-enhanced), long-rod (FtsZ-reduced) and dumbbell-like (FtsZ-enhanced), respectively. After HA synthesis pathway was introduced, only overexpression of FtsZ surprisingly changed the cell-shape into long and thick rod with 5.2-fold-increase of cell membrane area. Overexpression of FtsZ promoted the HAS expression on membrane significantly, which was verified by subsequent RFP fusion expression with HAS and flow cytometry analyses. Consequently, HA synthesis capability of the engineered  cells was immensely improved and we achieved 13.5-fold-increase of the single-cell HA producing yield. In one word, FtsZ enhanced expression is the most optimal way to obtain the enlarged recombinant cells with slightly negative impacts on cell growth, thereby achieve the highest single-cell HA producing capacity. We can expect that the total HA productivity of the engineered cells will be further greatly enhanced after eliminating the influence of morphological regulation on cell growth, through optimizing the two-stage induction, introducing dynamic metabolic regulation and other synthetic biology new methods. Current work is also highly valuable for other microbial products with similar limiting factors such as cell-volume and cell membrane. Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing, Yukun Zheng; Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing - Original Draft, Fangyu Cheng; Investigation(part), Bo Zheng; Resources, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Huimin Yu. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of manuscript..