Modern biology
has illuminated
the complexity of molecular processes that determine cellular phenotype. For example, while mutations within the coding sequence of a gene
can alter some phenotype, similar phenotypic effects can also arise
without any mutations, solely from changes in the levels of the mRNA
and protein encoded by the gene. The origins and consequences of
gene expression changes are at least as complex and as difficult to
unravel as those of coding sequence changes. Disrupting regulatory
sequences or epigenetic controllers of any gene can have effects that
propagate through the gene regulatory network causing emergent phenomena such as cell death, phenotype switching, and carcinogenesis. Moreover, gene expression levels can be tighly constrained within
narrow ranges, or they can differ substantially from cell to cell
in genetically identical populations, giving rise to complex expression
patterns with phenotypic consequences. Genetic studies
have predominantly focused on identifying and characterizing
phenotypes associated with gene expression through knockout, knockdown,
and overexpression, but the nuanced effects of gene expression levels
on phenotype remain poorly understood. For example, simultaneous changes
in the levels of two proteins can result in synergistic, nonadditive
effects conceptually similar to mutational epistasis. As a first step toward understanding such effects, multigene
expression control could reveal how specific protein levels jointly
induce or suppress a phenotype. Such multigene expression-control
methods should be precise, reliable, robust, and ubiquitously applicable
across different cell types. They should enable engineering applications
that investigate the cell as a black box, generating transfer functions
of cellular outcomes given a set of gene expression inputs, and may
be critical for cell fate reprogramming in biomedical applications. Synthetic biology is primed
to provide such gene expression control
methods. Synthetic gene circuits are comprised of non-native
DNA and can manipulate the expression of genes in response to a multitude
of cues, including external chemicals or intracellular signaling events,
with possible applications in cellular control, perturbation, reprogramming,
and outcome reporting. For example, the
gene expression linearizer circuit offers precise
protein level tuning compared to widely used induction systems like
Tet-On, which can have a steep dose–response
region with uncharacterized variability, making it difficult to titrate
inducer dosage to achieve desired levels of gene expression. The linearizer
gene circuit architecture utilizes negative feedback to beget uniform
protein levels proportional to external inducer dose for any single
gene. However, whether linearizer gene circuits can independently
and precisely control the expression of two genes in mammalian cell
lines has been unexplored. Multigene expression control was
previously accomplished in yeast
through the use of human hormone-inducible regulators. However, without negative autoregulation such
gene circuits might generate nonlinear and noisy gene expression responses.
Nonlinearity and cell–cell variability can complicate cellular
control or mapping of gene expression to cellular phenotype. Lastly,
those gene circuits, while functional in yeast, cannot readily translate
to mammalian cells due to the use of estradiol and progesterone hormone
inducers, which are biologically active in mammalian cells and prone
to elicit off-target cellular responses. Multigene expression control
has been implemented in mammalian cells as well, but without negative
feedback, and with unknown variability. Currently, independent and precise control of multigene expression
in mammalian cells is lacking. Here we introduce a chemically
inducible system of dual orthogonal
linearizers to enable studies of individual and joint contributions
of multiple gene expression levels toward an observable phenotype
or behavior in mammalian cells. Together, orthogonal linearizer gene
circuits provide a system that can simultaneously overexpress a pair
of genes to desirable levels independently and precisely in the same
cell. This enables exploring the phenotypic landscape of multigene
expression, to reveal epistasis-like effects unexpected from separately
controlling single protein levels, or to implement multigene control
toward the induction of a specific phenotype or cell reprogramming. Developing
an Orthogonal Linearizer Using the PhlF Repressor
Protein Gene expression linearizers are gene circuits that
can linearly and precisely increase the expression of a target gene
according to inducer dose in eukaryotic cells. This linear, low-noise dependence of average gene expression
on induction is due to negative autoregulation and identical promoters
controlling gene expression. The TetR-mLin linearizer gene circuit
used the Tet repressor protein (TetR) binding to two  operator sequences (2x) in two identical promoter
regions to repress its own expression as well as that of a reporter
gene. Increasing concentrations of Doxycycline
(Dox) relieve repression by TetR, causing the average expression of
both TetR and the target eGFP protein to increase linearly, with low
variability across the effective Dox concentrations. This TetR-mLin
gene circuit can control a gene of interest (GOI) downstream from
another copy of the TetR-regulated promoter or under the same promoter,
using a 2A sequence to produce a tetR-GOI
multicistronic transcript. To precisely
and independently control the expression of multiple genes simultaneously,
we aimed to construct a second inducible linearizer gene circuit that
could function in tandem with the existing TetR-mLin gene circuit.
Previously, we have shown that TetR-based linearizer gene circuits
function robustly in yeast and various mammalian cell lines if TetR
self-represses and its promoter is identical with that of the target
gene. Whether this holds for a different repressor protein has not
been tested. In order to replicate the same linearizer gene circuit
architecture, we chose the candidate repressor protein PhlF, a TetR
homologue originally derived from . Like TetR, the
PhlF transcriptional repressor protein contains both a ligand and
a DNA binding domain. The addition of the inducer chemical 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol
(DAPG) allosterically prevents PhlF binding
to a 30 bp operator sequence ( site). We designed two variants of the PhlF-mediated negative feedback
gene circuit (PhlF-mLin). These variants bore either a single PhlF
operator site upstream of the initiator element (PhlFs-mLin) or two
operator sites flanking the initiator (PhlFd-mLin) in the strong CMV
promoter driving PhlF expression (). We linked PhlF repressor protein expression
to the mCherry fluorescent reporter protein through a porcine teschovirus-1
2A (P2A) self-cleaving peptide. This minimal design allowed us to
control both PhlF and mCherry expression through a common promoter
as required by linearizer design, while minimizing sequence length
to aid in genomic integration. As previously described, these designs featured a nuclear localization
sequence (NLS) to increase nuclear repressor concentration, Kozak
sequence (KS) to optimize translation rate, and the Woodchuck post-transcriptional
regulatory element (WPRE) to increase expression. Our goals were to
generate a linear, low-noise gene expression response to inducer dose
with (i) low basal expression in the OFF state; (ii) a high range
of DAPG doses wherein the gene circuit responds linearly; (iii) appreciable
fold induction between induced and uninduced states; and (iv) low
gene expression noise measured as the coefficient of variation (CV). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf To test these criteria in the
novel PhlF linearizer gene circuit
prototypes, we integrated both genomically into HEK 293 cell lines
and assessed clonal DAPG dose responses through flow cytometry. In
order to insert these and subsequent gene circuits into the same genomic
locus in single copy robustly and reliably, we used Flp-In-293 cells
bearing a Flp-recombinase compatible FRT site in a well-expressed genomic locus. To minimize any heritable variability
that could confound our assessment, we sorted polyclonal populations
into single cell clones prior to downstream experimentation. DAPG
did not affect the growth rate of the cells. We measured the dose
response of the cell lines bearing the PhlF-mLin gene circuits across
a broad range of DAPG concentrations (0 to 25 μM DAPG). For
each cell line bearing a circuit variant, we seeded samples at different
inducer concentrations, and allowed gene expression to stabilize over
∼2 days (confirming that the histograms did not change in time).
We then measured the steady-state mean and coefficient of variation
(CV) of fluorescence intensity at each of the inducer doses. Both
variants showed linearity of mean fluorescence with increasing DAPG
concentrations prior to saturation (a, d) and consistently
low noise as measured by CV across all doses (c, f). Single cell
fluorescence distributions were uniformly narrow and unimodal across
doses (b, e) and between experimental replicates (). Both variants had comparable
basal expression in the absence of DAPG () and had linear dose–responses of
mean fluorescence as measured by L1-norm and  regression (). The PhlFd-mLin
gene circuit had a higher maximum fold induction, exhibited more pronounced
linearity across a broader range of inducer doses, and had lower gene
expression noise as measured by average CV (, b,c and e,f, ) than the PhlFs-mLin variant. Overall, these results
demonstrate that the existing linearizer gene circuit design applies
to a repressor different from TetR, enabling similar functional characteristics. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf To compare these novel phlF-based gene circuits against previously
established TetR-based linearizer gene circuits, we inserted a TetR-mLin
construct into the HEK 293 Flp-In cell line as described above and
conducted a flow cytometry dose response across a validated range
of Doxycycline concentrations. We likewise
quantified fluorescence mean and CV dose–responses (g–i and ). As expected, eGFP fluorescence mean
increased linearly with inducer concentrations (g), with low noise (i, ). We observed
a somewhat greater range of linearity and fold induction (, ) than previously reported in other cell lines with
random integration of the TetR-mLin gene circuit. Interestingly, the dose–responses of both PhlF-mLin
gene circuits had lower slopes than TetR-mLin, requiring larger inducer
doses to approach saturation. To investigate why this occurs, we conducted
computational modeling as previously described, which suggested that slower diffusion of DAPG compared to Doxycycline
across the cell membrane could be causing this slope difference (). Schematic
of orthogonal linearizer gene circuits: TetR-mLin (top)
and PhlF-mLin (bottom). At the core of each gene circuit a self-repressing
protein (TetR and PhlF). The repressor protein inhibits its own expression
as well as that of the corresponding reporter protein (eGFP and mCherry,
respectively). A different chemical inducer (Dox and DAPG, respectively)
alleviates each repression. We created two variants (inset) of the
PhlF-mLin circuit: one with a single phlFO operator site upstream
of the initiator element, and another with two operator sites flanking
the initiator. Steady-state dose responses of individual PhlF-mLin (top)
and TetR-mLin
(bottom) gene circuits. (a) Mean mCherry fluorescence intensity calculated
across 3 independent replicates for each DAPG inducer concentration.
Flow cytometry measurements of single operator variant phlFs-mLin
cells cultured under different DAPG doses were taken after the histograms
did not change anymore (, at steady state). Error
bars represent standard deviation. The black dashed line is a linear
fit across the corresponding DAPG inducer concentration range. (b)
Representative steady-state fluorescence distributions of phlFs-mLin
at selected doses. (c) Average CV of phlFs-mLin mCherry fluorescence  DAPG inducer concentrations. Error bars represent
standard deviation calculated across 3 independent replicates per
inducer dose. (d) Mean mCherry fluorescence calculated across 3 independent
replicates for each DAPG inducer concentration. Error bars represent
standard deviation. The black dashed line is a linear fit across the
corresponding DAPG dose range. (e) Representative fluorescence distributions
of phlFd-mLin at selected doses. Flow cytometry results of the double
operator variant phlFd-mLin cells cultured under different DAPG doses.
(f) Average CV of phlFd-mLin mCherry fluorescence  DAPG inducer concentration. Error bars represent standard deviation
calculated across 3 independent replicates per inducer dose. (g) Mean
eGFP fluorescence intensity calculated across 3 independent replicates
per Dox inducer concentration. Flow cytometry measurements of TetR-mLin
cells cultured under different Dox doses were taken after the histograms
did not change anymore (, at steady state). Error
bars represent standard deviation over 3 replicates. The black dashed
line is a linear fit across the corresponding Dox inducer concentration
range. (h) Representative fluorescence distributions of TetR-mLin
at selected Dox concentrations. (i) Average CV of TetR-mLin eGFP fluorescence
intensity  Dox inducer concentrations. Error
bars represent standard deviation calculated across 3 independent
replicates per inducer concentration. Evaluation Metrics of Clonal Cell
Lines Bearing Variant Linearizer Gene Circuits Investigating Clonal Heterogeneity http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf To investigate whether
gene expression control by the linearizer gene circuits depends on
the clones bearing the gene circuit, we tested fluorescent reporter
expression of uninduced and induced isogenic clones () across the two PhlF promoter variants ( = 7 clonal cell lines). We found heterogeneity in dose–response
across clones, possibly reflecting genetic and epigenetic clone–clone
differences in global gene expression control. The double operator
site PhlFd variant, on average, produced clones with lower basal expression
( < 0.001, ) than the single operator PhlFs variant. Both double operator site
linearizers (TetR-mLin and PhlFd-mLin) exhibited stronger correlations
between uninduced and induced expression levels than those of the
single operator PhlFs-mLin (), suggesting that additional operator sites strengthen the correlation
between basal expression and saturation levels (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf To further understand the variability
in dose response between clones, we performed flow cytometry measurements
of higher dose resolution for 3 clones per PhlF-mLin variant (). We found that both variants exhibited
similar dose–responses (). However, the PhlFd-mLin gene circuit had markedly lower CV and
therefore gene expression noise (). Across these clones, the PhlFd-mLin gene circuit’s dose–response
tended to be linear over a greater range of inducer doses (0 to 8.4
μM DAPG) than the PhlFs-mLin circuit (0 to 5.7 μM DAPG, ). Assessing Orthogonality
through Inducer Response To
orthogonally control the expression of two genes simultaneously, linearizer
gene circuits constructed with different repressor proteins should
not be cross-inducible. That is, the presence of DAPG in the growth
medium of cells integrated with TetR-mLin should not elicit eGFP fluorescence
response, and the presence of Dox should not cause mCherry fluorescence
changes in cells genetically modified with the phlF-mLin circuit.
For orthogonal control in the space spanned by the two inducer concentrations,
visually we expect the PhlF-mLin and TetR-mLin gene circuits to generate
planar bivariate dose response surfaces, each dose–response
plane being parallel to one inducer axis and orthogonal to the vertical
coordinate plane containing the other inducer axis. In other words,
we expect smooth, planar dose response surfaces of mean fluorescence,
each invariant either  Dox or  DAPG concentrations in the growth medium (a). Such linear bivariate mappings from inducers onto two
noninteracting protein levels, wherein the total reporter level depends
additively on the inducer concentrations, are a special case for more
complex mappings. Deviations of a phenotype from such additivity would
indicate interacting gene expression inputs in future applications. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf To assess the ability of the PhlF-mLin
gene circuits to reliably
and precisely actuate gene expression irrespective of the induction
state of the TetR-mLin gene circuit, we cultured both linearizer cell
lines in the presence of either Dox or DAPG. TetR-mLin cells exhibited
a marked increase in eGFP fluorescence in the presence of Doxycycline
but behaved as their uninduced cohort in the presence of DAPG. Likewise,
PhlF-mLin cells increased mCherry fluorescence when cultured in media
containing DAPG, but did not respond to Dox induction. (b,c) To confirm and quantify
these findings with greater sensitivity, we conducted 2-dimensional
dose response measurements across 4 Dox doses and 7 DAPG doses within
the linear range of each gene circuit on stably selected clonal TetR-mLin
and PhlF-mLin cell lines. Indeed, we observed that each gene circuit
still functioned as expected, producing bivariate dose–response
planes with no visible cross-talk effects from the presence of the
other inducer chemical. (d,e) We found no significant differences between Dox
induction groups ( > 0.05) in phlF-mLin cells
under
cross-induction as evidenced by one-way analysis of variance (). Likewise, we found no significant
differences in TetR-mLin cells across DAPG induction (). The mean CV of each gene circuit remained
low and did not change appreciably across the dose pairs, resulting
in flat, uniform planes. () Taken
together, these findings suggest that these gene circuits are not
cross-inducible (are orthogonal) and thus can be used in tandem. Bivariate
dose–responses of gene expression for cell lines
bearing single phlF-mLin and tetR-mLin gene circuits. (a) Schematic
representation of expected bivariate dose–response surfaces
(planes) for the PhlF-mLin (left) and TetR-mLin (right) gene circuits
under pairwise induction by Dox and DAPG. (b) Fluorescence images
of polyclonal HEK 293 Flp-In cells harboring stably integrated phlFs-mLin
gene circuit cultured in media without inducer chemicals, Dox-only
media, and media containing Dox and DAPG. Overlaid eGFP and mCherry
channels show mCherry expression only in the presence of DAPG. Scale
bars represent 500 μm. (c) Fluorescence images of polyclonal
HEK 293 Flp-In cells harboring stably integrated TetR-mLin gene circuit
cultured in media without inducer chemicals, DAPG-only media, and
media containing Dox and DAPG. Overlaid eGFP and mCherry channels
show eGFP expression only in the presence of Dox. Scale bar: 500 μm.
(d) Bivariate dose response (plane) of clonal HEK 293 Flp-In cells
harboring the stably integrated phlFd variant of the PhlF-mLin gene
circuit. Surface representation of mean mCherry fluorescence expression
across pairwise DAPG and Dox induction doses. Error bars represent
standard deviation calculated from 3 independent replicates per inducer
dose-pair. (e) 2-Dimensional slices through the mCherry fluorescence
plane showing mean fluorescence across DAPG inducer concentrations
for different Dox concentrations (red colors). (f) 2-Dimensional slices
through the mCherry fluorescence plane showing mean fluorescence across
Dox inducer concentrations for different Dox concentrations (green
colors). No significant differences between Dox groups were detected
by one-way ANOVA ( > 0.05). (g) Bivariate dose
response
of clonal HEK 293 Flp-In cells harboring stably integrated TetR-mLin
gene circuit. Surface (plane) representation of mean eGFP fluorescence
expression averaged from 3 replicates across pairwise DAPG and Doxycycline
induction doses. Error bars represent standard deviation calculated
from 3 independent replicates per dose-pair. (h) 2-Dimensional slices
through the eGFP fluorescence planes showing mean fluorescence across
DAPG inducer concentrations for different Dox concentrations (red
colors). No significant differences between DAPG groups were detected
by one-way ANOVA ( > 0.05). (i) 2-Dimensional
slices
through the eGFP fluorescence plane showing mean fluorescence across
Dox inducer concentrations for different Dox concentrations (green
colors). Multiplexing Orthogonal Linearizer Gene Circuits http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00534/suppl_file/sb9b00534_si_001.pdf To
determine whether the TetR and PhlF linearizer gene circuits could
operate orthogonally in the same cell, we integrated a plasmid bearing
the TetR-mLin gene circuit into the genome of cell lines with a stably
integrated PhlF-mLin gene circuit. The plasmid bore constitutively
expressed zeocin resistance (zeoR) protein which allowed us to select
for successful integration events with zeocin. Cells surviving selection
were single cell sorted, expanded, and assessed for orthogonality
using a 2-dimensional dose response as outlined above. The fluorescent
reporters chosen in this study were spectrally resolvable, with no
visible cross-talk between channels. The bivariate steady-state dose–responses
to two inducer concentrations were linearly increasing planes of protein
expression, with no cross-induction effects in single cells bearing
multiplexed linearizers (, ). The expression of mCherry as measured
by mean fluorescence increased linearly with DAPG concentration. Also,
mCherry fluorescence for cellular populations induced with increasing
concentrations of Dox were invariant to Dox dose ( > 0.05, ), generating horizontal
lines parallel to one another and to the Dox inducer axis for increasing
DAPG concentrations (c). Similarly, eGFP protein expression as a function of Dox
induction behaved linearly with no significant response to DAPG levels
in the medium (f,  > 0.05, ). Noise remained consistently low and did not vary across paired
inducer concentrations for either gene circuit. These results demonstrate
that TetR-mLin and PhlF-mLin gene circuits may be used for precise,
independent, and orthogonal multigene expression control, raising
the potential for testing phenotypic responses to multiple protein
levels in mammalian cells. Assessing experimental orthogonality of multiplexed
linearizer
circuits. (a) Bivariate dose response of mean mCherry fluorescence
intensity in HEK 293 Flp-In cells harboring both stably integrated
phlF-mLin and TetR-mLin gene circuits within the same clonal cell
line  pairwise DAPG and Dox inducer concentrations.
Error bars represent standard deviation calculated from 3 independent
replicates per inducer dose-pair. (b) 2-Dimensional slices through
the mCherry fluorescence plane showing mean fluorescence across DAPG
inducer concentrations for different Dox concentrations (red colors).
(c) 2-Dimensional slices through the mCherry fluorescence plane showing
mean fluorescence across Dox inducer concentrations for different
Dox concentrations (green colors). No significant differences were
found in mCherry fluorescence between groups of Dox concentrations
(ANOVA,  > 0.05) (d) Bivariate dose–response
of average mCherry CV across pairwise DAPG and Dox induction doses.
(e) Bivariate dose–response (plane) of mean eGFP fluorescence
expression averaged from 3 replicates across pairwise DAPG and Doxycycline
inducer concentrations. Error bars represent standard deviation calculated
from 3 independent replicates per dose-pair. (f) 2-Dimensional slices
through the eGFP fluorescence plane showing mean fluorescence across
DAPG inducer concentrations for different Dox concentrations (red
colors). No significant differences were found in eGFP fluorescence
between groups of DAPG concentrations (ANOVA,  >.05).
(g) 2-Dimensional slices through the eGFP fluorescence plane showing
mean fluorescence across Dox inducer concentrations for different
Dox concentrations (green colors). (h) Bivariate dose–response
of average eGFP CV across pairwise DAPG and Dox inducer concentrations. Current heterologous
expression systems are limited in their ability
to precisely induce gene expression responses in mammalian cell lines.
Linearizer gene circuits can tune the protein levels of a GOI placed under the control of
a synthetic promoter. However, cell states and phenotypes are often
controlled by multiple genes. Likewise, to understand how genes relate
and interact with one another to produce cell-level responses, we
need to control the expression of multiple genes. We previously have
built a TetR-based linearizer gene circuit capable of precisely controlling
gene expression in various cell types. Ideally, many such linearizers operating independently
and orthogonally to one another could achieve precise multidimensional
gene expression control and multivariate phenotype mapping. Toward
this goal, we constructed additional linearizer circuits utilizing
a different repressor (PhlF) and its operator sequences, which had
no operational cross-talk with TetR. We outlined the design, construction
and validation of the PhlF-based linearizer gene circuit. We further
demonstrated the orthogonality of this gene circuit to the TetR-based
linearizer gene circuit and showed the ability of the combined dual-linearizer
system to control the expression of two individual GOIs precisely
when genomically integrated into Flp-In-293 cells. Such a toolset
would beget novel methods of perturbational investigation of nonadditive
gene expression effects and would enable
biomedical applications in cellular reprogramming and beyond. Further modification and optimization of the PhlF-mLin
gene circuit
orthogonal to TetR-mLin may be possible through the consideration
of other repressors of the phl gene cluster as well as other inducers in the form of DAPG analogues. One such potential repressor is the  gene.
This gene-product has recently been identified to bind a 35-bp sequence
motif in the promoter of  to negatively inhibit
DAPG biosynthesis in  This mechanism
is a similar motif to repression through PhlF. The phlH repressor
protein interacts strongly with DAPG, but has other binding partners,
including MAPG, which may be used as inducers. Other variants of the TetR-orthogonal PhlF repressor-based
gene circuit may result in different dose response functions. Moreover,
other repressors could be employed to
build additional gene circuits orthogonal to both TetR-mLin and PhlF-mLin. This work focuses on building a technological framework that is
broadly applicable, bearing the potential to promote basic biology
or biomedical research. These two orthogonal linearizer gene circuits
permit precise, linear control of key genes, allowing the investigation
of the phenotypic landscape through linearly
tunable expression of driver genes. Depending on the desired experimental
design, the endogenous GOIs may be deleted in the cell line prior
to reintroduction under linearizer control. Considering the length
of the phlFO operator, the orthogonality to the TetR-mLin system,
and the apparent lack of DAPG toxicity, this new system should be
broadly applicable for controlling specific protein levels in eukaryotic
cells, with minimal side effects. Gene regulatory networks governing
phenotypic outcome are often
complex. They consist
of many feedback processes, interacting with one another in nontrivial
ways. Therefore, studying how network modifications alter gene expression
and thereby phenotype is difficult. This work serves to broaden the
range of investigational methods of gene pair relationships. Multiplexed linearizer gene circuits can be used for basic biological
research of selective and precise perturbation of genes interacting
with one another in complex networks. They can reveal unexpected interactions between the
expression levels of two genes, which is analogous to studies of epistasis
between two or more coding sequence changes. Likewise, these gene circuits can be used for cellular reprogramming or measurements of titrated gene expression contributions toward
a disease state. For the construction of the PhlF-linearizer,
DNA bearing a portion of the CMV promoter and either 1× and 2×
PhlF operator sites and corresponding restriction sites were synthesized
by GenScript and restriction cloned into the tetR-linearizer plasmid.
The PhlF and the mCherry genes were cloned in through overlap PCR
and restriction digest. Plasmids
were integrated
into HEK 293 Flp-In cells (Invitrogen, R750–07) through Flp-recombination
using the pOG44 vector (Invitrogen, V600520) in a 9:1 ratio or pCAG-FlpO
(Addgene, 63798) in a 1:1 ratio. Two μg total DNA was introduced
into 1–2 × 10 cells per well using the Lipofectamine
3000 transfection kit (Life Technologies, L3000008), used as per manufacturer’s
instructions. Approximately 90% transfection efficiency was confirmed
with positive control transfection of constitutive eGFP (pmaxGFP,
Lonza). A negative control was transfected with only the linearizer
plasmid to test for random integration. Cells were selected 3 days
post transfection with 50 μg/mL Hygromycin B (Invitrogen, 10687–010).
Selection dose was chosen  standard kill curve.
All control wells did not survive selection. Surviving cells
were single cell sorted into a 96 well plate and grown out for 2 weeks
before being passaged to flasks. Clones were selected through flow
cytometry with two inducer doses representing ON/OFF to verify single
cell population with a uniform fluorescence response. Due to a small
subpopulation silencing the inset, we maintained selection pressure
in between flow cytometry experiments. For random integration
of the TetR-mLin gene circuit into a stably
expressing cell line bearing a PhlF-mLin gene circuit, we randomly
integrated the plasmid pDN-D2irTNG4kwh into a clonal HEK 293 PhlF-mLin
cell line. Two μg total DNA was introduced into 1–2 ×
10 cells per well using the Lipofectamine 3000 transfection
kit (Life Technologies, L3000008), used as per manufacturer’s
instructions. Approximately 90% transfection efficiency was confirmed
with positive control transfection of constitutive eGFP (pmaxGFP,
Lonza). A negative control was transfected with only the linearizer
plasmid to test for random integration. Cells were selected 3 days
post transfection with 700 μg/mL Zeocin (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
R25001). Selection dose was chosen  standard kill
curve. The control well did not survive selection. Dose Response
and Flow Cytometry Clonal populations
were outgrown and plated onto 96-well plates at a seeding density
of 5–10 × 10 cells per well. Cells were dosed
with media containing appropriate doses of Doxycycline, DAPG, or both,
with 3 dose replicates per experiment. After a 48 h induction period,
cells were trypsinized with 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA (Life Technologies,
25200056), resuspended in calcium and magnesium free 1× DPBS
(Life Technologies, 14190250), and underwent flow cytometry on a BD
LSR Fortessa. We obtained 3–10 000 FSC/SSC gated events
per sample in the FITC (530/30 nm) and PE-Cy5 (695/40 nm) channels.
Each dose level consisted of 3 replicate samples. For fluorescence microscopy,
cells were passaged onto 6-well plates and induced for 48 h prior
to imaging. Images were acquired on a Nikon TiE inverted fluorescence
microscope equipped with a Nikon DSQi2 Digital Camera using CFI Plan
Fluor 10×/0.30/16.00 objective and ET Sputter Coat Ex470/40 Dm495
Bar525/50 FITC/GFP filter for EGFP and a ET Sputter Coat Ex560/40
Dm585 Bar630/75 TX Red filter for mCherry. Composite images with scale
bars were assembled in Nikon NIS Elements. FCS files were gated and analyzed using
custom MATLAB scripts. Cells were adaptively gated with a density-threshold
fit of log-transformed SSC and FSC values per sample to exclude debris
and cell clumps. To normalize out autofluorescence from the data,
we measured fluorescence of the HEK Flp-In parental cell line and
subtracted the mean fluorescence of the appropriate channel from each
sample flow event. L1-norm analysis, linear regression fits
and  were computed for a moving dose
window starting from uninduced (0 μM DAPG or 0 ng/mL Dox) to
maximal induction dose used experimentally per gene circuit. Statistical tests including two-sample  tests
and one-way ANOVA for assessing differences between clones and between
cross-induced groups, respectively, were conducted in Matlab..