The regulation
of gene expression,
guided by endogenous stimuli, is a valuable tool for cell reprogramming
and cell-based gene therapy. Synthetic circuits have the potential
to orchestrate protein expression and cellular physiology and provide
the means to precisely regulate the expression of exogenous and endogenous
genes. Synthetic biology has advanced the design of gene circuits that are responsive to various external signals,
such as small molecules, light, radio-waves, and temperature. Engineered transcription factors, based on designed DNA-binding
domains such as transcription activator-like effectors (TALEs) or
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR),
can target an almost unlimited number of DNA targets, making them
a powerful tool for the regulation of virtually any selected gene. When coupled with inducible systems, designable transcription factors
enable the external control of gene expression. Calcium-dependent
transcription factors are attractive tools for
synthetic biology applications, as many different physical and chemical
stimuli can induce the cellular uptake of calcium ions by activating
a variety of membrane receptors, such as G-protein coupled receptors
and calcium-selective ion channels. Most
calcium-dependent synthetic gene circuits engineered to date in eukaryotic
cells harness the nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) signaling
pathway. NFAT is a central transcription factor in mammalian
cells that is regulated by calcium influx  activation
of the calcineurin phosphatase, which in turn dephosphorylates NFAT.
This modification results in the translocation of NFAT from the cytosol
to the nucleus, where it regulates gene expression. An optogenetic approach has been reported that exploited calcium
signaling for the activation of NFAT-regulated transgenes and endogenous
genes in mammalian cells, while other
successful attempts at external NFAT regulation include the use of
stimuli such as fatty acids, radio-waves, ultrasound, and
menthol. NFAT-regulated exogenous gene
expression has also been demonstrated  in
hypercalcemic mice. The activation
of transgene expression by exploiting the endogenous
NFAT transcription factor is usually weak in cell types with low levels
of native NFAT expression. Here, we overexpressed NFAT in HEK293T
cells to enhance the activation of an exogenously introduced gene.
We found that NFAT overexpression results in its constitutive translocation
and transcriptional activity in the absence of calcium influx. To
enable potent NFAT activity while maintaining tight control, we prepared
engineered NFAT variants with modified subcellular localization properties.
Furthermore, the native NFAT DNA-binding domain was replaced with
a designed TALE DNA-binding domain and the VP64 activation domain.
This replacement ensured efficient calcium-dependent activation of
target transgene expression in several mammalian cell types. Replacement
of the DNA-binding domain also eliminated off-target activation of
NFAT promoter-driven gene expression, implying that the engineered
NFAT-TALE chimera does not interfere with autologous NFAT-regulated
genes. Moreover, coupling of the circuit to a signal-sensing ion channel
resulted in temperature- and small molecule-controlled activation
of transgene expression. The engineered NFAT-based transcription factors
characterized here are suitable for a range of therapeutic and diagnostic
applications, as the calcium-dependent circuit can be coupled to diverse
calcium signal transducing receptors. Overexpressed
NFAT Triggers Constitutive Transcription in HEK293T
Cells http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf Calcium signaling represents an attractive regulatory
mechanism for use in engineered biological circuits, as the influx
of calcium ions can be triggered by a plethora of chemical and physical
signals. Calcium influx in mammalian cells is coupled to transcriptional
control  the NFAT transcription factor, which
regulates gene expression in response to increased intracellular calcium
levels. Our initial aim was to harness the native NFAT transcription
factor for the transcriptional regulation of exogenously introduced
genes in HEK293T cells (A). Cells were transfected with a firefly luciferase reporter
plasmid containing three NFAT binding sites upstream of a minimal
promoter (_-fLuc)
(B). To trigger
calcium influx, cells were stimulated with the A21387 calcium ionophore
(hereafter referred to as “ionophore”). An ionophore
is an ion-carrier that conducts calcium ions through a lipid membrane
without the need for a protein pore, mimicking diverse cellular processes
that result in calcium influx. Stimulation of cells with ionophore
resulted in weak but significant activation of reporter gene transcription
(C, ). The poor response was not improved
by varying the reporter plasmid amounts or ionophore concentration
(). Nevertheless, the ionophore-mediated
transcriptional activation was reduced to background levels by the
calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine A (CsA), confirming that the modest
response did indeed occur through the canonical calcineurin/NFAT signaling
pathway (C). As response strength is essential
for the efficient performance
of engineered biological circuits, we aimed to increase the amplitude
of the response. To enhance NFAT-mediated transcriptional activity,
we overexpressed a Myc-tagged human NFAT-c1 isoform (hereafter referred
to as hNFAT) (D). Although hNFAT overexpression markedly increased the expression
of the luciferase reporter in ionophore-stimulated cells, reporter
activity was also significantly increased in uninduced cells, which
was unexpected (E). Nevertheless, the differences between nonstimulated and stimulated
cells were significant and reached up to 4-fold increase in reporter
gene expression (E). Incubation of transfected HEK293T cells with both ionophore and
the CsA inhibitor reduced hNFAT transcriptional activity to the level
of uninduced cells (F), confirming that the ionophore-triggered response is due
to calcineurin/NFAT pathway signaling. Surprisingly, when the hNFAT-expressing
cells were incubated with CsA in the absence of ionophore, we did
not find significant inhibition of the hNFAT-mediated constitutive
reporter expression (G), suggesting that the undesired hNFAT activity in uninduced
cells is independent of the calcineurin pathway. Confocal microscopy
results revealed the partial nuclear localization of hNFAT in uninduced
cells, with robust ionophore-triggered translocation of the cytosolic
fraction to the nucleus (H). In agreement with these findings, it was previously
reported that a fraction of the native NFAT constitutively localizes
to the nucleus of regulatory T-cells in a calcineurin-independent
manner. It is speculated that this might
be due to the action of other phosphatases; however, it is possible that other post-translational modifications,
such as acetylation, could also have an effect on NFAT localization
and activity. The observed phenomenon
presents a major concern for the use of hNFAT in engineered cellular
circuits, as tight regulation is critical for their use in therapy,
diagnostics, and other applications. This tight control is especially
important for synthetic circuits of higher complexity with several
layers of regulation, where the undesired activity of a single component
can greatly reduce circuit functionality. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf Overexpressed
NFAT constitutively activates transcription in HEK293T
cells in the absence of calcium influx. (A) Schematic presentation
of the calcineurin/NFAT signaling pathway. An external signal (, ionophore) triggers calcium influx. Calmodulin binds
calcium ions and activates the calcineurin phosphatase, resulting
in NFAT dephosphorylation. This is followed by translocation of NFAT
to the nucleus, DNA binding, and activation of gene expression. The
activity of calcineurin is inhibited by cyclosporine A (CsA). (B)
Schematic presentation of the _Pmin-fLuc reporter
plasmid. (C) The native calcineurin/NFAT signaling pathway in HEK293T
cells mediates the weak activation of reporter gene expression. (D)
Schematic presentation of the hNFAT construct with a N-terminal Myc
tag. The human NFAT-c1 isoform contains two transactivation domains
(TAD-A and TAD-B), the RHD (Rel-homology domain) DNA-binding region,
and a regulatory region with phosphorylation sites and localization
signals. (E) Overexpressed hNFAT enhances reporter gene expression
in both stimulated and nonstimulated HEK293T cells, with a maximum
of a 4-fold difference between the stimulated and nonstimulated cells.
(F) calcineurin/NFAT signaling mediates the ionophore-induced activation
of reporter expression in HEK293T cells transfected with the hNFAT-encoding
plasmid. (G) The constitutive hNFAT transcriptional activity in nonstimulated
HEK293T cells is not mediated by calcineurin activity. (H) Confocal
microscopy images of HEK293T cells transfected with 100 ng of the
hNFAT encoding plasmid. The images were acquired 1 day after transfection
following 3 h of cultivation with or without ionophore and immunostaining
with DAPI, anti-Myc tag primary antibodies, and Alexa 647-conjugated
secondary antibodies. The scale bars represent 10 μm. Amounts
of transfected plasmids for all luciferase experiments are listed
in . One day after transfection,
cells were stimulated with ionophore or both ionophore and CsA. Reporter
activity was measured 6–8 h after treatment. The bars represent
the mean ± s.d.;  = 4 biologically independent
cell cultures. Statistical analyses and the corresponding -values are listed in . Engineering NFAT Variants
with Modified Subcellular Localization
Properties To construct a stringent calcium-dependent transcription
factor with minimal activity in the uninduced state, we focused on
engineering hNFAT by modifying its localization properties. To achieve
this goal, hNFAT needs to be driven out of the nucleus in the uninduced
state, while maintaining its ability for robust calcium-dependent
nuclear translocation. The exposed nuclear localization signals (NLSs)
are the main driving features for the nuclear translocation of dephosphorylated
NFAT. The C-terminal domain of NFAT contains one of the two NLSs, and we hypothesized that its deletion would
result in decreased nuclear translocation and thus impair constitutive
transcriptional activity in uninduced cells. A previous study showed
that a truncated human NFAT-c1 isoform with a deleted C-terminal transactivation
domain was capable of normal nuclear translocation at elevated calcium
levels in COS cells. We confirmed that
the truncated hNFAT (hereafter referred to as “hNFAT”) (A) retained the nuclear translocation (B) and potent transcriptional activation
(C) abilities
in ionophore-stimulated HEK293T cells; however, the construct also
exhibited partial nuclear translocation and undesired transcriptional
activity in the uninduced state (B,C). When the intracellular calcium
concentration is low, NFAT is rephosphorylated
in the nucleus. The conformational rearrangement,
triggered by phosphorylation, exposes the nuclear export signal (NES),
resulting in the translocation of NFAT to the cytosol. Nuclear export
has previously been engineered into transcription factors by fusing
an NES and a light-controlled protein, using illumination with blue
light to induce a conformational change and expose the NES. In our attempt to reduce the undesired constitutive
activity of overexpressed hNFAT in uninduced cells, we inserted an
additional HIV-1 Rev NES signal into
the truncated hNFAT adjacent to the native
NFAT NES, generating hNFAT (D). The translocation of hNFAT to the nucleus triggered by ionophore-induced
calcium influx was not impaired by the additional NES; however, a
large fraction of the protein remained in the cytosol even after ionophore
stimulation (E). Importantly, the constitutive activity of hNFAT in uninduced cells was greatly reduced compared to that of full-length
hNFAT (F).
Reporter expression was efficiently activated in ionophore-treated
cells, resulting in an improved 14-fold ratio between the stimulated
and nonstimulated states (F). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf In another approach to alter NFAT localization,
we anchored the
truncated hNFAT to the plasma membrane, from
where it should be released in response to increased levels of intracellular
calcium (G).
The plasma membrane of mammalian cells contains anionic lipids on
the inner leaflet, where the accumulation of negative charges creates
an electric field that attracts polycationic peptides. Examples include
the farnesylated K-Ras peptide and its derivatives (K-pre and R-pre),
the N-terminal myristoylated peptide K-myr, and amphiphilic helices,
such as the synthetic peptide sequence KRφ. The KRφ, R-pre, and K-myr peptides were previously shown to
localize at the plasma membrane of macrophages and be released in
response to increased intracellular calcium levels. We first validated the localization of the KRφ, R-pre, and
K-myr peptides in HEK293T cells by fusing them to the blue fluorescent
protein (BFP) (). The localization
of the membrane anchor-tagged fluorescent proteins was detected with
confocal microscopy. As previously reported, the R-pre and KRφ
peptides were able to anchor the fluorescent protein to the plasma
membrane (); however, in contrast
to previous studies, the K-myr peptide failed to exhibit efficient
membrane localization (). Next, the subcellular localization of BFP fused
to the NFAT regulatory domain (hNFAT:BFP) was
examined (). As expected, tethering
of this construct to either the R-pre () or the KRφ peptide () resulted in anchoring to the plasma membrane in uninduced
cells (). Following ionophore
stimulation, nuclear translocation was detected only for the hNFAT:BFP:KRφ chimera (), while the R-pre peptide relocated to the endomembranes
(), as previously shown for the
K-Ras peptide and its derivatives. Next,
the KRφ peptide was fused to the truncated hNFAT variant (H). The hNFAT:KRφ construct was clearly
translocated to the nucleus following ionophore stimulation, but it
was partially retained at the plasma membrane (I). Importantly, the construct mediated the
robust, potent activation of reporter gene expression with no significant
transcriptional activity in uninduced cells, resulting in a further
improved 25-fold difference between the stimulated and nonstimulated
states (J). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf A Western blot analysis was performed to confirm that the reduced
activity of engineered NFAT variants observed in uninduced cells was
not due to low protein expression. The results indicated even higher
expression of all three engineered NFAT proteins (hNFAT, hNFAT, and hNFAT:KRφ) compared to that of full-length hNFAT (), further confirming that the improved features
are due to their engineered localization properties. Incubation of
ionophore-stimulated cells with CsA verified that the calcineurin/NFAT
pathway mediated the enhanced activation by the engineered proteins
(). The constructs were additionally
characterized by titration of ionophore and time-lapse measurements
of transcriptional activity (). All engineered variants reached peak activity even at the lowest
concentration of ionophore tested (1 μM) () and after 6 h of stimulation (). Among the tested approaches to engineer an optimal
NFAT variant for use in synthetic biological circuits, the hNFAT:KRφ protein exhibited the lowest background
activity in uninduced cells. Meanwhile, the construct retained the
ability to potently activate transcription in response to increased
intracellular calcium concentrations. These results suggest that tagging
NFAT-based constructs with the KRφ membrane anchor peptide is
a suitable strategy for further implementation in more complex synthetic
circuits. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf Engineered NFAT variants with modified
localization exhibit reduced
constitutive activity in the absence of calcium influx. (A) Schematic
presentation of an engineered NFAT variant with a truncated C-terminal
transactivation domain (hNFAT). (B) Confocal
microscopy images of HEK293T cells expressing the hNFAT construct. (C) The truncated hNFAT enhances
luciferase reporter gene expression in both stimulated and nonstimulated
HEK293T cells. (D) Schematic presentation of an engineered NFAT variant
with a truncated C-terminal transactivation domain and an inserted
nuclear export signal (NES) (hNFAT). (E)
Confocal microscopy images of HEK293T cells expressing the hNFAT construct. (F) The hNFAT construct mediates reduced constitutive activity in nonstimulated
HEK293T cells with up to a 14-fold change in luciferase reporter expression
following stimulation with ionophore. (G) Schematic presentation of
the expected localization of a membrane anchor peptide-tagged hNFAT construct. In the absence of calcium influx, the
peptide anchors NFAT to the plasma membrane. Following ionophore stimulation
and increased cytosolic calcium levels, the peptide is released from
the plasmalemma and is included in the calcineurin/NFAT signaling
pathway. (H) Schematic presentation of an engineered NFAT variant
with a truncated C-terminal transactivation domain and an added membrane
anchor peptide (hNFAT:KRφ). “Link”
represents a flexible linker peptide. (I) Confocal microscopy images
of HEK293T cells expressing the hNFAT:KRφ
construct. (J) The hNFAT:KRφ construct
exhibits no significant transcriptional activity in nonstimulated
HEK293T cells, with a 25-fold change in luciferase reporter expression
following ionophore stimulation. For confocal microscopy experiments,
HEK293T cells were transfected with 100 ng of the NFAT variant-encoding
plasmid. All confocal microscopy images were acquired 1 day after
transfection following 3 h of cultivation with or without ionophore
and immunostaining with DAPI, anti-Myc tag primary antibodies, and
Alexa 647-conjugated secondary antibodies. The scale bars represent
10 μm. The amounts of transfected plasmids for all luciferase
experiments are listed in . One
day after transfection, cells were stimulated with ionophore. Reporter
activity was measured 6–8 h after treatment. The bars represent
the mean ± s.d.;  = 4 biologically independent
cell cultures. Statistical analyses and the corresponding -values are listed in . Rewiring NFAT Signaling toward Selected DNA Targets http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf For the optimal performance of engineered biological circuits, it
is crucial that they function independently of the host cell’s
endogenous processes. In addition to activating an exogenously introduced
transgene, the overexpressed hNFAT proteins may also mediate the undesired
regulation of autologous genes. To engineer a calcium-responsive transcription
factor that does not interfere with the endogenous NFAT-regulated
genes, we modified the engineered hNFAT protein
by replacing its DNA-binding domain with a synthetic TALE DNA-binding
domain and the VP64 activation domain (A). This engineered transcription factor
should only bind to the synthetic TALE target site and not to NFAT
target sites, eliminating the undesired off-target activity (B). HEK293T cells
were cotransfected with the plasmid encoding the synthetic hNFAT:TALE:VP64 transcription factor and a reporter
plasmid with 10 repeats of the TALE binding site upstream of a minimal
promoter (_-fLuc)
(C). The construct
initiated strong ionophore-triggered transcription from the synthetic
promoter that was mediated through the calcineurin/NFAT pathway, as
confirmed by incubation with a combination of ionophore and CsA (D). Importantly,
the construct was unable to activate transcription from an NFAT-driven
promoter (D),
demonstrating that NFAT signaling can be rewired toward the selected
target promoter, orthogonal to endogenous NFAT-regulated genes. However,
as expected based on the NFAT overexpression results (E), the hNFAT:TALE:VP64 chimera also exhibited substantial transcriptional activity
in uninduced cells (D), despite its apparent cytosolic localization in the absence
of ionophore (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf For our aim of achieving potent
transcriptional activity following
calcium influx and minimal activity in uninduced cells, we set out
to test NFAT orthologues from other organisms. NFAT orthologues may
have different biochemical properties than their human counterpart,
potentially making them more suitable for use in engineered biological
circuits. Recently, a calcium-dependent dCas9-VP64 transcriptional
activator, which exhibited low activity in uninduced HeLa cells, was
engineered by fusion to the murine NFAT regulatory domain (mNFAT). We replaced the
human hNFAT regulatory domain with its murine homologue, generating
mNFAT:TALE:VP64. The construct supported highly
potent reporter gene expression in ionophore-stimulated cells, which
was mediated through the calcineurin/NFAT pathway, and did not activate
transcription from the NFAT-driven promoter (E). Similar to the construct containing the
human NFAT regulatory domain, ionophore stimulation induced cytosolic
localization followed by robust nuclear translocation, as detected
with confocal microscopy ().
Activity in uninduced cells was significant; nevertheless, it was
strikingly lower than that with the construct containing the human
NFAT regulatory domain, reaching a 27-fold difference between the
induced and uninduced states (E). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf To further reduce the undesired transcriptional
activity in uninduced
cells, the KRφ anchor peptide was appended to the C-terminus
of both NFAT:TALE:VP64 chimeras (A, ).
Both constructs displayed similar localization at the plasma membrane
and in the cytosol, followed by ionophore-triggered translocation
to the nucleus (C, ). The construct containing
the human NFAT regulatory domain (hNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ)
efficiently activated transcription of the luciferase reporter with
strongly decreased activity in uninduced cells and an improved 18-fold
difference between the stimulated and nonstimulated states (). Additionally, as a demonstration
of the potential therapeutic applications of the NFAT-based circuit,
the construct activated the expression of a transgenic human anti-inflammatory
cytokine interleukin 10 (hIL-10) (). The remaining undesired activation may be due to signal amplification,
as the reporter plasmid contains 10 copies of the TALE target site
in contrast to the _-fLuc reporter plasmid containing only three copies of the NFAT target
site. No transcriptional activation was observed in uninduced cells
when the synthetic promoter contained a single copy of the TALE target
site (). Nevertheless, while
reporter gene expression in ionophore-stimulated cells was significantly
elevated, it was 2 orders of magnitude weaker than that of the reporter
plasmid with 10 copies of the target site (). The mNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ construct
exhibited low transcriptional activity in uninduced cells, and it
was potently activated following ionophore addition, with over 100-fold
difference between the stimulated and nonstimulated states (D). As expected,
the construct did not activate transcription from the NFAT-driven
promoter (E).
Additionally, mNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ activated
the expression of the hIL-10 transgene in HEK293T cells (F) and luciferase
reporter gene expression in the Neuro2A mouse neuroblastoma cell line
(G), further
demonstrating its versatility. Among the tested NFAT:TALE chimeras,
the mNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ construct clearly
exhibited the best properties for use in synthetic genetic circuits
that exploit calcium signaling. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf Replacement of the NFAT
DNA-binding domain redirects transcriptional
activity toward the selected promoter. (A) Schematic presentation
of an engineered transcription factor composed of the NFAT regulatory
domain, the TALE DNA-binding domain, and the VP64 activation domain.
(B) Schematic presentation of transcriptional activation by the engineered
transcription factor. Following calcium influx, the NFAT:TALE:VP64
construct is translocated to the nucleus, where it only regulates
promoters containing the TALE target site, whereas promoters with
the NFAT target sites are unaffected. (C) Schematic presentation of
the _Pmin-fLuc reporter plasmid. (D) Transcriptional
activity of the engineered transcription factor containing the human
NFAT regulatory domain (hNFAT). The hNFAT:TALE:VP64 construct strongly enhances reporter
gene expression in both stimulated and nonstimulated HEK293T cells
(left). The ionophore-induced increase in transcriptional activity
is mediated through the calcineurin/NFAT signaling pathway (middle).
The construct did not enhance the transcription of the reporter gene
driven by the NFAT-regulated promoter (right). (E) Transcriptional
activity of the engineered transcription factor containing the murine
NFAT regulatory domain (mNFAT). The mNFAT:TALE:VP64 construct strongly enhances reporter
gene expression in ionophore-stimulated HEK293T cells, with markedly
reduced activity in the uninduced state (left). The ionophore-induced
increase in transcriptional activity is mediated through the calcineurin/NFAT
signaling pathway (middle). The construct did not enhance the transcription
of the reporter gene driven by the NFAT-regulated promoter (right).
Amounts of transfected plasmids for all luciferase experiments are
listed in . One day after transfection,
cells were stimulated with ionophore or both ionophore and CsA. Reporter
activity was measured 6–8 h after treatment. The bars represent
the mean ± s.d.;  = 4 biologically independent
cell cultures. Statistical analyses and the corresponding -values are listed in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf An engineered NFAT-based transcription factor enables
highly potent
calcium-mediated signaling. (A) Schematic presentation of the mNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ construct. (B) Schematic presentation
of transcriptional activation by the mNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ
transcription factor. In the absence of calcium influx, the KRφ
peptide anchors the construct to the plasma membrane. Following ionophore
stimulation and increased cytosolic calcium levels, the peptide is
released, and the transcription factor is translocated to the nucleus,
where it regulates transcription from the corresponding promoter.
(C) Confocal microscopy images of HEK293T cells transfected with 100
ng of plasmid encoding mNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ.
The images were acquired 1 day after transfection following 3 h of
cultivation with or without ionophore and immunostaining with DAPI,
anti-Myc tag primary antibodies, and Alexa 647-conjugated secondary
antibodies. The scale bars represent 10 μm. (D) The mNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ construct exhibits strongly
reduced constitutive activity in nonstimulated HEK293T cells, with
a 113-fold change in luciferase reporter expression following stimulation
with ionophore. (E) The mNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ
construct did not enhance transcription of the reporter gene driven
by the NFAT-regulated promoter in HEK293T cells. (F) mNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ-mediated activation of the expression of a transgenic
human interleukin 10 in HEK293T cells. (G) mNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ-mediated activation of luciferase reporter expression
in the mouse neuroblastoma Neuro2A cell line. Amounts of transfected
plasmids for all luciferase and ELISA experiments are listed in . One day after transfection,
cells were stimulated with ionophore. ELISA sample collection and
reporter activity measurements were performed 6–8 h after treatment.
The bars represent the mean ± s.d.;  = 4 biologically
independent cell cultures. Statistical analyses and the corresponding -values are listed in . Activation of the Engineered
NFAT-Based Signaling Pathway by
Physical and Chemical Stimuli To establish the utility of
the engineered NFAT:TALE chimeras for responding to diverse extracellular
signals, the expression of an exogenously introduced gene was coupled
with a calcium-selective ion channel. Light-dependent control of calcium
influx has previously been engineered into mammalian cells by overexpressing
ORAI/STIM calcium selective channels. To expand the selection of stimuli for the external
control of intracellular calcium levels, other calcium-transducing
receptors need to be explored. The transient receptor potential (TRP)
channel TRPV1 belongs to a group of plasma membrane ion channels that
sense various hot and cool temperature thresholds. The TRPV1-driven influx of calcium ions is triggered by temperatures
above 42 °C or the presence of small molecules such as capsaicin,
an active component of chili peppers. Here, human TRPV1-induced intracellular calcium-influx was used
to promote the translocation of the mNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ
transcription factor and activate gene expression in a temperature-
or capsaicin-dependent manner (A). The synthetic circuit responded to a temperature
of 43 °C (B), as demonstrated by the activation of firefly luciferase reporter
gene expression in HEK293T cells. The increase in temperature to 43
°C activated reporter gene expression even in cells without the
cotransfected TRPV1 ion channel, suggesting that the endogenous HEK293T
thermal sensors may have activated the NFAT-based gene circuit (B). In parallel,
capsaicin significantly activated gene expression only in HEK293T
and K562 cells that were cotransfected with the TRPV1 channel (C,D). These results
clearly demonstrate that the NFAT-based transcription factors engineered
in this study can be controlled  selected, physiologically
relevant physicochemical signals through the introduction of calcium-selective
receptors. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf Temperature- and capsaicin-triggered activation of the engineered
NFAT-based signaling pathway. (A) Schematic presentation of the external
stimuli-controlled pathway. Stimulation of TRPV1 by heat or capsaicin
induces the influx of calcium ions and thus the release, translocation,
and transcriptional activation by the mNFAT:TALE:VP64:KRφ transcription factor. (B) Incubation at 43 °C
significantly activates transcription of the reporter gene in HEK293T
cells, with enhanced activity upon cotransfection of the TRPV1-encoding
plasmid. (C) Capsaicin significantly activates transcription of the
reporter gene in TRPV1-expressing HEK293T cells. (D) Capsaicin significantly
activates transcription of the reporter gene in TRPV1-expressing K562
cells. Amounts of transfected and electroporated plasmids for all
luciferase experiments are listed in . One day after transfection, cells were incubated at
43 °C for 1 h or stimulated with capsaicin. Reporter activity
was measured 6–8 h after treatment. The bars represent the
mean ± s.d.;  = 4 biologically independent
cell cultures. Statistical analyses and the corresponding -values are listed in . We
report a synthetic, calcium-dependent, NFAT-based genetic circuit
that regulates transcription in response to external signals that
trigger increases in cytosolic calcium concentrations. Because the
endogenous NFAT of host cells exhibited a weak response, we overexpressed
the human NFAT-c1 isoform (hNFAT) in HEK293T cells, which strongly
enhanced the transcriptional activation of a reporter gene. The problem
of partial nuclear translocation and NFAT activity in uninduced cells
was solved by engineering NFAT variants with enforced localization.
Fusion of hNFAT to the plasma membrane anchor peptide KRφ was
found to be the most favorable strategy and resulted in minimal apparent
transcriptional activity in uninduced cells and up to a 25-fold increase
in the activation of reporter expression following ionophore treatment.
Moreover, confocal microscopy results demonstrated the incomplete
release of the peptides from the plasma membrane, suggesting that
the system could be even further improved by engineering the peptide
sequence. To eliminate the regulation of endogenous NFAT promoters
by the engineered NFAT variants, the NFAT DNA-binding domain was replaced
with a designed TALE DNA-binding domain and the VP64 activation domain.
This yielded potent transcriptional activators that were dependent
on the intracellular calcium concentration, demonstrating the modularity
of NFAT-based synthetic circuits. The designable NFAT-TALE transcription
factors can be used for calcium-dependent targeting and regulation
of endogenous gene expression, as the TALE DNA-binding domains can
be designed to bind any selected sequence. In principle, the TALE
DNA-binding domain can be exchanged with the CRISPR/dCas9 catalytically
inactive nuclease, zinc-finger DNA-binding
domains, or any other effector domain with a function that relies
on nuclear localization. The versatility of the engineered NFAT-based
transcription factors was demonstrated by their functionality in different
mammalian cell types (the human embryonic kidney cell line HEK239T,
the mouse neuroblastoma cell line Neuro2A, and the human granulocyte
cell line K562). The engineered transcription factors also induced
the transcription of the transgenic anti-inflammatory cytokine hIL-10
in response to a calcium influx, suggesting its potential use in therapeutic
applications. We coupled the gene circuit to the TRPV1 ion channel,
resulting in capsaicin- and temperature-dependent transcriptional
activation. In place of TRPV1, the circuit could be coupled to other
physicochemically inducible calcium ion-selective membrane receptors,
such as different G-protein coupled receptors or ion channels. The
engineered NFAT-based transcription factors presented in this study
represent valuable tools for use in synthetic biology and are applicable
in a wide range of therapeutic and diagnostic applications, and they
will be useful tools for investigating natural processes. Cloning and Plasmid Construction http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf All plasmids were
constructed using the Gibson assembly method, and their amino acid or nucleotide sequences are listed in . The
embryonic kidney HEK293T cell line
(ATCC) was cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM; Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco)
at 37 °C in a 5% CO environment. The mouse neuroblastoma
Neuro2A cell line (ATCC) was cultured in OptiMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco) at 37 °C in a 5% CO environment. The human immortalized myelogenous leukemia K562 cell
line (ATCC) was cultured in RPMI (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (Gibco) at 37 °C in a 5% CO environment. Transfection, Electroporation, and Stimulation http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf For
dual luciferase assays and ELISAs, 2 × 10 HEK293T
cells or 3 × 10 Neuro2A cells were seeded per well
in 96-well plates (Corning). For confocal microscopy experiments,
3 × 10 HEK293T cells were seeded per well in an 8-well
chamber slide (Ibidi). For Western blot experiments, 5 × 10 HEK293T cells were seeded per well in 6-well plates (Corning).
At 50–70% confluence, HEK293T cells were transfected with a
mixture of DNA and polyethylenimine (PEI, linear, Mw 25000; Polysciences,
catalog no. 23966). Per 500 ng DNA, 6 μL of PEI stock solution
(0.324 mg mL, pH 7.5) was used. Neuro2A cells
were transfected at 80–90% confluence using a mixture of DNA
and Lipofectamine LTX (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. K562 cells were electroporated with the Gene Pulser
electroporation system (Bio Rad) in 0.4 cm cuvettes at 350 V, 500
μF. A total of 20 μg of DNA was used to electroporate
3 × 10 cells for each sample. After electroporation,
the cells were resuspended in 2 mL of fresh medium and seeded into
96-well plates at 100 μL per well. Twenty-four h after transfection
or electroporation, the culture medium was replaced with fresh medium,
and cells were stimulated with the indicated concentration of ionophore
(calcium ionophore A23187, Sigma-Aldrich), cyclosporine A (BioVision),
or capsaicin (Sigma-Aldrich) for the indicated times. Calcium ionophore
A23187 was prepared as a 10 mM stock solution in DMSO, capsaicin as
a 100 mM stock solution in ethanol, and cyclosporine A as a 25 mM
stock solution in DMSO. “No induction” means incubation
with the solvent used for the stock solution in the experiment. In
experiments where cyclosporine A was used in combination with ionophore,
cells were preincubated with 1 μM cyclosporine A for 30 min
before stimulation with ionophore. For temperature stimulation experiments,
cells were incubated at the indicated temperature for 2 h and kept
at 37 °C for 4 h before lysis. The amounts of transfected plasmids
are indicated in the figures and figure captions or presented in . The phRL-TK plasmid (Promega),
encoding the  luciferase, was used as a transfection
efficiency control in luciferase experiments. The empty pcDNA3 plasmid
(Invitrogen) was used to equalize the total DNA amounts over different
experimental conditions. Cells were
lysed at the indicated
time points using 25 μL of 1× Passive lysis buffer (Promega)
per well. Firefly luciferase (fLuc) and  luciferase
(rLuc) activities were measured using the dual luciferase assay (Promega)
on an Orion II microplate reader (Berthold Technologies). Relative
luciferase units (RLUs) were calculated by normalizing fLuc to the
constitutive rLuc in each sample. Normalized RLU (nRLU) values were
calculated by normalizing the RLU values of each sample to the average
RLU value of the nonstimulated reporter only samples within the same
experiment. For the experiments in , nRLU values were calculated by normalizing
the RLU values of each sample to the average RLU value of the nonstimulated
cells transfected with 0 ng of the TRPV1-encoding plasmid. Fold activation
(depicted above the bars) was calculated as the ratio between the
average nRLUs of stimulated and nonstimulated samples. Immunostaining
and Confocal Microscopy For immunofluorescent
analysis of protein localization, cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde
(Histofix, Roth) and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 (Thermo
Scientific) 1 day after transfection. The cells were stained with
anti-Myc tag rabbit polyclonal primary antibodies (C3956, Sigma-Aldrich)
at a dilution of 1:100 and then incubated with Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated
goat antirabbit IgG secondary antibodies at a dilution of 1:2000 (A-21246,
Invitrogen); 300 nM DAPI (Invitrogen) was used as a nuclear stain.
After immunostaining, the cells were washed with PBS and stained with
DAPI for 5 min. For analyses of fluorescent protein-expressing cells,
live cells were imaged 1 day after transfection. During microscopy,
the cells were kept in a chamber at 37 °C. To maintain the physiological
pH, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.4 (from 1 M stock solution) was added to the
media. Microscopic images were obtained using a Leica TCS SP5 inverted
laser-scanning microscope on a Leica DMI 6000 CS module equipped with
an HCX Plane-Apochromat lambda blue 63× objective, numerical
aperture 1.4 (Leica Microsystems). A 50 mW 405 nm diode laser was
used for BFP and DAPI excitation (emission between 420 and 460 nm),
and a 10 mW 633 nm HeNe laser was used for Alexa Fluor 647 excitation
(emission between 650 and 690 nm). To evaluate the nuclear translocation
of engineered calcium-dependent constructs, BFP-fused constructs were
transfected into HEK293T cells and then incubated for 4 h either in
medium (nonstimulated) or with 5 μM ionophore (calcium ionophore
A23187, Sigma-Aldrich). Leica LAS AF software was used for acquisition,
and ImageJ software (National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda,
USA) was used for image processing. Two days after transfection, the cells
were washed with 1 mL of PBS and lysed in 100 μL of 1×
Passive lysis buffer (Promega). The protein concentration in each
sample was determined with the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Sample
dilutions (1:15 in water, 30 μL) and BSA standard were mixed
with 200 μL of the BCA reagent (CuSO diluted 1:50
in bicinchoninic acid) and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. Absorbance
at 562 nm was measured on a Synergy Mx automated microplate reader
(BioTek) using Gen5 software. Measurements were corrected by subtraction
of the absorbance of the blank sample (water) at 562 nm. Samples (75
μg of total protein per sample) were separated by SDS-PAGE (200
V, 10% polyacrylamide gel) and transferred to a Hybond ECL nitrocellulose
membrane (GE Healthcare) at 350 mA. The membrane was incubated with
anti-Myc tag primary antibodies (1:1000, rabbit anti-c-Myc IgG; Sigma-Aldrich,
C3956) and with secondary antibodies (1:4000, goat antirabbit IgG-HRP;
Invitrogen, 65–6120). Membrane blocking, antibody binding,
and membrane washing were performed with an iBind Flex Western Device
(Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The
immunoblots were visualized in a G-box analyzer (Syngene) after they
were developed using the Pico Sensitivity substrate (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). ImageJ software (National Institute of Mental Health,
Bethesda, USA) was used for image processing and densitometric analysis. Supernatants were collected 6 h after cell stimulation
and stored at −20 °C overnight before ELISA for hIL-10
(IL-10 Human Uncoated ELISA kit, 88–7106–77, Thermo
Scientific) was performed following the manufacturer’s instructions,
using appropriate dilutions. Absorbance was measured on a Synergy
Mx automated microplate reader (BioTek) at 450 and 630 nm using Gen5
software. Absorbance at 630 nm was used for correction and was subtracted
from the absorbance at 450 nm. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00133/suppl_file/sb0c00133_si_001.pdf Data are presented as the mean
± s.d. of 4 biological replicates within the same experiment.
Graphs were prepared with Origin 8.1 software, and GraphPad Prism
6 was used for statistical purposes. For analysis of activity in uninduced
cells transfected with increasing amounts of the NFAT variant-encoding
plasmid, one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s  analysis was used. The mean of each treatment (different NFAT variant-encoding
plasmid amounts) was compared to the mean of the control treatment
(0 ng of the NFAT variant-encoding plasmid). For analysis of experiments
in which cells were treated with cyclosporine A and/or ionophore,
one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s  analysis
was used. The mean of each treatment was compared to the mean of every
other treatment. For analysis of treated and nontreated cells within
the same experimental condition (the same NFAT variant-encoding plasmid
amount), paired, two-tailed Student’s  tests
were used. The details of the statistical tests along with the -values for each figure panel are listed in ..