A core aim of metabolic engineering
and synthetic biology is to redesign and create biological systems
with useful purposes, for example cell factories that produce novel
medicines and chemicals. To achieve these goals, the need of a large set of efficient
tools have spurred extensive research efforts dedicated to expanding
the synthetic biology toolbox. The alteration of gene
expression and rewiring of metabolic networks are important for basic
research and metabolic engineering, and methods such as transposon
sequencing (Tn-seq) and trackable multiplex
recombineering (TRMR) allow genomic perturbations
into a large number of sites. However, these approaches do not allow
combinations of several mutations in individual cells and are confined
mostly to generating gene knockouts that require integration of a
sizable selectable marker, for which there are limited options. The
recent development of Multiplex Automated Genome Engineering (MAGE) enables rapid and efficient targeted modification
of the genome through iterative cycles of λ-Red mediated recombination
using multiple oligonucleotides at once. MAGE with multiple degenerate
oligos can be applied toward genome mutagenesis through a semirational
approach, where specific targets are randomly altered to limit mutagenesis
to only selected targets. Such application of MAGE has been shown
to be useful for metabolic optimization to increase the biosynthetic
production of lycopene and indigo in . In theory, MAGE should be amenable to targeted mutagenesis using
thousands of oligos all at once to target hundreds to thousands of
chromosomal targets. This capability will open new possibilities for
many large-scale genome engineering projects. Mutagenesis of thousands of genomic targets by MAGE requires
large
oligo library pools. However, synthesis of thousands of MAGE oligos
by traditional column-based phosphoramidite chemistry is impractical
in both time and cost. Recent developments in high-fidelity oligonucleotide
microarray technologies have enabled the construction of large libraries
(>55 000 oligos) of 200 bp oligos at a significantly lower cost and turnaround time compared to oligos
produced by column-based synthesis. Here, we describe Microarray
Oligonucleotide (MO)-MAGE, a novel method to generate thousands of
oligos suitable for large-scale genome engineering by MAGE and demonstrate
its application for fast and robust targeted mutagenesis of the  genome. Using a computational
framework for MAGE oligo design (MODEST), we first identified perturbation targets of
the  genome that included most regulatory
and protein coding regions (See Table  for
details about which genes were targeted). Protein coding perturbations
were made through the generation of a nonsense and frameshift mutation
within the first 5% of the open-reading frame to functionally introduce
a reversible gene knockout. Regulatory perturbations included up-regulation
(“RBS up”) using consensus (AGGAGG), down-regulation
(“RBS down”) using anticonsensus (TCCTCC) ribosomal
binding sites, or insertion of a T7 promoter sequence (TAATACGACTCACTATAGGG)
upstream of operons. A summary of the genomic perturbation design
is given in Table . In all, the designed oligo
library constituted 13 000 possible targeted perturbations
against the  genome (see ). Traditional column-based synthesis of 90mer MAGE oligos
of this
library size would take months to years to generate at a cost of aproximately $500,000 USD. Thus, we turned to new
approaches in long oligonucleotide synthesis using DNA microarrays. A 130mer single-stranded DNA library was generated
using the Oligo Library Synthesis (OLS) platform from Agilent Technologies
(Santa Clara, CA, U.S.A.). Because the amount of oligos needed for
MAGE is much higher than the total yield from microarray synthesis
(μM versus pM), we devised a PCR-based amplification protocol
to generate a renewable supply of MAGE-compatible oligo pool from
our initial microarray-derived oligo library, which we describe in
greater detail later. Each oligo library subpool (e.g., CDS
Knockout, T7 insertion, RBS up,
RBS down) was designed with a unique set of barcodes, which allowed
for selective amplification of only the subpool library by using specific
primers (see Figure ). A total volume of 38.4
mL of PCR was first performed to ensure that we generated enough oligos
for >10 MAGE cycles. One of the two primers used for the PCR contained
a 5′-phosphothioester bond and a 3′-uracil, while the
other contained a 5′ phosphorylated group. The resulting amplicons
contain a 5′-phosphothioester bond on the MAGE-compatible sense-strand
and a 5′-phosphate on the reverse complement strand. This 130
bp double-stranded (ds) DNA amplicon was digested with λ-exonuclease.
Since λ-exonuclease has much higher activity for unphosphorylated
substrates and its activity is blocked
by phosphothioester bonds, the digest results in a 130mer single-stranded
(ss) DNA library of the MAGE-compatible sense-strand that contained
the phosphothioester bond at the 5′ end. Subsequently, the
20 bp flanking barcodes used for PCR amplification of the subpools
were removed from each end of the ssDNA to yield unique 90mer oligos
needed for high efficiency MAGE. This was accomplished by first digesting
the 130mer ssDNA library, which contained an internal uracil at the
barcode junction from the previous PCR (see Figure ), with an uracil DNA glycosylase, endonuclease VIII, which removes the uracil from the ssDNA strand.
The uracil excision effectively removes the 20mer barcode at the 5′
end of the ssDNA library, yielding a 110mer library. The 3′
barcode was designed with a DpnII restriction site placed immediately
after the target oligo sequence. To remove the 3′ barcode,
a guide primer complementary to the 3′ barcode including the
DpnII site was used to hybridize to the 110mer oligo and was digested
with DpnII to yield the designed 90mer oligo library. The use of a
guide primer ensured that the remaining part of the single-stranded
oligo is not digested by DpnII, which only cuts dsDNA. The resulting
oligo library contained unique 90 base single-stranded oligos. Gel electrophoresis of the oligos was performed after each
step
to ensure that the processing resulted in the expected product (see
Figure a and b). Serial dilutions of the library
were further visualized on a TBE-UREA gel to estimate library concentration
using ImageJ. We estimate that a typical
amplification generates 1.4 nmols of oligos (∼12 μM in
115 μL), which is sufficient for 14 MAGE cycles at 2 μM
per 50 μL reaction per cycle. We performed a side-by-side
comparison of the microarray-derived
oligos with those obtained through standard column-synthesis from
a commercial vendor (Integrated DNA Technologies, Iowa, U.S.A.). A
test group of 5 oligos generated from the microarray pool and the
commercial vendor was used for MAGE and the efficiency of oligo incorporation
was determined (see Figure c). We find that
3 out of the 5 tested oligos showed slightly lower incorporation efficiencies
in the microarray library compared to the column library. We attribute
the decreased efficiency to differences in individual oligo concentrations
that may result during amplification from the microarray library.
Nonetheless, these results offered a convincing proof-of-concept that
microarray-derived oligos are compatible with MAGE mutagenesis. Since
the introduction of synthetic regulation to native genomic loci has
been an outstanding challenge in synthetic biology, we sought to further
explore our sublibrary that generated T7 promoter insertions in the
untranslated regions (UTR) upstream of each of 2585 operons in the  genome. This multiplexed promoter insertion perturbation
enables the generation of a mutant library that contains new transcriptional
regulation in the presence of an inducible T7 polymerase system. Thus, in this current work, we focused on characterizing our methods
in greater detail using this T7 insertion library. The T7 promoter
insertion library was designed using MODEST to target the UTR region 40 bp upstream of all
nonessential and nontranscription-factor operons in . Downstream polycistronic open reading frames without adequate intergenic
space were not targeted. In all, 2585 unique insertion target sites
were identified. We designed 90 bp oligos by flanking a 20 bp T7 promoter
(TAATACGACTCACTATAGGG) sequence with 35 bp of homologous sequence
at each end to the target genomic integration site. In general, introduction
of a 20 bp insertion is expected to have lower incorporation efficiency
than smaller point mutations or deletions. Nonetheless, these larger insertions represent a unique opportunity
to introduce synthetic regulation and to challenge the limits of our
MAGE capabilities using large oligo library pools derived from microarrays. Furthermore, effective selection of desirable mutants from a smaller genomic library with T7 promoter insertions have previously been performed successfully. Following the generation of the 2585-oligo library, we applied
this T7 promoter pool to mutagenize the  genome
by MAGE for 12 cycles. The entire oligo processing pipeline and MAGE
mutagenesis was performed twice in parallel to generate two separate
cell libraries to test the reproducibility of our protocol. To assess
the success of T7 insertion in these combinatorial libraries, we performed
deep sequencing of the final cell populations. We first extracted
genomic DNA of the cell populations and hybridized the genomic DNA
with a biotinylated oligo containing the T7 promoter sequence. Genomic
regions that contained the T7 promoter insertions can thus be enriched
from total genomic DNA when it is applied to streptavidin beads that
bind to the biotinylated oligo-genomic hybrid. We then sequenced the
enriched genomic library by deep-sequenced to identify T7 insertion
sites. Supporting
Information Figure 1 Next-generation sequencing analysis of the data showed
that the
two separate libraries contained 87 reads and 208 reads with the T7
promoter sequence, with the reads mapping to 56 and 98 targeted operons
respectively in the two libraries. Only 4 of the total 154 targets
were redundant, resulting in identification of 150 unique targets
out of 2585 possible. The sequencing coverage (the number of times
the genome has been sequenced) of the libraries was 2064× and
1364× respectively. We used a Monte Carlo model to simulate the
insertion frequency of the total library, and found that the total
cell library is expected to contain between 2250 and 3500 modified
genes (95% confidence interval, see ). These results show that all or most
of the targeted sites are predicted to have T7 promoter insertions
within the cell library. We proceeded to further validate our
mutagenesis results and to
estimate the insertion efficiency. We randomly selected 12 targets,
including 8 that had not been detected by population sequencing. We
amplified ∼200 bp PCR fragments spanning the T7 insertion sites
of each of the 12 genes from the cell library and sequenced the PCR
products by Next Generation Sequencing. For all 12 loci, we found
reads containing the T7 promoter insertion sequence. This provides
further support that the cell library contains a majority of the 2585
T7 promoter insertions (see Table  and Figure ). The insertion frequencies for the 12 loci were estimated by comparing
the number of reads with T7 promoter insertions to the number of reads
without the insertion. The average frequency was 0.017%, and thus,
the average number of insertions per cell can be estimated as μ
=  ×  = 0.434 where  = 0.00017 and  = 2585 targets. This
means that 43% of the cell library is expected to have at least one
insertion on average. The top 1% of the population is expected to
have at least four (4.3) insertions based on the calculations  = μ + 2.326( × (1 – )) = 4.3 (for details
about the MAGE efficiency calculations see the  as well as Wang and Church, 2011). The MAGE efficiency for insertions has previously
been predicted based on fitting of empirically determined efficiencies. Using such approach, the insertion efficiency (IE) is IE = 0.15
× e = 0.0361, where  is the size of the insertion
in number of bases ( = 20). Based on this insertion
efficiency, the predicted average frequency of each insertion can
be calculated by  = 1 – (1 – IE/) = 1 – (1 – 0.0361/2585) = 0.000167,
where  is the number of MAGE cycles. The predicted
average insertion frequency of 0.0167% matches very well with the
measured frequency of 0.017%, providing confidence to our predicted
population mutagenesis profile and its applications to analyze MAGE
mutagenesis of complex oligo pools. These results further highlight
that that cell libraries with combinations of multiple insertions
per genome can be generated using this massively multiplexed approach. Here, we have presented a proof-of-concept demonstration for the
generation and application of oligo pools that specifically target
thousands of unique chromosomal loci across a cell population to introduce
promoters amenable for synthetic regulation. The Microarray Oligonucleotide
MAGE enables rapid mutagenesis of bacterial genomes using oligos derived
directly from microarrays without intermediate cloning or cassette
selection steps, which can significantly expand the combinatorial
genomic diversity of the resulting cell population. A resulting cell
library will be useful for various screens for metabolic engineering
purposes such as increased production of biochemicals or tolerance
toward biomass inhibitors. The MO-MAGE process described here allow
researchers to limit the combinatorial space to only specific mutations
that are expected to have a much higher chance of leading to a desired
phenotype than random mutations. Thus, the effect of rationally designed
targets can be assessed very effectively because the mutagenesis quality
(i.e., the proportion of interesting mutants to other cells) is much
higher. Whereas current approaches are limited to only creating few
genomic changes at a time, our method could be used to target all
predicted beneficial mutations predicted from metabolic models, and
screen for optimal phenotypes. As the complexity of engineering
tasks of synthetic biology and
metabolic engineering increases, the need to reduce cost of genome
engineering becomes more important. MO-MAGE allows the synthesis of
oligos at a fraction of the cost (>1000×) compared to traditional
column based oligo synthesis to make large-scale genome engineering
accessible to most laboratories. At a price of 36 USD per column-based
oligo, MO-MAGE (2800 USD) is currently cost competitive when using
more than 78 oligos. This method could provide a paradigm shift by
making large-scale genome engineering of many thousands of targets
available as a standard tool for strain optimization and other projects
where large-scale targeted mutagenesis searches are needed. New advances
in DNA and gene synthesis will further foster growth in genome engineering
of microbial and eukaryotic systems, and
in theory, oligo pools containing millions of oligos can be applied
for MO-MAGE. However, since increasing oligo diversity leads to lower
replacement efficiency per genomic target, there is a practical limitation
in the number of oligos that can be meaningfully applied depending
on the required replacement efficiency per site for a given experiment. For some projects, a higher integration frequency might be of interest,
to allow more combinations of insertions and a higher quality library.
The amount of MAGE cycles performed can be increased to higher levels,
and automated solutions could increase the feasible number of MAGE
cycles to several hundreds. For creation of complex libraries where
many combinations per cell are desired, single base pair substitutions
and small insertions and deletions can be applied to increase the
replacement efficiency. For instance if 1000 oligos designed for making
single base pair substitutions are used for 100 cycles of MAGE, a
cell library with 25 average replacements per cell is predicted. This
allows creation of unprecedented targeted combinatorial libraries
of specific chromosomal modifications. Ultimately, we envision MO-MAGE
method will be used to make thousands of specific chromosomal changes
predicted to result in a desired phenotype and combined with selection
or screening of the cell library for interesting mutants. Overview of Oligos
Designed and Synthesized
on the Micro-Array Chip all nonessential, non-pseudo-,
non-ncRNA all nonessential, non-pseudo-,
non-ncRNA Four oligo subpools were made,
intended for knocking out genes by introduction of a nonsense and
frameshift mutation within the first 5% of the CDS (“CDS Knock
Outs”), upregulation by insertion of T7 promoters upstream
of genes (“T7 promoters”) and insertion of a consensus
RBS sequence (“RBS up”), and down-regulation by insertion
of an anti-consensus RBS sequence (“RBS down”). TFs = Transcription Factors. Only genes with sufficient spacing
to the next gene upstream were targeted, to ensure that the insertion of T7
promoters did not disturb upstream genes. Twelve Genes Randomly Selected for
Deep Amplicon Sequencing and
Analysis The
number of reads with a T7
promoter insertion was compared to reads without an insertion to calculate
the insertion frequency. MO-MAGE method
for targeted whole genome mutagenesis. 130 base
oligonucleotides were designed and synthesized on a DNA microarray,
which can be ordered from several commercial vendors. The oligos can
be designed with different barcodes, which allow selective PCR amplification
of a desired subpool. One of the primers are 5′ phosphorylated,
which allow the degradation of only one of the strands by λ-exonuclease,
resulting in single stranded oligos. The barcodes are removed by enzymatic
treatment with endonuclease VIII (cutting the barcode by removing
a uracil from the modified primer), DpnII and a guide primer (to make
a double stranded cut site for DpnII). The final 90 bp single stranded
oligos are directly applicable for MAGE. (a) PCR amplicons of the T7 promoter oligo
pool can be seen as
the strong bands around 130 bp (4% Agarose E-Gel EX with Low Range
Quantitative DNA Ladder). (b) Serial dilutions of the processed single
stranded T7 promoter oligo library (left 4 lanes) compared to a reference
oligo of 90 bp (right 4 lanes), which indicates correct processing
of the oligos from 130 bp to 90 bp oligos ready for MAGE (TBE-Urea
gel 4% from Invitrogen). (c) Comparison of MAGE efficiency using column-synthesized
oligos and microarray-processed oligos by MO-MAGE. Gel shows size
distribution of the two processed oligo pools (TBE-Urea gel 4% from
Invitrogen). MO-MAGE
of 2585 genomic targets corresponding to untranslated regions
(UTR) upstream of genes for insertion of 20-bp T7 synthetic promoter.
Designed targets are shown in blue. Mutated targets verified by whole-genome
sequencing are shown in red (see  for complete list). Mutated targets verified by amplicon
sequencing are shown in black. We used a strain based
on the EcNR2 strain for all experiments,
which is based on  K12 MG1655. The genotype
is λ-RedblabioA/bioB mutSzeo Lac_T7polSpec LacIQ. All strains for MAGE were
grown in low salt LB-min medium (10 g tryptone, 5 g yeast extract,
5 g NaCl in 1 L dHO) for optimal electroporation efficiency
with addition of specified antibiotics. All cells for liquid cultures
were grown in standard LB-min medium (10 g tryptone, 5 g yeast extract,
10 g NaCl in 1 L dHO) with addition of specified antibiotics. All standard oligonucleotides
were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies with standard purification. OLS pools were synthesized
by Agilent Technologies and are available upon signing a Collaborative
Technology Development agreement with Agilent. Costs of OLS pools
are a function of the number of unique oligos synthesized and of the
length of the oligos The OLS pool were synthesized, cleaved, and delivered
as lyophilized ∼1–10 picomole pools. Oligos for T7 Cell Library Generation A list of all
the 2585 oligos synthesized on the microarray chip designed to insert
a T7 promoter upstream of  genes can be found
in the . MAGE was performed according to the protocol provided
in ref (). Briefly,
the cells were grown to midlog phase, whereafter the β-protein
of the λ-red system was induced by growing at 42 °C for
15 min whereafter the cells were chilled to 4 °C. The culture
were washed to remove salts and resuspended in cold water (<4 °C).
The cells were mixed with the 2 μM oligos in 50 μL and
electroporated in a Bio-Rad MicroPulser, BTX ECM-830 with 1 mm gap
cuvette, whereafter the cells were incubated for 2–3 h at 30
°C. The process were repeated 12 times (12 MAGE cycles) to allow
a higher frequency of insertion. After 5 and 10 MAGE cycles, the cells
were grown overnight in 50 mL LB low salt medium and stored at −80
°C in a 15% v/v glycerol solution. Enrichment for T7 Promoter
Containing Sequences The
enrichment protocol was based on Gnirke et al. and NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Exome Library SR v2.2 protocol. A biotinylated oligo targeting the T7 promoter
was incubated 66 h with the prepared sequencing library fragments.
The T7 promoter containing fragments that hybridized to the biotinylated
oligo was enriched by multiple rounds of binding and washing with
Invitrogen Streptavidin M-270 Dynabeads and Invitrogen binding and
wash buffer. Illumina DNA Sequencing and Analysis Samples for sequencing
of the 12 individual strains were processed with Illumina TruSeq v2
sample prep kit and standard Illumina adapters. Samples for sequencing
of the cell libraries were prepared with the NEBNext DNA Sample Prep Master Mix Set 1 kit
for Illumina sequencing and manually ordered adaptors kindly provided
by Luhan Yang (Harvard Medical School, George Church Lab). The libraries were
sequenced in two separate lanes, whereas the
12 isolated strains were sequenced in one lane with multiplexing barcodes.
The 12 prepared individual strains were sent to the Harvard Biopolymers
facility () for Illumina sequencing
and downloaded to the cbs.dtu.dk server and processed here. Sequences
containing the T7 promoter sequence were extracted with the “grep”
command.  was performed in CLC Bio main Workbench
6.0 with standard settings: “word size” 11, “match”
1, “mismatch” −3, “gap cost existence”
5, “gap cost extension” 2. () was applied to perform the alignment of the
reads to the reference genomes (see parameters in the script in ). () was applied to make a consensus reference
genome and indexed BAM-file (for visual inspection of read alignment)
from the bowtie output (see parameters in the script in ) TACACTCTTTCCCTCACGACGCTCTTCGATCTac*T /5Phos/gtAGATCGGAGAGCGGTTCAGCGGAATGCCGAG TACACTCTTTCCCTCACGACGCTCTTCGATCTtg*T /5Phos/caAGATCGGAGAGCGGTTCAGCGGAATGCCGAG PCR primers were designed
for amplification of 12 genomic regions of around 200 bp with the
T7 promoter insertion site in the middle. The amplicons were sequenced
on an Illumina MiSeq, and a script created to extract all WT and mutant
sequences and report the numbers..