The characterization of biological
building blocks and complex synthetic systems is fundamental to synthetic
biology. Historically, characterization of biological
systems has been carried out using batch culture methods. The low cost, ease of culture propagation, and scalability through
use of well plates and culture flasks have contributed to the prevalence
of this culture method. However, in batch culture, the chemical environment
is continually changing as cells grow, divide, consume nutrients,
and excrete waste products. These changes
associated with growth have substantial effects on cellular physiology and engineered biological components, which can in turn cause the
mischaracterization of a system’s input-output response or
require the consideration of uncontrolled disturbances to the system. To more accurately characterize biological systems, researchers
must turn to static environments, which yield lower noise in quantitative
phenotyping. A primary tool for culturing cells in a static environment
is continuous culture, where inoculated growth medium is continually
diluted with fresh medium. At steady state, a continuous culture device
will dilute cells and waste products at the same rate that they are
being produced leading to an unchanging environment. Two main categories of continuous culture devices are chemostats
and turbidostats. Chemostats dilute liquid culture at a fixed rate
and reach steady state when a limiting nutrient has been depleted,
or toxins have been accumulated, at which point the growth rate is
equal to the dilution rate. Therefore, chemostats are ideal for interrogating
the effects of nutrient limitation or where defined growth rates are
desired. In contrast, turbidostats use a feedback control loop to
keep cell density constant; in a turbidostat, the cell density is
continually monitored and used to compute the dilution rate that achieves
a prespecified cell density. Thus, turbidostats are ideal for characterization
of systems without nutrient limitation, when cells are growing at
their maximum rate. In spite of the advantages, use of chemostats
and turbidostats
is not commonplace. Factors that limit the use of continuous culture
systems include the fact that commercially available bioreactors either
lack feedback capability, have such large volumes that dilution rates
needed to sustain a log phase culture would be impractical, or are
prohibitivly expensive. As a result, researchers often design their
own turbidostats, which vary widely in implementation based on the
needs of the experimenter. Unfortunately, the design and construction can be laborious and
uncertain. Design decisions that are seemingly innocuous can lead
to failures or inflexible devices. Furthermore, development of turbidostats
requires specialized knowledge of electrical and computer engineering,
which has further limited their popularity. We have developed
an open source turbidostat design (the Flexostat)
that contrasts with other publicly available continuous culture devices. Using common hand tools and standard
laboratory equipment combined with inexpensive online or university
provided fabrication services and 3D printing, our instrument can
be built for under $2000 USD. Indeed, many individuals from a wide
range of backgrounds have already built turbidostats from our design.
Currently, five laboratories have at least one complete instrument
(see acknowledgments), some with custom modifications. As part of
our commitment to the community, the authors will continue to contribute
updated designs to the Web site and ask, but do not require, that
all derived designs be submitted so that the community may benefit. The Flexostat implements eight parallel culture chambers, which
enable users to gather replicate data and perform parallel experiments
requiring no extra pumps or controllers. Each chamber contains electronics
that enable distributed sensing and mixing control allowing users
to add new chamber modules with new capabilities with minimal hardware
redesign. A platform agnostic Python program collects data from each
chamber and computes dilution rates through a user programmable function. To demonstrate the utility of our device over standard batch culture,
we recharacterized part of the auxin plant hormone pathway cloned
into  and grown at various constant
cell densities. Previous work has characterized the interactions between
the small molecule auxin and the family of F-box proteins in batch
culture resulting in a table of key parameters for each interaction. Here, we show that one of these parameters, a
degredation rate in the presence of auxin that was previously considered
a constant, varies by more than 4-fold depending on the cell density. Finally, we showcase how the modular design and 3D printed nature
of the Flexostat allows us to add new capabilities. In particular,
we show a proof of concept single chamber, mixture controlled variant
that is capable of detecting strongly fluorescent cultures (the Fluorostat)
such as  expressing super folder GFP. Fluorescence
detection is accomplished through the addition of a single blue excitation
source and a pair of low cost, spectrally orthogonal filters. The
light sources for the Optical density (OD) measurement and fluorescence
measurements alternate in time and share the same photodetector. The
dual use of the photosensor allows us to use the same electronics
for the standard Flexostat and the Fluorostat, requiring that only
software and a single 3D printed part be changed. The operation of the Flexostat
(Figure ) consists of a discrete dilution
cycle with an adjustable period (typically 1 min). First, the current
optical density of each chamber is measured. Then, for each chamber,
a user-programmable Python module computes the dilution rate as a
function of error between desired OD and measured OD. The dilution
rates, which may be different for each chamber, are then sent to the
embedded circuitry, which controls the media pump and valve system.
As new media is added, it is mixed by magnetic stir bars diluting
old media, cells, and waste products. When the media level rises to
the mouth of the effluent tube, waste is forced out by positive pressure
provided by an aeration input. Specifications and Characterization Biochemical reactions
in cells are highly sensitive to experimental preparation, equipment
variation, and environmental changes. Indeed, some systems even have
multimodal steady state distributions, which are sensitive to initial conditions and require replicates
to thoroughly probe. Furthermore, most experimental outcomes must
be compared to those of a control experiment or between multiple variants.
In a single chamber turbidostat, each replicate and control must be
performed serially, which is time-consuming and susceptible to day
to day variations in experimental conditions. For the Flexostat, we
chose to multiplex eight culture chambers into the same media source
and pump, which allows us to perform eight experiments in parallel,
all of which are subjected to the same conditions. A single multiplexed
pump has the additional advantage of lowering cost relative to buying
eight pumps. In the continuous culture literature, culture volumes
can range from a few femtoliters to industrial
fermenters containing thousands of liters of media. The culture volume
has logistical impacts that need to be carefully weighed. Yeast in
rich media go through approximately 16 generations in a day if kept
at maximal growth rates. Since one volume must be replaced for every
generation and there are eight culture chambers, 16 generations/day/chamber
× 1 volume/generation × 8 chambers = 128 volumes per day
will be consumed, which quickly adds up for large culture volumes.
Small volumes also have drawbacks. If sampling is required for characterization,
enough effluent must be available for a single measurement. A typical
flow cytometer for example requires at least 50 μL for measurement. Sampling the 50 μL required for flow cytometry
from a 1 mL vessel would require close to 5 min of collection time
from effluent. We have found that a culture volume of 15 mL is a good
balance, allowing for enough effluent to be collected over a sample
period of 2 min while limiting the amount of media used to less than
2 L a day. Supporting Information section S2 For characterization
in replicate, all chambers must measure OD
uniformly. Commercial OD probes are too large to fit into a 15 mL
volume without interfering with other essential processes (e.g., stirring,
dilution, etc.), so we developed a customized solution. We measure
optical density through the walls of the culture tube using a 650
nm laser diode, similar to those found in common laser pointers, and
a pair of photo sensors configured to reject changes in transmitted
light intensity caused by temperature variation and electrical noise
(Figure ). Tests with reference medium consisting
of black dye, which has an absorbance spectrum similar to  (in the 500–700 nm range), show chamber to
chamber variation of less than ±2.5%. For further characterization
information including noise, linearity, and detection threshold see . A large component of the cost
of a continuous culture device is
the pump. In the Flexostat, we multiplexed a single syringe pump that
feeds all eight chambers (Figure ). A multiplexed
pump saves the cost of seven additional pumps and reduces the number
of valves needed from 16 to 9. To further reduce the cost, we have
designed a 3D printed syringe pump that may be used in place of a
commercial syringe pump. These two strategies have reduced pumping
costs by 96% compared to designs that utilize commercial peristaltic
pumps. (a) Schematic of the Flexostat. Optical density (OD) is measured
through the chamber wall and reported to a control system. A dilution
rate is then calculated for each chamber, which is carried out by
the pumping system. Valves select the flow source or destination while
a single multiplexed syringe pump determines the volume and direction
of flow. (b) A photograph of the turbidostat chamber with integrated
OD measurement and stirring. (c) A 3D printed syringe pump. (d) A
3D printed four way normally closed pinch-valve with the upper right
valve selected. In each chamber,
a laser diode emits a 650 nm beam that is then
split two ways. Approximately 10% of the light is sent to a photosensor
used to measure noise while the remaining 90% is used to measure light
transmitted through the cell culture. The ratio of these two signals
is a linear function of the transmitted light, which is then normalized
to a blank measurement and log transformed to obtain the optical density. A continuous culture device
can be modeled by a simple set of ordinary differential equations
(ODEs),where () is the cell mass, () is the
mass of substrate,  is the substrate
concentration of the feedstock, φ() is the
growth rate, γ is the growth yield in biomass per substrate
mass, and  is the dilution rate. It is worth noting
that the units of  can be substituted by OD, which
only changes the units of γ to OD per substrate mass. If a turbidostat’s set point is too close to the maximal cell
density, γ, then it is possible
that slight variations in media, conditions, or cell morphology may
cause large changes in dilution rate, or even prevent dilution entirely.
More formally, if we assume the growth rate as a function of substrate
concentration is a Hill function without cooperativitywith max growth rate φ and half-maximum constant , we can examine the
sensitivity to substrate concentrationwhich rises sharply as the
substrate mass goes to zero. The high sensitivity to low substrate
concentrations makes running a turbidostat in nutrient limited regimes
impractical. Difficulty maintaining set points near the maximal OD
is analogous to the difficulty chemostats have maintaining set points
near the washout rate. Assuming cultures will be run sufficiently
far from maximal densities,
where the substrate is not limiting, we can assume a nearly constant
growth rate allowing us to simplify the model furtherFurthermore, because a turbidostat’s
culture is always near its reference point , the
bilinear model (eq ) can be further simplified
to a linear model around the operating point (*, *) = (, φ):As stated earlier,
turbidostats maintain cell
density through feedback control. We have chosen the proportional
plus integral feedback controllerwhere  and  are proportional
and integral gains, respectively. This controller eliminates any steady
state error in optical density and yields the systemSystem  can oscillate
when the condition /(4) > 1 is not met. To prevent oscillations
we assume that the minimal OD set point will be 0.1 ( > 0.1) OD units and pick  and  so that /(4) = 5 > 1. Indeed, gains so chosen have yielded robust,
nonoscillatory
OD signals with the Flexostat. To measure error and validate
the controller in the implemented
system, we grew  in duplicate at four
different ODs and quantified the average, maximum, and 95th percentile
tracking error (difference between set OD and measured OD) over a
period of 22 h. Average tracking error was no more than 3.14 ×
10 OD units between all eight chambers while the
maximum error observed at any time point was ±4.8 × 10 OD units with 95% of the error inside of ±2.3
× 10 OD units. Thus, accurate maintenance
of a desired OD set point is achievable over experimentally relevant
time periods. Since the Flexostat is programmable through a
Python application
program interface (API), it can also be easily reprogrammed for different
objectives (see  section
S1 for details). Dilution and feedback can be turned off allowing
for the measurement of growth curves in the same device (), which can be useful for
determining batch growth rates and growth yields. It can also be programmed
to follow arbitrary reference trajectories so long as they are physiologically
feasible (Figure ). Experimental data collected
from parallel experiments.  was grown
in synthetic complete media and
made to track four sinusoidal reference trajectories (red). Measured
OD values are shown in blue while the normalized dilution rate is
shown in green. The maximum positive rate of change in OD is determined
by the growth rate, while the maximum negative rate of change in OD
is determined by the device’s maximum dilution rate. (a) Top: In the presence of auxin, AFB degrades
the fusion protein
EYFP-AUX/IAA. Bottom: A model from previous work of the network shown. State  represents
auxin bound to AFB with input  being the auxin concentration,
parameter  the association rate of auxin
and AFB, and  the natural degradation
rate of AFB. State  represents the concentration
of EYFP-AUX/IAA where  is the production
rate,  is the natural degradation rate,
and  is the degradation rate in the
presence of auxin bound to AFB. (b) YKL73 characterized in a turbidostat
at four different ODs. At  = 1.25 h auxin was added
to the culture chamber and media source to reach a concentration of
10 μM, and the response was measured by sampling effluent and
reading mean fluorescence in a flow cytometer at a period of roughly
6 min. The cytometery data was gated to only include singlet (nonbudding)
yeast in a healthy size range. An untreated time course is available
as  Figure S9 and
shows no singnifigant change in fluorescence. (c) Model parameter  was fit to the data collected in part b (See
Havens et al. Supplemental Data for detailed
methods) and compared to previous work (gray). Gene Network Parameter
Dependence on Cell Density In
previous work, we studied the auxin plant
hormone pathway cloned into . In our
engineered yeast strain, as , indole-3-acetic
acid (auxin) promotes the interaction between a member of the F-box
family of plant proteins (AFBs) and a member of the Aux/IAA family
of plant proteins. AFBs target our engineered EYFP-Aux/IAA proteins
to promote degradation via the proteasome (Figure a). In yeast transformed with a member of each family of AFB
and EYFP-Aux/IAA proteins, strong YFP fluorescence can be measured
through flow cytometery. With the addition of auxin, the EYFP-Aux/IAA
fusion protein is degraded and within 2 h only background fluorescence
is detectable. The exact degradation rates were characterized and
shown to be dependent on the combination of AFBs and Aux/IAAs. In previous work, each member of a combinatorial AFB Aux/IAA library
was grown in synthetic complete medium (SC) under batch conditions
at 30 °C in a shaker incubator overnight. The following day,
the cultures were diluted and allowed to reenter exponential growth
phase before induction at a cell count roughly equivalent to OD 0.4
in the Flexostat. Over the course of three or more hours, cells were
sampled from batch and fluorescence was measured in a flow cytometer.
These data were then fit to an ODE model (Figure a) where the parameter  represents
the degradation rate of EYFP-Aux/IAA in the presence of auxin bound
to AFB. Supporting Information Table S2 We hypothesize that culture density has an effect on
degradation
rates either directly or indirectly through changes in nutrients,
signaling molecules, and waste products that correspond with cell
density in a given media. To test our hypothesis, we selected a strain
YKL73 from previous work that coexpresses AFB2 and EYFP-Aux/IAA6.
YKL73 was grown in SC in our turbidostat inside of a 30 °C incubator
at four different ODs: 0.4, 0.7, 1.0, and 1.3 in duplicate. Although
we chose ODs ranging from 0.4 to 1.3, we did not observe a significant
difference in growth rate between cultures, which is typical for growth
at nonlimiting nutrient concentrations. To measure fluorescence in
each chamber, 200 μL of effluent was sampled every 6 min and
measured in the same flow cytometer as previous work (Figure b). After fitting the new degradation curves we
found  to vary from 0.036 ± 0.006,
an average degrader, to 0.171 ± 0.015 (Figure c and ), which is 35% faster than the fastest pair previously reported from batch data. Supporting Information
Figures S10 and S11 Another apparent feature
of the data are the initial AUX/IAA levels
(quantity / in the model). The initial expression levels also show an inverse
relationship between OD and untreated expression of AUX/IAA. Figure c and  illustrate the relationship between OD,
initial expression, and degradation rates though the exact cause of
the relationships is unknown. In continuous culture, steady
state levels of waste products and
other exportable chemicals are proportional to cell density. Through
the use of cytometer gating, we controlled for cell size and morphology
(singlets vs budding cells). This leads us to hypothesize that either
the rate  and the ratio / are highly sensitive
to differences in growth rate (within the error margin of our measurements),
or that the cells’ internal state was affected by the density
dependent effects in environment. Since  is modeled as a constant, the density dependent effects, which could
not have been measured in batch, highlight the utility of continuous
culture in model validation and the need, in this case, for a higher
order model to explain the data when density cannot be controlled.
Further study is required to determine the exact nature and source
of the physiological changes that influence expression and degradation
rates. (a) Diagram representing the layout of the modified fluorostat
culture chamber. The light sensor is time divison multiplexed between
light from the absorbance source (600 nm) and fluorescence excited
by the excitation source (470 nm). A filter set ensures that only
light generated by fluorescence is detected. (b) An IPTG inducible
GFP expressing strain of  was grown at OD
0.6 in alternating M9 media with (gray area) and without IPTG. Fluorescence Detecting
Turbidostat A key capability
in synthetic and systems biology is the ability to read fluorescent
reporters. In the previous section, we used a flow cytometer, which
resulted in individual cell data but was labor intensive. An alternative
method to collecting cytometry data is to obtain bulk fluorescence , which can be collected without user intervention. We modified the original chamber design to include a blue excitation
light source at a right angle to the absorbance photo sensor (Figure a). The new design multiplexes the original light
sensor in time to serve the dual purpose of measuring absorbance and
fluorescence. For OD measurements, the chamber works as described
in earlier sections. When fluorescence measurements are made, the
600 nm LED is turned off and the 470 nm LED excitation source is turned
on. To prevent bleed over from the excitation source into the emissions
wavelengths, we added a band-pass optical filter (see  and  section S4). Similarly, to prevent the excitation source from being
detected by the photo sensor, a long-pass optical filter was added. Supporting Information Figure S13 To test the fluorescence detection capability of our fluorescence
detecting turbidostat (or Fluorostat for short), we measured a range
of fluorescent cultures. Wild type  (BL21)
and BL21 containing a high expression super folder green fluorescent
protein (sfGFP) plasmid were cultured for use in quantification. The
cultures were then mixed at various ratios and measured in the Fluorostat,
which showed a linear relationship between mix ratio and measured
fluorescence (). Next, we tested the Fluorostat under more experimentally
realistic
conditions. We cultured an IPTG inducible sfGFP expressing strain
of  in the Fluorostat. At periods of 1 and
6 h, media containing 1 mM and 0 mM IPTG, respectively, were alternated
and the resulting fluorescence signal was measured (Figure b). The results of this experiment demonstrate the
ability of an LED based fluorimeter to read sfGFP reported outputs
during the course of a turbidostat experiment. These results also
highlight the adaptability of our design to work with evolving experimental
needs. While linear within its dynamic range and capable of
measuring
changes in expression levels, we discovered that only cultures bright
enough to be visibly fluorescent under blue light transillumination
were capable of being detected. The YFP expressing strain of yeast
measured using cytometry in the previous section was too dimly fluorescent
to measure in the Fluorostat. While its low sensitivity precludes
the use of the Fluorostat in some experiments, we believe that through
further refinement, the use of a more sensitive fluorometer, or an
automatic cytometer sampling system, all experiments requiring fluorescence
measurement should be possible without manual sampling. With the advent of 3D printing and other
inexpensive custom fabrication processes, laboratories are now more
capable of building their own equipment from open source designs than
ever before. These community driven designs have the benefit of open
design elements that allow laboratories to customize software and
hardware for their own unique experiments rather than using designs
optimized for industrial purposes. We presented a new 3D printable
and customizable turbidostat for the next generation of “3D
printed labs”. To demonstrate its utility, we have shown
an example system with previously thought to be constant parameters
that turned out to be dependent on cell density. We also demonstrated
that our design can be adapted to accommodate fluorescence measurement,
enabling the automatic collection of reporter expression data within
the device. All data fitting methods,
yeast methods, strains, media, and flow
cytometery are as in previous work, unless
otherwise stated below. Diploid  strain YKL73 was obtained from previous work and expresses AFB2 and IAA6 with EYFP fused to
its N-terminus. All
yeast cultures were grown at 30 °C in Synthetic Complete medium
according to standard protocols. Batch cultures were grown from colonies
in 15 mL tubes in a shaker incubator and used to inoculate turbidostat
cultures. Auxin was dosed from a stock solution of 100 mM auxin in
95% ethanol to a working concentration of 10 μM into each turbidostat
chamber while simultaneously dosing the media reservoir. Complete construction and assembly instructions,
design files (including 3D CAD and circuit boards), and a full bill
of materials can be found on our Web site . All ABS plastic parts were 3D printed with OEM natural colored
filament on the UP! 3D printer from , which can be purchased for $1500 USD. Delrin parts were laser
cut from 5 mm delrin sheet by . Circuit boards were manufactured by  and assembled by hand in the laboratory. Surface-mount soldering
was done on a standard laboratory hot plate using CHIPQUIK Sn96.5Ag3.0Cu0.5
solder paste at a temperature of 230 °C and through hole was
done by hand using a Weller W60p soldering iron. Fluorescence characterization
was done with  strain BL21 transformed with
a plasmid containing the pLac promotor driving sfGFP. All growth of  in the turbidostat was done in M9-1% glucose at
an OD 2 cm of 0.6 and a temperature of 37 °C. Batch
growth was done in M9-1% glucose media at 37 °C in a baffled
shaker flask to stationary phase and diluted to OD 1
cm 1.0 in M9 salts. For fluorescent strains a saturating level of
100 μM IPTG was used to induce sfGFP expression. The following
filter set and excitation source was used for fluorescence measurement:
Thorlabs part number FGB25, Thorlabs part number FGL530,  part number L1-0-B5TH30-1. Samples ≥200
μL were collected
over 3 min sampling periods into 2 mL 96 deep well plates. The plates
were then transferred to an Accuri C6 flow cytometer with CSampler
attachment for immediate measurement. All settings and analysis were
done as in previous work..