Prokaryotes are capable of dynamically
responding to a diverse range of environmental stressors. This ability
is often mediated by genetic circuits that can detect signals of stress
and subsequently mount an appropriate response. The SOS pathway is
a canonical example of such a stress-response pathway, mediating survival
from genotoxic stress. The pathway is under the control of a single
transcriptional regulator, LexA (a). In the absence
of stress, LexA binds to the promoters of SOS pathway genes to repress
the response. In , as many as 40 genes
are regulated by LexA, with binding dictated by conserved SOS boxes
that vary in strength and location relative to the promoters of SOS
genes. In the event of DNA damage, single
stranded DNA (ssDNA) accumulates at stalled replication forks or double
stranded DNA breaks and serves as the template for filamentation of
the DNA damage sensor protein, RecA. This
activated RecA nucleoprotein filament (RecA*), in turn, triggers the
self-cleavage (autoproteolysis) of LexA. Cleaved LexA is no longer able to bind DNA, and the resulting derepression
results in an orderly progression of SOS gene transcription based
on the affinity of LexA for each respective SOS box. The resulting cascade of genes expressed largely function
to repair damaged DNA, but several, such as translesion DNA polymerases,
are also associated with accelerated mutagenesis. The SOS pathway has more recently been implicated in antibiotic
tolerance and acquired resistance, sparking a renewed interest in
understanding and manipulating its effects on evolutionary adaptation. Given its prominent role in both DNA repair and mutagenesis,
the
SOS pathway has been an area of intense interest for decades; however,
a standing challenge in the field has been separating the roles of
the upstream inciting events from those of the downstream induced
SOS pathway genes. Separating the events preceding the SOS response
is important because SOS pathway activation, as noted above, results
from three linked but distinct events—DNA damage, RecA* activation,
and LexA cleavage—and each of these processes plays discrete
roles in the observed phenotypes. DNA damage, for example, can directly
contribute to mutagenesis independent of SOS activation, and can also
activate the general stress response pathway through RpoS and RpoE. RecA* has additional functions beyond mediating LexA cleavage: RecA*
participates in homologous recombination, activates mobile genetic
elements including prophage induction, and modulates the activity
of error-prone polymerases, including serving as one component of
the active DNA polymerase V complex. As the last link in these integrated processes, LexA cleavage is
ultimately responsible for the induction of SOS pathway genes. Prior studies have employed classical genetic approaches to address
the challenge of studying the biology of the SOS pathway independent
of DNA damage and activated RecA, but each approach carries limitations.
Deletion of , for example, activates a constitutive
hypermutable state; however, unregulated overexpression
of SOS effector genes obscures their role when induced at physiological
levels. Similar findings and limitations are associated with a strain
harboring , an allele which constitutively
generates RecA*. A heat-labile  allele, whose
protein product degrades upon shifting to 42 °C, offers an alternative
means to induce the SOS pathway in the absence of DNA damage; however,
in addition to the added stressor of heat shock, this mutant LexA
has numerous defects, including altered degradation kinetics and an
inability to bind to certain SOS promoters, leading to incomplete
split-phenotype SOS activation. Introducing
an undamaged F′ plasmid or phage genome into a UV-irradiated
cell has also been used as an alternative means of separating SOS-associated
mutagenesis from DNA damage. These studies suggest that targeted mutagenesis
to damaged genomes exceeds untargeted mutagenesis; however, replication
dynamics are likely different for exogenously introduced DNA than
for the host genome. Given the importance of
separating the upstream signals from the
downstream SOS gene induction events, as well as the limitations of
classical approaches, we considered whether modern synthetic biology
approaches could be applied. Envisioning the SOS
pathway as a genetic circuit allowed us to conceive of an alternative
circuit design, whereby the SOS response in  could be induced without a requirement for DNA damage or RecA activation.
We manipulated a variable region in LexA to introduce a new recognition
site for tobacco etch virus protease (TEV), allowing us to control
LexA cleavage by modulating expression of TEV with a nontoxic small
molecule (a).
After validating our design biochemically, we demonstrated that bacterial
strains harboring the synthetic circuit recapitulate the UV resistance
phenotype of the native circuit. Furthermore, with the ability to
now orthogonally investigate DNA damage, RecA activation, and LexA
cleavage, we applied our synthetic circuit to demonstrate the importance
of DNA damage for accelerating SOS-mediated mutagenesis. Our work
offers a novel application of synthetic biology to separate a stressor
from its associated stress-response pathway. Schematic
of engineered synthetic circuit. (a) In the native circuit
(top), SOS genes are turned on after DNA damage activates filamentation
of RecA, which induces LexA to undergo self-cleavage within its CTD.
In the synthetic circuit design (bottom), the nontoxic small molecule
anhydrotetracycline (ATc) induces expression of TEV protease, which
instead cleaves LexA at a site introduced into its flexible linker.
(b) Crystal structure of LexA protein bound to operator DNA adapted
from PDB 3JS0. The unstructured linker region is
highlighted, with partial sequence alignment of LexA from  and ,
along with the engineered linker sequence of LexA containing
the TEV recognition site. (c) Representation of four LexA variants
examined in this study. The variants represent all combinations of
RecA*- and/or TEV-mediated cleavage. Design
of a LexA Variant Capable of Orthogonal Regulation http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf To obtain
orthogonal control over the SOS pathway, we envisioned
engineering an  LexA variant that could
be rendered dysfunctional inside the cell, not by self-cleavage but
by an alternative protease. Our design began with an examination of
the LexA sequence conservation across more than 400 different species
(). LexA is a homodimer consisting
of an N-terminal DNA binding domain (NTD) and a C-terminal serine
protease domain (CTD) connected by a flexible linker (b). Although the functional
NTD and CTD are generally well-conserved across prokaryotes, we noted
that the linker region is highly divergent, spanning from its shortest
length of 5 amino acids in  up to 50
amino acids in some species. This natural diversity in length and
sequence led us to hypothesize that the short linker in  could tolerate modification and provide a locus for introducing
an exogenous protease cleavage site without significantly perturbing
the function of the NTD and CTD. Reasoning that a longer linker
could increase accessibility for an exogenous protease, we replaced
the linker from  with the 24 amino acid
linker from  Within this scaffold,
we then centrally embedded the optimized recognition site for TEV
(b). We expressed and purified this engineered LexA
variant, hereafter called LexA. To abolish LexA self-cleavage,
we also made a corresponding S119A mutant, inactivating the catalytic
active-site serine (LexA). This variant could potentially
be activated by the synthetic, but not the native, circuit. With native
LexA (LexA) and the protease-inactive S119A variant (LexA), these four variants thus covered the full range of
RecA*-induced and/or TEV-cleavable systems (c). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf Our alteration to the LexA linker
would ideally be non-perturbing
to NTD and CTD function, while permitting TEV cleavage. To compare
our novel LexA and LexA proteins
with their native-linker counterparts, we began by quantitatively
comparing their DNA binding and protease functions. Using an electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) for DNA binding activity, we found that
association of LexA with SOS operator DNA was comparable
to that of LexA (K 65 ± 21 and 47 ±
15 nM, respectively), and similar results were noted for the S119A
variants (, ). The DNA-binding of LexA was specific to SOS operator DNA, as the affinity was similar in
the presence of a large excess of nonspecific DNA and no binding was
observed to a scrambled operator duplex (). To evaluate self-cleavage activity, the proteins were
incubated with activated RecA* and cleavage products were analyzed
(a). As anticipated,
both LexA and LexA were unreacted,
while LexA and LexA were both proficient
in RecA*-stimulated self-cleavage. Both of the RecA*-cleavable proteins
behaved similar to one another in the presence of either SOS operator
DNA or scrambled DNA (). LexA
can also undergo an efficient RecA*-independent, Ser119-mediated,
self-cleavage reaction when exposed to high pH , and this reaction can be readily quantified by fitting the reaction
progress curve to a first-order kinetic model (, ). Under these conditions, we found that LexA and LexA cleaved with similar efficiencies (0.014 ± 0.003 and
0.019 ± 0.003 min, respectively), while LexA and LexA showed no demonstrable
cleavage at any time point observed, as expected. Equally important
for our synthetic circuit design, we found that, when incubated with
purified TEV, both LexA and LexA were readily cleaved , while LexA and LexA remained intact (b). TEV-mediated cleavage was not affected
by the presence of DNA containing either an SOS operator box or a
scrambled SOS operator sequence (). These results together confirmed our hypothesis that altering
the linker, which has previously been subjected only to limited investigation, can add new functionality while preserving native
characteristics. Our results suggest that this linker could provide
a locus for exploring other alterations in the future. Biochemical validation
of LexA cleavage by native or synthetic
circuits. (a) Purified LexA proteins were incubated with or without
activated RecA* and visualized by SDS-PAGE. (b) Analogous incubations
with TEV were carried out and resolved by SDS-PAGE. Biochemical Characterization of Purified
LexA Variants The reported values are the binding
constants of LexA with operator DNA and the rates of alkaline-induced
self-cleavage. Values are the mean ± SD from at least 3 independent
experiments. N.D., not detected. Construction of Synthetic Circuit Inside Cells http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf To advance
our synthetic circuit strategy into cells, we engineered our LexA
variants into the native  locus by scarless recombineering
(). The parent strain for the majority of our studies was  MG1655  (hereafter ), as recombineering at the  locus requires a transient  state and the  strain is nonviable. In this background, the  locus was replaced with a cassette containing chloramphenicol resistance
and an I-SceI cut site for efficient scarless recombineering. Subsequent
replacement of this locus with  serves as an SOS-off strain, unable to self-cleave and therefore
constitutively repressed. Two analogous
strains were generated: one encoding our synthetic LexA variant that
is also proficient in self-cleavage () and a second that harbors both the variant linker
and the S119A mutation (), which should render LexA only capable of orthogonal activation
by TEV. Notably, once the  locus has been replaced
in the recombineering process,  can potentially
be reintroduced. While some prior studies have shown that deletion
of  does not significantly alter SOS survival
phenotypes, to address the possible influence
of  deletion in our synthetic circuit strain,
we also restored  in the  strain (called ). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf We completed the design of our synthetic circuit
by introducing TEV into the cells. To control TEV expression, we placed
the gene on a medium-copy plasmid under the control of the anhydrotetracycline
(ATc)-inducible  promoter, along with a copy
of its associated  repressor gene. To help minimize
any effects from leaky TEV expression under uninduced conditions,
we also added a ssrA degron tag to the C-terminus of TEV. A complete sequence and map of the pMG81 plasmid
containing TEV protease can be found in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf With strains harboring both the chromosomal  variants and inducible TEV plasmid, we first wanted
to examine whether
native circuit functions were retained in the expected manners; specifically,
if LexA could bind and repress SOS promoters in unstressed
cells, and if the strains with preserved CTD protease activity could
undergo SOS induction in response to DNA damage. To monitor derepression
of the SOS gene network, we employed a GFP reporter plasmid under
the control of the  promoter (P-GFP); for consistency, all cell-based assays were performed
in the presence of both this plasmid as well as the TEV-expression
plasmid. Mid log cultures were either
left untreated or irradiated with UV light (50 J/m), and
GFP fluorescence was monitored after 1 h by flow cytometry (a). In the absence
of UV exposure,  and  strains had low baseline GFP expression, similar to that of  and . In response to UV light, however,  and  strains demonstrated a ∼1-log
shift in mean fluorescence intensity compared to the undamaged controls,
while  and  strains showed
no DNA damage-associated GFP expression. To examine a wider range
of SOS-controlled genes, we repeated these experiments with reporters
containing three additional promoters representing a range of induction
kinetics: P-GFP, P-GFP, and P-GFP. Similarly
to P-GFP, these three reporter plasmids
demonstrate a rightward shift in mean fluorescence intensity compared
to controls in the  and  strains,
while there was no GFP expression associated with DNA damage in the  and  strains (). These results have two implications. First, given
the low baseline fluorescence intensity in unstressed cells, both
LexA and LexA bind to SOS operator
DNA in cells and suppress expression comparably to LexA. Second, similar levels of GFP expression with LexA and LexA upon irradiation confirms that the native
SOS pathway is preserved in those strains. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf After confirming the preserved function of the native circuit,
we next evaluated the function of the synthetic circuit. Using the  strain, we
initially examined expression of TEV and cleavage of LexA by Western blotting. Steady state levels of this LexA variant were
comparable to those in the  strain (). We added a
range of concentrations of ATc to a mid log culture of  and analyzed TEV and LexA
levels after 10 and 60 min ().
TEV was undetectable at baseline, and sustained expression starting
within 10 min could be observed at or above 0.02 μg/mL. Concurrently,
under these conditions full-length LexA becomes undetectable
within 10 min, which is in the time range observed with native circuit
activation by UV light. Following the
rapid degradation of LexA, we consistently observe some reaccumulation
of LexA at 60 min. As both LexA and TEV are autoregulated at their
respective promoters, this reaccumulation may represent the changing
equilibrium with increased synthesis of new LexA, concurrent with
decreased production of TEV protease. Notably, no LexA cleavage products
were detected by Western blot, suggesting rapid degradation after
cleavage, analogous to that observed when native LexA self-cleaves. Given that we observed a mild growth deficit
at ATc doses at or above 0.2 μg/mL, we chose to use a standard
concentration of 0.02 μg/mL ATc for initial studies on our synthetic
circuit. However, these data suggest the potential for a titratable
response with further refinement. Together, these data support that
TEV can be activated rapidly following ATc addition and that TEV can
cleave engineered LexA and promote its depletion. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf We proceeded to ask whether the P-GFP SOS reporter could be activated through our novel ATc-inducible
circuit. Analogous to the experimental setup with UV-mediated induction,
mid log cultures either remained untreated or were induced with 0.02
μg/mL ATc, and GFP fluorescence was monitored (b). At 1 h after ATc addition,  and  strains showed a ∼0.7-log
increase in mean fluorescence intensity, while  and  strains demonstrated no change in fluorescence.
The expanded series of reporters likewise showed an ATc-dependent
increase in GFP fluorescence from P-GFP, P-GFP and P-GFP in our  and  strains, indicative of broad pathway activation across a range of
LexA-controlled promoters ().
To correlate our GFP fluorescence at 0.02 μg/mL ATc with a quantifiable
UV dose, we compared the extent of GFP expression through the synthetic
circuit to that of the native circuit across a range of UV doses (). The degree of SOS activation most
closely correlated to that seen with ∼5 J/m UV
light. We attributed this degree of SOS activation to several factors,
including the rate of TEV synthesis after ATc addition or the cleavage
rate of TEV protease  that of LexA self-cleavage.
Taken together, the above results show that our synthetic circuit
design achieved the desired aims. The  strain offers us two ways to activate the SOS
response: orthogonally, by adding ATc, or natively, by inducing DNA
damage. Uniquely, the  strain can only activate the SOS response by orthogonal means,
thus bypassing the requirement for DNA damage and RecA*. Induction of native and
synthetic SOS circuits . Strains engineered
at the native  locus and
containing an ATc-inducible TEV expression plasmid were evaluated
for GFP expression from an SOS reporter plasmid 1 h after exposure
to (a) UV damage or (b) ATc. Representative histograms show single-cell
GFP fluorescence profiles for unexposed (light gray) or exposed cells
(dark gray and orange). Small-Molecule
Inducible UV Resistance Having demonstrated
ATc-inducible activation of several SOS reporter genes, we next asked
whether our synthetic circuit could recapitulate the global phenotypes
normally associated with SOS gene network activation. We chose first
to test our strains in the classic model of survival and DNA repair
after UV damage. The strains were streaked across LB agar plates in
the presence or absence of ATc and were subsequently exposed to a
gradient of UV light from 0 to 120 J/m. In the absence
of ATc, the strains with intact native activation pathways,  and , survived UV doses up to ∼100
J/m (a). By contrast,  and  were largely unable to survive doses above 10–20 J/m. With , we observed rare colonies that could tolerate higher doses
of UV irradiation, which could represent sporadic leaky expression
of TEV. In the presence of ATc, these patterns for survival remain
unchanged for , , and . However, as predicted by our circuit
design, in the presence of ATc,  shows a >5-fold increase in the
tolerated
UV dose, demonstrating our desired small-molecule inducible UV resistance
pattern. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf To further quantify UV resistance,
we next examined survival curves
across a range of UV doses (b). A mid log phase culture was split into media containing
ATc or no ATc and then immediately irradiated. Serial dilutions were
plated onto LB agar, and viable cells were counted after overnight
incubation. Relative to  where the native SOS pathway is intact,  showed enhanced killing by ∼2–3
log across UV doses. In the absence of ATc, the  strain followed a similar
survival curve to . In the presence of ATc, however,  showed a significant ∼1.5–2
log increase in the surviving fraction across all UV doses. We also
repeated the survival curve analysis with  and found similar levels of small-molecule inducible UV-resistance
in comparison to  strain (). As with the
P-GFP reporter studies, the synthetic
circuit does not fully achieve the functional levels seen in the  strain. It is possible
that because our synthetic circuit best mimics a UV dose of 5 J/m, mild suppression of the response compared to the  strain accounts for the
incomplete rescue. Nonetheless, these data support the functionality
of SOS-mediated DNA repair and survival following activation of the
synthetic circuit. While prior studies have successfully designed
gene circuits controlling individual or small groups of genes, our study offers a novel example of small-molecule
control over an entire stress response gene network in bacteria. Survival in response to UV damage. (a) Strains were streaked across
LB agar without ATc (top) or with 0.02 μg/mL ATc (bottom). The
plates were exposed to a gradient of UV light from 0 to 120 J/m and plates were imaged after 24 h. (b) Survival curves for
mid log cultures of engineered strains following UV light exposure.
Viable colony forming units were determined under each condition and
the fraction survival was determined relative to the unexposed cells.
Error bars represent SEM from at least 4 independent determinations. Small-Molecule Inducible Mutagenesis through the Synthetic Circuit Turning our attention to another hallmark of the SOS response,
we assessed mutagenesis by utilizing a rifampin resistance assay.
As resistance to the antibiotic rifampin is acquired through any one
of a number of specific point mutations in the  chromosomal gene locus, this assay has been classically used as
a reliable proxy for the overall mutation frequency across the genome. We focused our analysis on , which can only activate the SOS pathway
through the native circuit, and , which can only activate through the
synthetic circuit. Mid log phase cultures were split into media with
or without ATc. The cultures were then immediately damaged with increasing
doses of UV light, and serial dilutions were plated after 1 h. The
total population size without UV damage was determined after overnight
growth on plates with nonselective media, and the number of rifampin-resistant
colonies was counted after 48 h of growth on media containing selective
levels of rifampin. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf The  strain demonstrated a low baseline and a UV dose-dependent
increase in the number of rifampin-resistant mutants relative to the
starting population (a). In the  strain, in the absence of ATc the frequency of resistant mutants
remained low, in part due to the potent killing of the strain by UV
light, with growth not detected above 20–30 J/m. However, when the  strain was treated with ATc concurrently with UV damage, mutagenesis
was largely restored to levels seen with , and showed a similar dose-dependence.
As with DNA repair, minor differences can be observed between the  and  strains, particularly
at the highest dose. Most of this can be accounted for by the small
decrease in survival of the  strain compared to the  strain; indeed, when the number of resistant mutants was normalized
to overall cell viability after irradiation, the /ATc condition
gives a mutation frequency per viable cell that is even higher than
that of the  strain
(). As with our UV survival experiments,
we evaluated the impact of  on the function of
our synthetic circuit and once again observed >1-log increase in
ATc-inducible
mutagenesis in the  strain (), similar to the levels observed in the absence
of . Overall, we conclude that synthetic circuit
activation allows for small-molecule inducible mutagenesis in the
setting of UV damage that is comparable to native pathway activation. Separating
the signals in SOS mutagenesis. (a) After exposure to
various doses of UV light in the presence or absence of ATc, the  or  strains were plated on
selective rifampin-containing media and the number of resistant colonies
was quantified relative to an undamaged population of cells plated
on nonselective media. Error bars represent the standard error across
at least 6 independent replicates. (b) Rifampin resistant colonies
were quantified relative to an undamaged population following exposure
to either UV light (10 J/m) and/or ATc (0.02 μg/mL).
Open circles indicate the presence of the  constitutively active allele. Genetic and Environmental Requirements for SOS-Mediated Mutagenesis Finally, we used our synthetic circuit to separate the roles of
DNA damage, RecA activation, and LexA cleavage in SOS-mediated mutagenesis.
As noted earlier, some studies have indicated that mutagenesis can
occur in the absence of exogenous DNA damage when the SOS pathway
is artificially hyperactivated—for example, with  deletion, overexpression of the error
prone polymerases, or constitutive RecA
activation through either  or  mutations. However, other studies have indicated
a role for DNA damage in SOS mutagenesis: when undamaged DNA, such
as F′-plasmids or phage, is introduced into bacteria undergoing
a UV-induced, native SOS response, mutagenesis appears to occur at
only low rates on the undamaged, foreign DNA. Our synthetic circuit offers an opportunity to reconcile these differences
by studying the inducible SOS response, rather than a constitutive
response, and examining SOS mutagenesis on the chromosomal  locus, rather than foreign DNA. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf To examine the
requirements for SOS mutagenesis, we therefore evaluated the mutation
frequency with UV alone (at a fixed 10 J/m), ATc alone,
or both together (b). With the  strain, mutagenesis was observed with UV light in the presence
or absence of ATc, although the mutational frequency is slightly decreased
in the presence of ATc. As overall viability is not significantly
altered (), this dampening could
be due to a metabolic cost associated with TEV production. Importantly,
our data with  suggests that SOS pathway activation with ATc in the absence
of UV is not sufficient for heightened mutagenesis. In this strain,
we observed that the number of rifampin-resistant mutants increased
when treated with UV and ATc together, but not with either one alone
(b). This aligns
well with prior studies, which used a heat-labile  allele to simulate LexA cleavage and degradation without DNA damage;
in this case, mutagenesis was similarly impaired, although concerns
about altered interactions with SOS promoters limited the authors’
conclusions. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf Our results imply that
either DNA damage and/or RecA* are necessary
for mutagenesis, beyond simply acting as the signals involved in inducing
LexA cleavage. DNA damage could provide a nidus for SOS mutagenesis,
while the alternative functions of RecA*, including its role as one
component of the active DNA polymerase V complex, could be important for SOS mutagenesis. To examine if activated
RecA* is sufficient to restore SOS mutagenesis without DNA damage,
we generated  and  strains in
the background of a  allele, which encodes
for an E38L mutation that renders RecA constitutively active. The  showed a similar responsiveness to
ATc addition as the  strain (), suggesting
that the strain offered similar orthogonal control over LexA cleavage.
Evaluating these strains, as previously established, shows a high baseline mutation frequency irrespective of DNA damage
(b). This finding
likely reflects complete pathway derepression and aberrantly high
concentrations of activated error-prone polymerases. With the  strain, we observed the expected low mutation frequency at baseline,
as the noncleavable LexA exerts a dominant repression
on SOS genes even in the presence of activated RecA*. Interestingly,
in the presence of ATc and absence of UV, there is no increase in
mutational frequency in the  strain. As with , only in the presence of ATc and UV light
are rifampin-resistant mutants readily recovered. Taken together,
these data indicate that both DNA damage and LexA
cleavage are necessary for SOS mutagenesis, even in the presence of
activated RecA*. These results support a model where DNA damage is
necessary to provide a nidus of mutation, upon which SOS-mediated
mechanisms can build; only with both DNA damage and LexA cleavage
can we observe appreciable mutagenesis at the chromosomal  locus. One limitation of our approach is our inability
to demonstrate if RecA* is necessary for mutagenesis, as DNA damage
in the presence of  also activates RecA. Future improvements of our synthetic circuit
could involve separation of DNA damage from RecA activation, chromosomal
integration of TEV, or added autoregulatory capacities in the circuit.
Nevertheless, our study represents a step beyond previous genetic
approaches, which now allows more deliberate manipulation of the SOS
stress response pathway in a near-native system. In this study, we have generated a synthetic circuit for inducible
control over the SOS pathway independent of DNA damage and RecA*.
Our engineered strain shows small-molecule inducible DNA repair and
mutagenesis, and opens the possibility of addressing a wide variety
of significant questions related to SOS function. For example, one
significant advantage of our approach is that the circuit now permits
temporal separation of DNA damage from the induction of the SOS response,
which can be applied to examine the dynamics of cell death and DNA
repair after DNA damage. Furthermore, other phenotypes that have been
associated with SOS function, such as the generation of persisters, biofilm formation, or acquired antibiotic resistance can
potentially be examined independent of DNA damage. Future refinement
of the synthetic circuit may allow for titratability of the response
across a dose range of ATc or examine pathway inactivation after washout
of ATc. More generally, the concept of reprogramming stress response
pathways with synthetic biology approaches can allow for separation
of environmental changes from their associated responses to probe
other aspects of bacterial adaptation, survival, and evolution. A comprehensive database of LexA homologues
was generated using the ConSurf Server Database, which utilizes CS-BLAST
of the SWISS-PROT protein databank to calculate sequence homology
and conservation of protein structures. LexA homologues were aligned and percent identity calculated using
Jalview sequence alignment tool. For experiments
with purified LexA, a previously described expression vector was used
as a basis for mutagenesis, encoding LexA with an N-terminal His-tag
with or without the S119A mutation. Linker
variations were introduced by overlap extension PCR. Proteins were
expressed in  BL21 pLysS, followed by
one-step purification using the His-tag as previously described. An EMSA
was used to quantitatively determine the binding efficiency of LexA
proteins to the SOS consensus sequence. 44 bp oligonucleotides containing either the SOS consensus sequence
or a scrambled control were 5′-radiolabeled with P using T4 polynucleotide kinase, then annealed to their complementary
unlabeled strand. Serial dilutions of LexA were incubated with 100
pM of the radiolabeled duplex in 70 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 10 mM MgCl (Buffer A) at 25 °C either alone or with a 1000-fold
excess (1 ng/μL) of unlabeled sonicated salmon sperm DNA, and
samples were separated on a native 8% acrylamide gel at 25 °C
in 0.5× Tris/Borate/EDTA buffer. The gels were then imaged on
a Typhoon imager. Quantification was performed on ImageJ software
by quantifying the ratio of bound to unbound DNA normalized to background
phosphorescence. The data were fit to one site specific binding  Prism software. To qualitatively examine LexA
autocleavage, 5 μM purified LexA variants were incubated in
Buffer A with 20 μg/mL RecA (New England Biolabs,
NEB) preactivated by coincubation with 10 μM ATPγS and
10 μM ssDNA, either alone or in the presence of 10 μM
SOS operator or scrambled operator DNA. After 2 h at 37 °C, reactions
were quenched with 2× Laemmli buffer. For alkali-induced cleavage,
5 μM LexA was incubated in a 1:1 ratio with 2× autocleavage
buffer (100 mM CAPS, 100 mM Tris, 300 mM NaCl, pH 10.6) for 2 h before
quenching with Laemmli buffer. For TEV-mediated cleavage, 5 μM
LexA proteins were incubated for 2 h with 0.8 μM TEV in 50 mM
Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.5 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT, with or without 10 μM
of SOS operator or scrambled operator DNA. Samples were separated
on either 12% SDS-PAGE gel (for TEV-cleavage) or 20% SDS-PAGE gels
(for RecA*-cleavage) in 1× Tris-Glycine-SDS (TGS) Buffer (Biorad),
visualized using Coomassie stain, and imaged on a Gel Doc XR+ (Biorad).
Band intensity was quantified using ImageJ software and first order
cleavage kinetics were determined by Prism software. Strain Generation
for Cell-Based Assays http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00108/suppl_file/sb7b00108_si_001.pdf A  (Cam), ΔsulA::FRT MG1655  strain
previously used for the generation of the  strain served as the parent for
recombineering. The PCR-amplified gene
fragment containing  or  and ∼1000 bp of flanking DNA were amplified and used
in the recombineering protocol described previously. The  gene was reintroduced by P1 transduction of a (Kan) strain obtained through the Keio collection, as  is a nearby gene with
high linkage to . The  allele was introduced by P1 transduction from the
donor SS4247 strain as previously described. All strains were confirmed by PCR amplification and sequencing of
the relevant loci. A comprehensive list of strains and genotypes used
can be found in . All cell-based
protocols were performed in strains cotransformed with both a GFP
reporter plasmid maintained by kanamycin selection and an inducible
TEV plasmid maintained by ampicillin selection. The GFP reporter plasmids
used (P-GFP, P-GFP, P-GFP, P-GFP) were obtained from the Open Biosystems  promoter collection (Thermo Scientific). For the TEV expression plasmid, the parent strain
for cloning was a medium-copy pMG81 vector (Goulian Lab collection)
encoding the  and  gene
locus under the control of a bidirectional TetR-regulated promoter.
An autolysis refractory N-terminal maltose binding protein (MBP) fusion
of TEV was amplified out from RK1043 (Addgene), appending an  tag in the process. This gene was then cloned using Gibson assembly
into pMG81, replacing the  gene locus. Overnight cultures of strains were
diluted 1:100 in 15 mL of 1× MM (1× M9 minimal media salts,
10 mM MgSO, 1 mM CaCl, 0.2% glucose, and 0.1%
Casamino acids, with 30 μg/mL kanamycin and 100 μg/mL
ampicillin for plasmid maintenance) and shaken at 37 °C. At mid
log phase, cultures were either untreated or ATc was added at a concentration
range from 0.005–0.2 μg/mL and cells were incubated at
37  C. At 0, 10, and 60 min, 1 mL of culture was removed,
pelleted and resuspended in 100 μL of media. 50 μL was
mixed with 50 μL of 2× Laemmli buffer, denatured at 95
°C, and run on a 12% SDS-PAGE denaturing gel. The gel was transferred
to a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane using the iBlot Gel Transferring
System (Invitrogen). Membranes were probed with mouse anti-LexA (Santa
Cruz, sc-365999) 1:1000 or goat anti-MBP (NEB) 1:50 000, followed,
respectively, by horse radish peroxidase(HRP)-conjugated goat anti-mouse
or rabbit anti-goat (1:2000, Santa Cruz). Membranes were imaged on
a Amersham Imager 600 system after being exposed to Immobilon Western
HRP substrate (Millipore). Overnight
cultures of
strains were diluted 1:100 in 1× MM and shaken at 37 °C.
At mid log phase, 100 μL of strains in a 96-well plate were
exposed to UV light at the doses noted and/or ATc (0.02 μg/mL).
Recovery and activation of SOS genes was allowed for 1 h before cell
were pelleted by centrifugation at 7600 and resuspended
in 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with 4% paraformaldehyde.
Single-cell GFP fluorescence intensity was analyzed using a FACSCalibur
(BD Biosciences) and analyzed using FlowJo software. DNA Repair
and Mutagenesis Assays Overnight cultures
of strains were diluted 1:100 in 1× MM and shaken at 37  C. At mid log phase, cultures were streaked across LB agar
supplemented with 100 μg/mL ampicillin and 30 μg/mL kanamycin,
and either no ATc or ATc at 0.02 μg/mL. Streaked strains were
allowed 5–10 min settling into the agar and then exposed to
a gradient of UV light with the plates partially covered to alter
exposure intensity. The plates were analyzed following 24 h at 37
°C. For UV survival curves, 200 μL of mid log phase
cultures were transferred to 24-well plates to increase surface area
and exposed to UV light and/or ATc (0.02 μg/mL). After UV exposure,
cultures were immediately serially diluted in 1× PBS ± ATc,
and then plated on LB agar plates with 100 μg/mL ampicillin,
30 μg/mL kanamycin, and ±0.02 μg/mL ATc. Plates were
counted through a combination of manual counting and OpenCFU software. For analysis of mutagenesis, overnight cultures of strains were
diluted 1:1000 in 1× MM and shaken at 37 °C. At mid log
phase, 1 mL cultures were transferred to 24-well plates and then exposed
to UV light at doses ranging from 5 to 50 J/m and/or 0.02
μg/mL ATc. Cell recovery was allowed for 1 h shaking at 37  C following damage. Cultures were serially diluted in 1×
PBS and plated on LB agar with ampicillin and kanamycin for viable
cell counts and selective LB agar with ampicillin, kanamycin, and
rifampin (100 μg/mL) to quantify the number of rifampin resistant
mutants. Resistant colonies were tabulated after 48 h of growth. The
mutagenesis assays with UV alone, ATc alone, or both, were performed
with 4 mL cultures in 6-well plates to increase the limit of detection.
The frequency of resistant mutants per starting population was determined
by normalizing the number of resistant colonies to an average of three
undamaged control cell counts on nonselective media ± ATc. The
frequency of resistant mutants per viable cell count was determined
by normalizing the number of resistant colonies to an average of three
UV-damaged or undamaged controls plated on nonselective media..