Biomolecular
computing systems have the potential for
a range of key technological
and medical applications, including valuable compound production and biosensors for disease and pathogens, all
the way to bioremediation. Over the past decade, characterization
and standardization of various biological parts and components through
experiments and computational analysis have been crucial in moving
the field forward. Expanding experimental characterization to large-scale analysis, using synthetic circuits as benchmarks for reverse
engineering, and integrating domain specific
languages are prime examples of cross
fertilization of engineering principles to synthetic biology. Overall,
the area has seen remarkable growth and progress. Genetic circuit
engineering has transitioned from two-node circuits to complex architectures which respond to input stimuli
by generating cellular memory through recombinase-based mechanisms and multilayered transcriptional and post-transcriptional
regulation. Toward advanced computing
applications, multioutput systems are
just as important as multi-input circuits, yet the former is an underexplored
and largely unsolved problem for computations performed in single
human cells. Notably, it is not currently feasible to utilize cell-to-cell
communication in mammalian systems to achieve intercellular multilayered
circuits. Here, as a means of enabling
the control of multiple outputs with a few inputs, we introduce a
biological intracellular multilayered circuit that emulates an electrical
decoder. Specifically, we introduce a novel genetic architecture that
converts two chemical inputs into four unique outputs. The circuit
achieves the combinational effect of a system composed of four parallel
Boolean logic AND-gates (Figure a). It consists
of a five node system that utilizes a network of transcription factors
and synthetic microRNAs to receive the inputs, process, and transduce
the information into four responses (Figure b). The decoder operation is based on two general layers, a “regulating
layer” and a “regulated layer”, offering a flexible
platform for achieving combinational logic in mammalian cells. We provide experimental results that show proper
operation of the
decoder in human cells and serve as a proof-of-principle toward future
biological and medical applications. Importantly, the modular outputs
of the current implementation can be easily replaced with any gene
product (e.g., custom transcription activator-like effectors), thereby allowing for a multiplexed interface
with a diverse array of cellular functions. (a) Boolean
logic illustration of a biological decoder with chemical
inputs and fluorescence proteins as the outputs of the genetic circuit.
(b) Node and edge schematic of the decoder circuit within a cell.
The system consists of five distinct nodes combined into two distinct
layers which interact through activation and inhibition edges. Nodes
A and B comprise the “regulating” nodes, while nodes
C, D, and E comprise the “regulated” nodes. Decoder
Architecture and Implementation Each node of
the circuit is composed of well-studied biological parts (Figure a,  Biological Parts). We use two promoters, two transcription factors
(TFs), a synthetic microRNA, and the corresponding three operator
sites. The promoters are a human polybiquitin C (UbC) and the Cytomegalovirus
(CMV) immediate-early. The transcription factors are the reverse tetracycline-controlled
transactivator (rtTA; an activator) and the LacI-KRAB fusion protein
(an inhibitor). We use a synthetic microRNA based on miR30, the miR-FF4. The operator sites are the TET response element (TRE), the lac operator
(LacO), and finally, three tandem targets of perfect complementarity
to miR-FF4. Combinations of these parts were used to build distinct
computation layers: the “regulating” layer (nodes A
and B) and the “regulated” layer (nodes C, D, and E),
shown in Figure a. We used the small molecules
doxycycline (DOX) and Isopropyl β--1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG) as the inducers that control the “regulating”
layer, which in turn programs the “regulated” nodes
to produce the four outputs (including the nonproduct case). Node A of the system architecture is a genetic construct
consisting
of the CMV promoter followed by the downstream LacI-KRAB fusion gene.
This node constitutively produces the LacI-KRAB protein and becomes
inactivated with the addition of the input IPTG. Node B is a genetic
construct consisting of the CMV promoter followed by the transactivation
protein, rtTA. As with node A, node B constitutively produces its
gene product, the rtTA protein, and becomes an active node only when
the input DOX is added. Nodes A and B are the first layer of the decoder
circuit and serve by creating a link between the input molecules and
the regulated layer. The second, or regulated, layer of the decoder
contains three nodes. Node C of this layer consists of the TRE followed
by the downstream gene of yellow fluorescence protein (tagYFP), a
protein degradation pest domain, and
last, three targets of perfect complementarity to miR-FF4. Node D
consists of the UbC promoter, two repeats of the lac operator sites,
the cyan fluorescence protein (tagCFP), and three targets of perfect
complementarity to miR-FF4. Node E contains the TRE promoter, two
repeats of the lac operator sites, the far-red fluorescence protein
mKate2, a pest domain, and last miR-FF4,
which provides an internal feedback mechanism. Inputs are the
chemical signals received by the system and outputs
are the fluorescent proteins produced. The input/output function of
the circuit is a decoder that converts two cellular inputs into four
unique outputs. Specifically, the four states are no signal without
any input (IPTG:0, DOX:0), producing tagYFP with DOX input (IPTG:0,
DOX:1), producing tagCFP with IPTG input (IPTG:1, DOX:0), and producing
mKate2 when the circuit receives both IPTG and DOX inputs (IPTG:1,
DOX:1) (Figure b and c). The first state
of the biological decoder is the absence of both
IPTG and DOX inputs (Figure b and c, “00”).
In the absence of IPTG, node A is active and constitutively produces
the inhibitor LacI-KRAB, which allows this node to inhibit nodes D
and E. The edge between these nodes prevents the production of the
tagCFP and mKate2 outputs by the LacI-KRAB binding the lac operator
in nodes D and E, therefore inhibiting transcription. Additionally,
since the DOX input is absent, node B remains inactive because the
rtTA protein requires DOX to operate as an active inducer, resulting
in nodes C and E remaining inactive. This restricts the production
of tagYFP and mKate2. Therefore, in the “00” state,
the downstream effect of node A being ON and node B being OFF is the
nonproduct case of the decoder state. The second state of the
biological decoder is the absence of IPTG
and the presence of DOX inputs (Figure b and
c, “01”). In this instance, when the DOX input is added
to the system, node B becomes activated because rtTA undergoes a conformational
change to its active state, which can subsequently bind and can activate
the TRE in nodes C and E. However, node A is still active because
of the absence of the IPTG input, and represses nodes D and E with
LacI-KRAB. Even though the promoter on node E is activated by rtTA
the (fine-tuned) presence of LacI-KRAB is sufficient to inhibit the
production of mKate2. Therefore, in the “01” state,
the downstream effect of node A being ON and node B being ON results
in tagYFP being produced as the sole output. The third state
of the biological decoder is the presence of IPTG
and the absence of DOX inputs (Figure b and
c, “10”). In this case, the IPTG input serves to inactivate
node A by causing a conformational change in the LacI-KRAB protein
to an inactive state. With node A inactivated, the edge between node
A and nodes D and E is turned OFF. Furthermore, node B is inactive
because the absence of the DOX input, which prevents the rtTA protein
from activating the TRE of nodes C and E. Therefore, in the “10”
state, the downstream effect of node A being OFF and node B being
OFF results in tagCFP being produced as the sole output. The
fourth state of the biological decoder is the presence of IPTG
and the presence of DOX inputs (Figure a and
b, “11”). The connections that occurred in states “01”
and “10” are utilized within this final state of the
decoder to achieve the last independent output. Similar to state “01”,
node B is activated through the addition of the DOX input by causing
the rtTA to transition to its active activation state. Also, as in
state “10”, node A is inactivated through the addition
of the IPTG input, which transitions the LacI-KRAB to its inactive
repressor state. These changes in the regulating layer allow nodes
D and E to be free of the repressor LacI-KRAB and nodes C and E to
be activated by rtTA. Therefore, all nodes of the regulated layer
are active. Here, we incorporate a feedback mechanism controlled by
node E. When node E is active, along with the output mKate2, the microRNA
miR-FF4 is cotranscribed, which inhibits the mRNAs produced by nodes
C and D. This post-transcriptional inhibitory mechanism allows mKate2
to be produced independently from the other two outputs. The result
of node A being OFF and node B being ON results in mKate2 being produced
as the sole output of the “11” state. In summary, the
decoder yields orthogonal outputs by responding to input signals,
by means of processing the chemical information with a 2-node regulating
layer, transducing the signal into a 3-node regulated layer, and finally
producing a measurable response. (a) Illustration
showing the system nodes, the DNA architecture
of each node, and the outputs of each node of the decoder. There are
two layers of the decoder architecture: a “regulating”
layer and a “regulated” layer. The “regulating”
layer consists of two nodes: node A and node B. Both node A and B
constitutively produce gene products which are the transcription factors
rtTA and LacI-KRAB. Node A responds to the input IPTG by becoming
inactivated. Node B responds to the input DOX by becoming activated.
The “regulated” nodes consist of three nodes: node C,
D, and E. Each node consists of combinations of promoters, transcription
factors, operator sites, fluorescence proteins, synthetic microRNAs,
and degradation tags. (b) Node and edge diagram for each state of
the decoder, showing active edges for each individual state. In the
“00” state (IPTG:0, DOX:0), node A is active and node
B is inactive. Node A inhibits nodes D and E, while node B cannot
activate nodes C and E. This results in the nonproduct case of the
decoder. In the “01” state (IPTG:0, DOX:0), node A is
active and node B is active. Node A inhibits nodes D and E, while
node B activates nodes C and E. This results in the production of
tagYFP as the decoder output. In the “10” state (IPTG:1,
DOX:0), node A is inactive and node B is inactive. Node A is prevented
from inhibiting nodes C and E, while node B cannot activate nodes
C and E. This results in the production of tagCFP as the decoder output.
In the “11” state (IPTG:1, DOX:1), node A is inactive
and node B is active. Node A is prevented from inhibiting nodes C
and E, while node B activates nodes C and E. This results in mRNA
output of all three nodes (C, D, and E). However, a feedback mechanism
is incorporated into node E which prevents the translation of the
outputs from nodes C and D. This results in mKate2 as the decoder
output. (c) Biological interactions of nodal components within the
decoder architecture for each Boolean state. The four decoder cases
are shown to illustrate the interactions the inputs have with the
effector proteins, the interactions the effector proteins have with
the DNA components, and the interactions between the feedback mechanism
and its accompanying targets. The synthetic circuit was
tested in human embryonic kidney cells (Tet-On 3G), which contain
a stable integration of the rtTA protein under a constitutive promoter.
To validate the circuit, approximately 200 000 cells were plated
per well, transfected after 24 h, induced immediately after transfection
with the appropriate “input” chemical molecule(s), and
grown an additional 48 h, concluding with characterization by flow
cytometry. The IPTG and DOX concentrations used to induce the decoder
were 10 mM and 2.5 μg/mL, respectively. To emulate the four
states, each perspective well was induced with or without the IPTG
and DOX inputs immediately after transfection. For the experiment
in Figure , 50 ng of each node (Figure a) were transfected into the kidney cells. Flow
cytometry was performed to probe the population behavior and fluorescence
microscopy was used to qualitatively confirm the results. Supporting Information Figure 1 Supporting Information Figure 2 For
analysis of the transfected cells using flow cytometry, single cells
were isolated (), followed by calculating the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI)
of the gated cells and subtracting the mean background signal. As
illustrated in Figure a, the circuit exhibits
the desired input/output behavior: “01” to tagYFP, “10”
to tagCFP, “11” to mKate2, and finally, no signal for
“00”. The normalized microscopy images for each perturbation
are shown in Figure b and are in agreement
with the MFI cytometry data. Each row of images contains a bright
field image, the tagYFP, tagCFP, and the mKate2 field, and finally
the overlap of all signals. Notably, the microscopy images show a
virtually digital behavior. Even when we apply a wide fluorescence
intensity range for the normalization of each channel (), the observable
by microscopy leakage is minimal. In accordance with the flow cytometry
data of Figure a, the most significant leakage
appears for tagCFP in the “00” case, mKate2 in the “01”
case, and tagYFP in the “11” case; however, these states
are significantly lower than the ON states. We hypothesize that the circuit
leakage originates mainly from
the multiplasmid transient transfection conditions. The complete decoder
consists of four separate plasmids and 1 stably integrated gene. With
the circuit residing in multiple vectors, because of the transient
transfections, there is high likelihood that cells uptake a subset
of the total circuit resulting in leakage or other incorrect input/output
behavior. However, even with leakage, the fold MFI change is approximately
3-fold between all leakage OFF states and ON states (Figure c). Supporting Information
Figure 3 Numerous genetic circuits of different
complexity have been created
over the years. Importantly, there is a vast variety in the conditions
associated with transient transfections (reagents, cells, mass of
DNA). Typically the circuits are optimized for specific conditions
and the mean fluorescence intensity is the standard metric in quantifying
their output. In our case, 50 ng of each vector resulted in optimal
separation of the ON/OFF states as judged by the MFI. Other concentrations
and ratios between the decoder vectors resulted in inferior performance.
Importantly, the MFI fold differences become progressively worse for
low vector concentrations (). The reason is that the MFI neglects a crucial circuit
characteristic, namely the number of cells that yield output above
background fluorescence. This number becomes particularly important
in transient transfections of several plasmids and at low mass concentrations
where only a few aberrant cells can bias significantly the mean fluorescence
intensity. Supporting Information Figure 4 Supporting Information Figure 5a Supporting Information Figure 5b To probe this issue, we performed a simple experiment
utilizing
one of the plasmids of the decoder circuit. The architecture of this
plasmids is the same as “node C” in Figure . The node consists of the TRE followed by the downstream
gene of yellow fluorescence protein (tagYFP), a protein degradation
pest domain, and last, three targets of perfect complementarity to
miR-FF4. In this example, when the plasmid is transfected alone, there
are only two states. An “OFF” state when the small molecule
doxycycline is absent and an “ON” state when the molecule
is added to the transfected cells. In analyzing cells positively transfected
for tagYFP, we set a gate based on untransfected cells (). By taking the
mean tagYFP fluorescence of cells within this transfected gate, we
observe a 3-fold increase in tagYFP fluorescence in the “OFF”
state compared to the “ON” state (), which is clearly an artifact.
In analyzing this quantitative artifact, it is useful to look at the
frequency of cells above the tagYFP transfected gate (). We observe
that the “OFF” state has a frequency of cells within
the gate of 0.21% while the “ON” state has as frequency
of cells within the gate of 29.2% of all live single cells. Analyzing
the frequency of cells above this gate, we indeed see that a few aberrant
cells significantly bias the mean fluorescence intensity. Supporting Information Figure 6 In
order to address this issue, we used the integrated mean fluorescence
intensity (iMFI) to analyze our data. We note that the integrated mean and median
fluorescence intensity are practically the same for our data (). The iMFI takes
into consideration both the frequency (f) and the mean fluorescence
intensity (MFI) of the cells within a selected gate. The frequency
of the cells within the gate is the number of cells within the gate
divided by the parent population (the total number of cells), expressed
as a percentile. The iMFI is the product of f and MFI. The iMFI therefore
approximates the area of a histogram, giving a quantitation of the
pictorial descriptor, when the total amount of single live cells remains
constant between circuit states. For the simple example used previously
(), the integrated
mean fluorescence intensity shows a true fold change between the “ON”
and “OFF” state of the genetic architecture, and in
agreement with qualitative microscopy. Supporting Information Figure 4 For our decoder experiments,
the flow cytometer voltage for the
tagYFP, tagCPP, and mKate2 was adjusted to set the negative (untransfected)
population at under 10 arbitrary units. To calculate the
iMFI we set a gate that collects events over the background fluorescence
threshold (). In Figure d, the black events correspond
to the cells that are below the threshold while the rest are above
(yellow, cyan, and red events). Additionally, in each graph the frequency
of cells above the threshold is shown. As illustrated in Figure d, the normalized iMFI is similar to the MFI, showing
approximately 5-fold difference between the ON and OFF states. Supporting Information Figure 3 Supporting Information
Figure 3 Supporting Information Figure 7 Supporting Information Figure 7 Importantly, if we compare the MFI and iMFI, we observe that the
iMFI is more robust to the transfection conditions (). The MFI of the very low
concentration transfection (, condition 1) shows high leakage on most OFF states.
Specifically, the leakage for mKate OFF states in the “00”
and “01” cases is in the same range with the ON state.
However, if we examine the individual histograms and scatter plots,
shown in , we notice that the level of leakage is not significant and stems
primarily from few, possibly false-positive, events thereby confirming
our hypothesis. In contrast, at these low concentrations, the iMFI
points to the true leaking states, tagCFP for “00”,
mKate2 for “01”, and tagYFP for “11” (). To summarize,
we believe that the iMFI can be an important metric in the analysis
of genetic circuits, in particular for multivector and low mass transient
transfections, where false positive and negative events are common. (a) Histograms of kidney
cells transfected with the decoder circuit
(50 ng per node) for the four states of the decoder. Each row shows
histograms for each color of each state, while each column shows each
state. The ON states (“01”for tagYFP, “10”
for tagCFP, and “11” mKate2) for each state of the decoder
show significant increase from all OFF states. Additionally, in each
histogram in the upper right-hand corner is the number of cells above
the 10au threshold. (b) Fluorescence microscopy of the
four outputs. There are five columns: a bright field showing the live
cells, a tagYFP, tagCFP, and mKate2 field, and last an overlap of
the three fluorescence fields. Each row is a different state of the
decoder. Each field is normalized to the same intensity, so that images
from the same column can be compared with each other. (c) The normalized
background subtracted mean fluorescence intensity of single cells.
The MFI corresponds to the data shown in panel a. Each state of the
decoder shows the correct ON signal in the appropriate case, with
leakage significantly lower in all OFF states. (d) Flow cytometry
scatter plots showing the four states of the system. Each column shows
a different fluorescent output on the -axis and
each row shows a different state of the circuit. In each scatter plot,
in the upper right-hand corner is the frequency of cells that fall
above the background fluorescence gate (10 au). The black
dots on the scatter plots are single cells that fall below the background
fluorescence threshold, while the colored dots are single cells that
fall above this threshold. The bar graph on the side of the FACs scatter
plots shows the integrated mean fluorescence intensity (iMFI) for
each state of the decoder. This correlates with the MFI quantity,
showing a 4–5 fold change between all ON and OFF states. Here, we present a novel genetic architecture
that can convert information from two chemical molecules into four
observable responses in the form of fluorescent proteins. The circuit
utilizes several modules in a two-layer architecture. The logic of
the decoder can be extended to implement more than 2 inputs with relatively
simple modifications. We show a clear separation between ON and OFF
states with approximately 3-fold mean fluorescence difference. Additionally,
we adopt the integrated mean fluorescence intensity for the characterization
of the circuit and show that this metric is more robust to transfection
conditions when compared to the mean fluorescent intensity. Supporting Information Figure 8 Supporting Information Figure 9 General-purpose decoder architectures can allow us to implement combinational
control in cells with several practical applications. As a direct
application, the output fluorescence proteins can be replaced with
active proteins in order to create an interface with endogenous cellular
pathways (). For example, the outputs can be used to apply transcriptional
control through TALEs fused with transactivation or repression domains. In a more specific example, a decoder can interface
with the cell-cycle by producing outputs that interact with crucial
junction proteins of the cell cycle (e.g., retinoblastoma for G1 arrest,
HIV-VPR for G2 arrest, hBax for apoptosis). Toward computing objectives,
we envision that the decoder circuit can be used as a modular unit
of higher-order circuits, such as a multiplexer (). As a future objective
for decoder architectures, eliminating leakage
in OFF states would be a highly desirable characteristic. In the current
version, the negative feedback employed does not completely inhibit
the target and does result to leakage in the “OFF” states.
We expect that future architectures will adopt a collection of tools
such as recombinases, in order to limit the use of
inherently leaky transcriptional/post-transcriptional regulation mechanisms. Mammalian Cell Culture and Transient Transfections A Tet-On 3G cell line (Clonetech, catalog number: 630931) constitutively
producing the protein rtTA was used for all experiments performed.
The cell line was sustained in an environment at 37 °C, and atmosphere
of 5% CO. The cell line was grown in high glucose Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Invitrogen, catalog number:
11965-092) that was supplemented with 50 mL of 10% Fetal Bovine Serum
(FBS, Atlanta Biologicals, catalog number: S11550), 2.5 mL of 10 000
units/mL penicillin antibiotic and 2.5 mL of 10 000 μg/mL
streptomycin antibiotic (penicillin–streptomycin liquid, Invitrogen,
catalog number: 151140-122) and 5.5 mL of 100X MEM nonessential amino
acids (Invitrogen, catalog number: 11140-050). All transient transfections
had 200 000 cells in 1 mL of complete supplemented DMEM media
added to each well of a Cellstar 12 well cell culture multiwall plate
(Greiner Bio-One, catalog number: 665180) and were allowed to grow
for 24 h. For jetPRIME transfections, up to 1 μg of total plasmid
DNA was added to 75 μL of jetPRIME Buffer and 2.4 μL of
jetPRIME transfection reagent (Polyplus, catalog number: 114-07).
All transfection solutions prepared were vortexed gently and allowed
to incubate at room temperature for 10 min. After incubation, each
solution was added to the cells and was mixed by gently shaking. When
appropriate to the circuit architecture, Doxycycline (Sigma-Aldrich,
product number: D9891) and IPTG (Sigma-Aldrich, product number: I6758)
were added to the cells immediately after transfection. Quantitative
and qualitative analysis of all experiments was performed 48 h after
transfections were completed. Microscopy was performed 48
h after transfections occurred. The cells grown on a Cellstar 12 well
cell culture multiwall plate were image analyzed with a Olympus IX81
microscope equipped with Sutter filter wheels, a Solent brand environmental
chamber held at 37 °C, and a Prior Scientific mechanized stage.
Microscopy images were collected with an Orca ERII camera, which was
cooled to −60 °C and utilized in the high precision (14
bit) mode. This mode was used with a 20X Plan-APOCHROMAT NA 0.8, PH2
objective. The Chroma filter settings were as follows: ET436/20x (excitation)
and ET480/40m (emission) for tagCFP, ET500/20x (excitation) and ET535/30m
(emission) for tagYFP, and ET560/40x (excitation) and ET630/74m (emission)
for mKate2. Experimental data collection and processing of the images
was performed in Slidebook 5.0 software package. All images obtained
experimentally were collected at the same exposure time per field
of interest, underwent identical processing, and when compared with
various cases of the circuit, normalized to the same fluorescent intensities. Cells were prepared as follows: 48 h
after transfection complete media was removed from cells plated on
the Cellstar 12 well cell culture multiwall plate. Once media was
removed, cells were trypsinized with 0.15 mL 0.25% trypsin–EDTA
at 37 °C for 3 min. The trypsin–EDTA was then neutralized
with 0.85 mL of supplemented DMEM which also resuspended the cells.
The cell suspension was centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min, the supernatant
was decanted, and the cell pellet was resuspended in 0.5 mL PBS buffer.
The cell suspension was then analyzed on a BD LSRII flow analyzer.
TagCFP was measured with a 445 nm laser and a 515/20 band-pass filter
at a voltage of 240 V. TagYFP was measured with a 488 nm laser, a
535 emission filter, and a 545/35 band-pass filter at a voltage of
300 V. MKate2 was measured with a 561 nm laser, 610 emission filter,
and 610/20 band-pass filter at a voltage of 320 V. Over 150 000
events were collected per well..