A limited set of RNA Polymerase
III (Pol III) promoters, mostly from U6 and H1 genes, have been used
in eukaryotic synthetic biology systems to express short noncoding
RNAs without the 5′ and 3′ mRNA modification associated
with Polymerase II expression. The U6 small nuclear RNA (snRNA) has
a highly conserved 106–108 nt sequence and an external 5′
promoter structure that is remarkably similar to that of an RNA Pol
II promoter, namely, a TATA-like box and proximal sequence element
(PSE). 7SK is another RNA Pol III-transcribed abundant snRNA, whose
function in transcriptional regulation is conserved from invertebrates
to humans. Like U6, 7SK has an external 5′ promoter structure,
similar conserved domains (a TATA-like box and PSE), and in mammals
distal elements consisting of an SPH domain and OCT motif. 7SK RNAs have been identified in multiple arthropod
species, including Dipterans. In this work, we have
explored their use for expression of sgRNAs. In mosquitoes,
Pol III promoters have been utilized for genetic
control strategies that depend on CRISPR guide RNA (sgRNA) or RNAi
expression. The ability to express multiple noncoding RNAs while minimizing
repetitive sequences is a significant advantage to these systems and
may be necessary to create robust technologies. More
broadly, as the use of mosquitoes as insect synthetic biology chassis
develops, it will be highly advantageous for researchers to have access
to a diverse range of validated noncoding RNA promoters with varied
expression levels; such a toolbox does not yet exist in the Culicines,
and we address this need here. Alternative methods for multiplexing
sgRNAs from a single transcript, , using tRNAs
or ribozyme-based processing, have been demonstrated in other species with varying efficiencies but have not yet been applied to mosquitoes. We hypothesized that adapting existing promoters from related species
would be a rapid and cost-effective way of expanding the available
Pol III expression toolbox in Culicines, as cross-species activity
of U6 promoters in mosquitoes has previously been demonstrated by
Konet et al. We systematically tested
the activities of a range of previously reported insect U6 promoters
in , , and  cell lines. This was supplemented by the identification and testing
of additional new U6 promoters and the testing of U6 and 7SK promoters that had
previously been identified but not experimentally tested in cell lines.
We used a standardized cell- CRISPR/dCas9–VPR binding assay
to systematically quantify the promoter activity across cell lines.
Our results represent a large advance in the available expression
tools and provide a general guide for efficiently identifying additional
expression modalities. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00436/suppl_file/sb9b00436_si_001.pdf The transcriptional
activities of 33 phylogenetically diverse insect
Pol III promoters were tested in three cell lines from disease-relevant
Culicine mosquito species (,  and ). Potential U6 promoters were
identified by BLAST using a previously published  U6 RNA sequence, AAEL017774. The presence of highly conserved sequence elements (a TATA-like
box, PSE, and poly-T terminator) were verified for those sequences
taken forward experimentally (sequence alignments are provided in
the ). Each promoter
was used to express the same sgRNA, targeting a tetracycline response
element (TRE) upstream of the coding sequence of the firefly luciferase
gene. Expression of functional sgRNA by the putative promoters, in
conjunction with dCas9–VPR, binds the TRE and activates expression
of firefly luciferase. Firefly luciferase activity was normalized
to the levels of  luciferase
expressed independently of the sgRNAs (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00436/suppl_file/sb9b00436_si_001.pdf In Aag2 () and Hsu () cells,
the levels of promoter
activity were broadly in line with the species of origin of the promoter,
decreased with phylogenetic distance, and accounted for most of our
observed variance () ( = 0.73,  = 0.89 for Aag2,  = 0.46,  =
0.84 for Hsu;  and A,B), while random
variance introduced by technical replicates (replicate wells transfected
with the same mix on the same day) and experimental blocking were
low. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00436/suppl_file/sb9b00436_si_001.pdf In -derived U4.4 cells
we found no significant effect of the species of origin of the promoter
sequence on the relative luciferase expression and larger random variance
than in our other experiments ( = 0.22,  = 0.89;  and C). We speculate that there may be less overall
activity from one or more of our promoter sequences in these cells,
which with fewer replicate experiments (still at least three performed
on different days) likely explains the lack of an observable pattern
here. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00436/suppl_file/sb9b00436_si_001.pdf Within those species where we tested U6 and 7SK promoter
sequences,
there was a trend toward 7SK promoter sequences having stronger activity
levels than U6 promoter sequences regardless of their species of origin
( and ). None of the U6 promoters
from  or  showed any activity above background
in our mosquito cell lines (). Promoters are denoted by the last three digits of
their accession numbers. Shorter versions of several U6 promoters
were tested in Aag2 and
Hsu cells () in order to determine the minimum possible promoter fragment without
compromising the activity. For all seven promoters, the PSE and TATA-like
box were present within 100 nt upstream of the transcriptional start
and are likely the principal requirements for expression. We did not
identify any distal sequence elements with a strong effect on the
promoter activity, except in CuU6.801, where deletion from 200 bp
to 100 bp essentially eliminated the activity. These results indicate
that most of the U6 promoters identified can be used in a very compact
form. Furthering the work of Mount et al. and
Konet et al., we have demonstrated
a pipeline for cell culture verification of Pol III promoter sequences
in Culicine mosquitoes. In these experiments, we showed that Pol III
promoter sequences from closely related species can be used to drive
high levels of noncoding RNA expression in mosquito species of interest.
Regulatory elements from more distantly related species may be applicable
for complex applications where a range of expression levels is desirable.
We anticipate that these findings will provide a valuable resource
for those involved in the rapidly developing field of mosquito genome
editing and synthetic biology. dCas9–VPR assay components. Our assay
consists of four plasmids,
each expressing a single component. HR5/IE1, a constitutive promoter
in insect cells of baculoviral origin, is used to express a dCas9–VPR
fusion protein. A second plasmid containing seven tetO repeats upstream
of the  minimal hsp70
promoter expresses firefly luciferase upon activation. Test promoters
all express the same sgRNA targeting the tetO repeat region. Finally,
a plasmid expressing  luciferase
from the OpIE2 promoter was used as a control to normalize for transfection
efficiency. dCas9–VPR assay . Ratios of FF/RL
luciferase normalized to a no-sgRNA control are shown. Promoters are
organized by median relative activation within U6 and 7SK promoter
categories, and the colors denote the promoter origin by species.
Lowercase letter groupings denote significant differences at  < 0.05 following post hoc analysis. Each point represents
one well of a 96-well plate, with at least eight replicate wells transfected
in at least three replicate experiments. Mosquito U6 promoters maintain dCas9–VPR activity down to
100 bp. Seven promoters were deleted incrementally from a −600
bp fragment down to −100 bp upstream of the transcriptional
start. Four promoter lengths were tested for each Pol III promoter,
shown in each group left to right as 100 bp (orange), 200 bp (green),
400 bp (blue), and 600 bp (purple). Activity was assessed by the dCas9–VPR
assay in Aag2 cells and Hsu cells. FF/RL luciferase ratios have been
normalized to a no-sgRNA control. Each point represents one well of
a 96-well plate, with at least eight replicate wells transfected at
least three replicate experiments. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00436/suppl_file/sb9b00436_si_001.pdf Cloning details and complete
plasmid sequences are available in the . Cells, Transfections, and Luciferase Assay All of the
cell lines were maintained at 28 °C without CO or
humidity control. Aag2 and U4.4 were maintained in L-15 (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) (Labtech, Lewes, U.K.), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Pen/Strep)
(Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 10% tryptose phosphate broth (Thermo
Fisher Scientific). Hsu cells were maintained in Schneider’s
Drosophila Medium (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) supplemented with 10%
FBS and 1% Pen/Strep. Cell lines were a kind gift of Rennos Fragkoudis. Cells were seeded in 96-well plates 1 day prior to transfection
with the TransIT-PRO transfection kit (Mirus Bio, Madison, WI, U.S.)
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Master mixes
were prepared for 8.8 wells of a 96-well plate, and eight replicate
wells per experimental construct were transfected in three to eight
replicate experiments. In each well, 25 ng of dCas9–VPR plasmid,
25 ng of TRE-firefly reporter plasmid, 0.3 ng of Pol III-sgRNA expressing
plasmid, and 50 ng (Aag2, U4.4) or 30 ng (Hsu) of pRL-OpIE2 were used. Two days after transfection, the cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered
saline, lysed with 1× Passive Lysis Buffer, and then analyzed
using the Dual Luciferase Assay Kit on a GloMax Multi+ plate reader
(Promega, Southampton, U.K.). Luciferase readings were normalized for
transfection by dividing the firefly activity by the  activity and then normalized to the average
of background readings (no-sgRNA control). Data were analyzed by generalized
linear mixed models using a Γ distribution with a log link with
the glmer function within lme4. Models
that encountered convergence errors were fitted with the boyqa optimizer.
Each transformed data reading for a promoter was analyzed together
with the species of origin and promoter type (U6 or 7SK), and experimental
replicates and blocking were nested as a random effect within promoter
identity. After each model was fitted, marginal and conditional  values ( and , respectively)
were calculated to express the variance explained by the fixed and
random factors using the package piecewiseSEM. Pairwise comparisons of different promoter strengths were
calculated using Tukey HSD multiple comparison tests using the lsmeans
package. All analyses were conducted
in R ver. 3.5.3. Scripts and raw data
can be found at doi: 10.6084/m9.figshare.11407752..