One of the aims of synthetic
biology is the rational design of microorganisms for biotechnological
applications. An important aspect for
the design of these tailored microorganisms is the molecular composition
of their cell surface, which determines their interaction with the
environment. Incorporation of affinity ligands on the surface of the
engineered cell could help to program its adhesion properties toward
a target surface or cell of interest. Natural bacteria encode in their
genomes diverse types of adhesive proteins, termed adhesins, which
play a fundamental role in multiple processes (e.g., biofilm formation,
host-colonization, cell invasion) by recognizing molecular structures
found in abiotic and biotic surfaces of other bacteria, plant, and
animal cells. However, the variety and redundancy
of natural adhesins, together with the widespread distribution of
their receptors among different cell types and surfaces, preclude
their use as functional units conferring predictable adhesion capabilities. is a common host for biotechnological
applications due to its amenability for genetic manipulation and heterologous
protein expression. Although some  isolates have acquired pathogenicity traits, most strains of this
Gram-negative bacterium are nonpathogenic commensals of the gastrointestinal
(GI) tract of vertebrates. Interestingly,  has shown potential for  biomedical applications against infections agents and cancer. Specific  strains have been used in humans as probiotics competing
with pathogenic bacteria causing infections in the mucosal surfaces
of the GI and urinary tracts. In addition, commensal
and probiotic  strains administered systemically
have been shown to colonize solid tumors grafted subcutaneously in
mice. Hence, engineering the adhesion properties
of these nonpathogenic  strains may improve
their colonization efficiency and specificity for target mucosal surfaces
and tumors . In this work we report
synthetic adhesins (SAs) that allow the
rational design of robust and specific adhesion capacities to . SAs have a modular structural organization resembling
that of natural  adhesins, which are commonly
composed of an anchor β-barrel module that is embedded in the
bacterial outer membrane (OM) and an adhesion module bearing an immunoglobulin
(Ig)-like fold that is exposed to the extracellular milieu. The designed SAs combine a highly stable β-barrel domain derived
from intimin, an adhesin found in enterohemorrhagic and enteropathogenic  strains (EHEC and EPEC, respectively), with Ig domains of high affinity, solubility, and stability based
on the variable domain of eavy hain-only ntiodies (HCAbs), known as VHHs ( of CAbs) or nanobodies. VHHs
of defined specificity can be selected against antigens of interest
from large VHH repertories cloned and expressed in  and its bacteriophages. We show that
SAs integrated in the chromosome of  can be
constitutively expressed, being nontoxic and stably maintained
throughout multiple bacterial generations  and  in the absence of inducer and selection
pressure. Expression of SAs in an engineered  chassis devoid of a set of natural adhesins directed the specific
adhesion of bacteria to abiotic surfaces and mammalian cells expressing
on their surface the target molecule recognized by the SA. Importantly,  experiments showed that low doses of the engineered
bacteria colonize solid tumors expressing the target molecule with
higher efficiency than the wild type  strain,
having also lower retention in normal organs. Structure
of Synthetic Adhesins and Targeted Adhesion of  to Antigenic Surfaces Although Ig-fragments
have been displayed on the surface of  with
various expression systems, such as lipoprotein
fusions and β-domains of autotransporters, adhesion of  to target
surfaces has not been observed with those systems. Lipoprotein fusions
severely disturb the integrity of the OM causing significant leakiness
and toxicity, whereas autotransporters
are prone to proteolysis as part of their secretion mechanism. Recently, we reported that libraries of VHH
can be displayed on the surface of  cells
fused to an N-terminal fragment of intimin from EHEC (residues 1–659;
named Neae), allowing the isolation of high affinity clones binding
an antigen of interest. The Neae polypeptide
(ca. 69 kDa) comprises the native intimin signal peptide (SP), LysM
domain for peptidoglycan binding, a 12-stranded β-barrel domain
for OM insertion, and a surface-exposed Ig-like domain (named D0)
lacking adhesion capacity (Figure a). VHH domains (ca. 13 kDa) are fused to the C-end of Neae generating
protein fusions termed NVHH with a total mass of ca. 84 kDa and tagged
with E- and myc-tag epitopes (Figure a). To investigate whether NVHH fusions
could modify the adhesion properties
of , we first examined the specific adhesion
of bacteria to abiotic surfaces coated with the antigen recognized
by the VHH. To this end, NVHH fusions binding GFP (NVgfp) and human
fibrinogen (NVfib) were expressed in  K-12
strain EcM1 (MG1655ΔA-H; ). This strain has a deletion of the  operon encoding type 1 fimbriae, a natural adhesin
found in most  strains and involved in recognition
of mannosylated glycoproteins found on epithelial cell surfaces. Cultures of EcM1 bacteria bearing plasmids encoding
NVgfp, NVfib, and Neae (), were induced with IPTG, and the display of the NVHH protein fusions
on the surface of  was confirmed by flow cytometry
with anti-myc monoclonal antibody (mAb) (Figure b). Induced bacteria were incubated on GFP- and fibrinogen (Fib)-coated
plastic surfaces, washed with PBS, and stained with crystal violet
to reveal the presence of bound bacteria. This experiment demonstrated
the specific binding to those surfaces coated with the antigen recognized
by the corresponding NVHH fusion (Figure c).
Specific adhesion of  bacteria was confirmed
by light microscopy (Figure d). These results
indicated that NVHH fusions could act as SAs driving the adhesion
of  bacteria to a target surface. Synthetic
adhesins and targeting of  cells
to antigens immobilized on a plastic surface. (a) Scheme of the primary
structure of SAs (left) showing the N-terminal domain of intimin (Neae)
as anchoring module, comprising the signal peptide (SP), LysM, β-barrel,
and D0 Ig-like domains, fused to a variable Ig domain from heavy-chain-only
antibodies (VHH) as adhesion module. The E-tag and myc-tag epitopes
flanking the VHH domain are also indicated. Model of a SA fusion protein
(right) in the bacterial outer membrane (OM) with the VHH exposed
to the extracellular milieu. (b) Flow cytometry analysis of IPTG-induced  EcM1 bearing pNeae (control), pNVgfp, or pNVfib
plasmids. Histograms show the fluorescence intensity of bacteria stained
with anti-myc mAb and secondary anti-mouse IgG-Alexa 488. (c) Induced  EcM1 expressing the Neae polypeptide control (pNeae)
or SAs against GFP (pNVgfp) or human fibrinogen (pNVfib) were incubated
with plastic surfaces coated with GFP or human fibrinogen (Fib), as
indicated. Bacterial adhesion was assessed by crystal violet staining.
(d) Adhesion of  bacteria to target antigen-coated
plastic surface (as in panel c) observed under the light microscope. Constitutive,
Stable, and Nontoxic Expression of SAs from the
Chromosome of To further investigate  targeting mediated by SAs, we developed constitutive
gene expression cassettes that can be integrated as a single copy
in the chromosome of . This strategy would
allow constant expression of the SA in the absence of exogenous inducers
and antibiotics for plasmid maintenance. For site-specific integration
in the chromosome of , we adapted a marker-less
gene deletion strategy that enables sequential manipulation of multiple
gene loci leaving no antibiotic resistance genes or any other vector
sequences in the chromosome. This technology
is based on the insertion of a suicide plasmid bearing homology regions
(HRs) of the targeted gene and the subsequent generation of double-strand
breaks by expression of I-SceI restriction endonuclease , which are repaired, resulting in the specific modification
of the targeted gene (). For this we constructed a suicide vector with I-SceI sites, named
pGE (), and generated
derivatives for integration of SAs having VHHs binding GFP (pGE-SAgfp) or binding TirM (pGE-SAtir). TirM is the extracellular domain (residues 252–360)
of the translocated intimin receptor of EHEC. These constructs incorporated a constitutive promoter, P, driving the expression of the SA,
and HRs flanking the  gene of  K-12 strain MG1655. The  gene encodes Antigen
43, an adhesin conserved in most  strains
that is involved in biofilm formation and bacterial self-aggregation. Using these vectors the  gene of  EcM1 was replaced by the gene cassettes
expressing SAgfp or SAtir (Figure a), generating
strains EcM1SAgfp and EcM1SAtir (). We also generated with suicide plasmid pGE the control strain EcM1Δ,
an isogenic EcM1 strain not expressing SAs and having a deletion of  identical to that generated by the insertion of SAs.
Finally, these strains were tagged with a bioluminescent reporter,
the  operon from () under the control of a constitutive
promoter (P), which was inserted in the  operon with suicide vector pGE- (). This operon
encodes the meningitis-associated and temperature-regulated Mat fimbriae,
also termed  common pilus, which are produced
by most  pathogroups, being involved in early
stage biofilm development and host cell recognition. The final bioluminescent strains were named EcM1Δ, EcM1SAgfp, and EcM1SAtir (). Flow cytometry analysis of EcM1SAgfp
and EcM1SAtir with anti-myc mAb (Figure b) indicated that both SAs were highly and homogeneously
expressed
on the surface of bacteria, SAgfp being expressed at higher levels
than SAtir. EcM1SAgfp and EcM1SAtir strains showed identical growth curves as EcM1Δ in LB media at 37 °C with agitation
(Figure c), and nearly identical colony forming
units (CFU) per unit of optical density at 600 nm (OD) were determined by plating (∼1.0 × 10 CFU/OD), demonstrating that bacterial growth and viability was
not affected by the constitutive expression of the SAs. In addition,
EcM1SAgfp and EcM1SAtir strains
were grown at 37 °C for 5 days with a daily dilution (1:2000)
in fresh LB medium lacking antibiotics. Whole-cell protein extracts
were prepared from each culture harvested every day and analyzed by
Western blot with anti-myc mAb (to detect the SA) and anti-GroEL mAb,
as loading control, demonstrating that the expression of the SAs was
stably maintained throughout the length of the experiment (ca. 55
bacterial generations) without the need of any inducer or antibiotic
pressure (Figure d). Similarly, the  operon was stably expressed in both strains along the
experiment (). Constitutive, stable, and nontoxic expression of synthetic
adhesins
from the chromosome of . (a) Scheme of a SA
gene fusion integrated in the  gene of  chromosome under the control of the constitutive
promoter P. (b) Flow cytometry analysis of  EcM1Δ,
EcM1SAgfp, or EcM1SAtir bacteria.
Histograms show the fluorescence intensity of bacteria stained with
anti-myc mAb and secondary anti-mouse IgG-Alexa 488. (c) Growth curves
of bacterial cultures of the same strains shown in panel b. (d) Western
blot analysis of the expression of SAs in EcM1SAgfp and EcM1SAtir strains grown in LB cultures
for the indicated time. SAs were immunodetected with anti-myc tag
mAb. Cytoplasmic GroEL chaperone was used as loading control (lower
panel) and was detected with anti-GroEL mAb. Adhesion of Engineered  to Antigens
Expressed on the Surface of Mammalian Cells We investigated
whether EcM1SAgfp and EcM1SAtir bacteria adhered specifically to  cultured
mammalian cells expressing on their surface the cognate antigens recognized
by the SAs. As an experimental model, we stably transfected HeLa cells
with plasmids pDisplay-GFP-tm and pDisplay-TirM-tm (), which expressed GFP and TirM antigens,
respectively, on the extracellular side of the plasma membrane by
means of an N-terminal signal peptide and a C-terminal transmembrane
(tm) anchor domain from the platelet derived growth factor receptor
(PDGFR) (). In
addition, the protein fusion containing TirM incorporates, before
the tm domain, the monomeric green fluorescent protein mWasabi. The primary sequence of mWasabi differs from that of GFP and is
not recognized by the VHH cloned in SAgfp. Thus, expression of GFP-tm and TirM-tm fusion proteins on the surface
of HeLa cells can be monitored by their green fluorescence emission.
Upon stable transfection, fluorescence-positive HeLa cells were enriched
by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and expanded . The expanded cell populations, named HeLa-GFP-tm
and HeLa-TirM-tm, contained cells with different expression levels
of these antigens on their surface, including some cells with undetectable
levels of the antigens, especially in HeLa-TirM-tm (). We performed  adhesion assays of HeLa-GFP-tm and HeLa-TirM-tm cultures infected
with EcM1SAgfp or EcM1SAtir
bacteria (MOI 300:1). After 1 h infection, unbound bacteria were removed
with PBS, and the samples were stained with anti- polyclonal antibodies and DAPI (to stain DNA). Inspection of the
samples by light and fluorescence microscopy (Figure ) revealed very high numbers of EcM1SAgfp
and EcM1SAtir bacteria (red fluorescence) specifically
adhered to HeLa cells expressing GFP or TirM, respectively (green
fluorescence). Target HeLa cells were largely covered by bound bacteria
expressing the corresponding SA, as can be also visualized by three-dimensional
reconstruction of confocal images (). In contrast, EcM1SAgfp and EcM1SAtir bacteria were not bound to HeLa cells expressing
the nonspecific antigen (i.e., TirM for EcM1SAgfp;
GFP for EcM1SAtir) (Figure a and b). Importantly, bacteria adhered to cells with different expression
levels of the target antigen on their surface, but not to antigen-negative
cells that can be found in both HeLa-GFP-tm and HeLa-TirM-tm cultures
(labeled with asterisks in Figure c). Similar
results were observed with lower MOI and infection times (see below).
We also tested whether the bioluminescent reporter could provide a
sensitive readout of the bacterial adhesion process. To this end,
HeLa, HeLa-GFP-tm, and HeLa-TirM-tm cells were grown in a multiwell
tissue culture plate and infected as above with EcM1SAgfp, EcM1SAtir, or EcM1Δ. After 1 h infection, the plate was washed
with PBS and monitored for light emission. Bioluminescence signals
were observed only in those wells in which bacteria expressing SAs
infected HeLa cells expressing the cognate target antigen (). To gain further insight into the adhesion process mediated
by the
SAs, we performed time-lapse live microscopy recording the adhesion
of EcM1SAgfp bacteria to HeLa-GFP-tm cells, selecting
a field in the microscope that allow comparison of the behavior of
bacteria encountering antigen-positive and antigen-negative cells.
For this experiment infection of HeLa-GFP-tm culture was performed
with a lower MOI (100:1) to reduce bacteria in the medium that could
hinder the visualization of cells. The result from this experiment
() showed that antigen-positive
HeLa-GFP-tm cells (green) were covered with bacteria within 5 min,
whereas almost no bacteria were attached to antigen-negative cells.
Interestingly, a significant number of bacteria attached in just 2
min to antigen-positive cells. In fact, adhesion of an individual
bacterium occurs in a very short time period (<30 s) after an apparent
random collision of a swimming bacterium with the surface of a mammalian
cell. After this initial contact with the target cell, bacteria can
be observed moving and tumbling in close proximity to the surface
of the mammalian cell, eventually establishing a permanent adhesion
phenotype and stopping its active motility. In contrast, bacteria
that contact with an antigen-negative cell move and tumble close to
the cell surface but then swim in a different direction away from
the cell (see ). This
behavior suggests that a productive adhesion of the SAs to the target
surface is somehow transduced by the bacterium to stop flagella. Interestingly,
an arrest of flagellum rotation has been described in the adhesion
of  to surfaces during its
life cycle. In , intracellular levels of c-di-GMP second messenger have been proposed
to regulate changes in flagellar rotation during the transition between
motile and surface-attached multicellular communities. Taken together, our experiments demonstrated
that the engineered  strains with constitutive
expression of SAs were able to adhere fast, in high numbers, and in
a highly specific manner to mammalian cells expressing on their surface
the target antigen recognized by the SA. In addition, the mechanisms
underlying the behavior of engineered  with
SAs to a target surface might be related to those found in natural
adhesion processes that trigger arrest of flagellar rotation. Adhesion of  expressing synthetic adhesins
to target mammalian cells. (a) Light and fluorescence microscopy images
of HeLa-GFP-tm cells grown in culture and infected with EcM1SAgfp or EcM1SAtir bacteria (MOI
300:1), as indicated. Expression of GFP-tm fusion on the surface of
these cells is detected by the green fluorescence emission. (b) Light
and fluorescence microscopy images of HeLa-TirM-tm cells grown in
culture and infected with EcM1SAgfp or EcM1SAtir bacteria (MOI 300:1), as indicated. Expression
of TirM-tm fusion on the surface of these cells is detected by the
green fluorescence emission of its mWasabi domain. Bacteria were stained
with anti- polyclonal serum and anti-IgG-rabbit-Alexa-594
(red). (c) Confocal microscopy images of HeLa-GFP-tm cells infected
with EcM1SAgfp (top panels) and HeLa-TirM-tm cells
infected with EcM1SAtir (bottom panels). Infection
and staining was carried out as in panels a and b. In addition, cell
nuclei and bacterial chromosomes were stained with DAPI (blue). The
selected images contain antigen-negative cells (labeled with asterisks)
to show the absence of bound bacteria to them. Colonization
of Tumors  by Engineered  with Synthetic Adhesins To test the functionality
of the SAs , we evaluated whether the engineered
bacteria exhibited an improved colonization of solid tumors expressing
the target antigen on the surface of tumor cells. It is well established
from animal models and clinical trials that intravenous administration
of facultative anaerobic bacteria such as  and  strains results in the preferential
bacterial colonization of solid tumors. This natural ability of anaerobic bacteria for tumor colonization
has encouraged research aimed to engineer the expression of therapeutic
proteins within the tumor (e.g., cytotoxins, pro-drug converting enzymes)
as well as gene reporters for  tumor diagnosis
(e.g., bioluminescence, magnetic resonance imaging). Clinical trials using systemic administration of  for human cancer therapy revealed that the highest bacterial dose
that was tolerated was still insufficient for the effective colonization
of solid tumors found in those patients. Therefore, it would be of interest to engineer bacteria with improved
tumor colonization capabilities (i.e., requiring lower doses of administered
bacteria and showing an increased ratio of bacteria in tumors versus
healthy organs). It has been previously
shown that systemic administration of a single bacterial dose of 5
× 10 CFU of wild type  K-12
(strain MG1655) to tumor-bearing mice elicited colonization of >90%
of the tumors. Three to 5 days after its
intravenous injection,  K-12 bacteria were
recovered in high numbers from the tumor mass (∼10 CFU/g), whereas organs such as liver or spleen had low bacterial
numbers (<10 CFU/g). Following a similar approach,
we established an  tumor xenograft model based
on HeLa-GFP-tm cells. Athymic Nude mice that received subcutaneously
∼10 HeLa-GFP-tm cells developed solid tumors of
∼200–400 mm in about 10–15 days.
These animals were divided in two experimental groups ( = 6) and received intravenously in their lateral tail vein a single
dose of 1 × 10 CFU of EcM1SAtir
or EcM1SAgfp. Four days after the intravenous
injection, live imaging of the animals showed bioluminescence signals
in the tumors from both groups, and bacteria were found in high numbers
(∼10–10 CFU/g) in all tumors
from each group (6/6) (), whereas livers and spleens did not contain bacteria (detection
limit ∼5 × 10 CFU/g) or had low bacterial
numbers (<10 CFU/g) (). The level of expression of the SAs and bioluminescence
signals were identical in the inoculated bacteria and in tumor-recovered
bacteria, showing the stability of the expression of SAs  ().
Histological cross sections of colonized HeLa-GFP-tm tumors stained
with anti- antibodies revealed that bacteria
from both strains localized preferentially at inner regions of the
tumors (), especially
at the border with outer regions where tumor cells preferentially
proliferate. A similar pattern of bacterial distribution was reported
for tumors colonized with wild type  MG1655. Hence, the above data indicated that the
engineered  strains stably expressed the SAs  and maintained the capacity to colonize solid tumors of HeLa-GFP-tm
cells regardless of the specificity of the SA when a high bacterial
dose was administered (1 × 10 CFU). To determine
whether SAs could favor tumor colonization with lower bacterial doses,
first we showed that a bacterial dose of 1 × 10 CFU
was suboptimal for the colonization of HeLa-GFP-tm tumors by wild
type  MG1655 as only one-third of the tumors
(3/9) were colonized 4 days after its systemic administration (Figure a). This dose represents 2% of the dose reported
for optimal tumor colonization with wild type  MG1655. Nevertheless, those tumors that
were colonized had bacterial titers (∼10 CFU/g)
similar to those found with high bacterial doses, suggesting that
once  succeeded at an early stage of tumor
colonization, bacteria can proliferate, reaching a final titer that
is independent of the inoculated dose. In contrast, livers and spleens
of these animals had undetectable levels of bacteria (Figure b). Therefore, a suboptimal
dose of 1 × 10 CFU was
chosen to compare the tumor colonization capacity of the engineered  strains. As above, EcM1SAtir
or EcM1SAgfp bacteria were administered intravenously
to two groups of Nude mice ( = 9) bearing subcutaneous
HeLa-GFP-tm tumors (≥200 mm). Four days after inoculation,
most animals (8/9) of the group inoculated with EcM1SAgfp had their tumors colonized with high bacterial titers (≥10 CFU/gr), whereas less than one-third of the animals (2/9)
in the group inoculated with EcM1SAtir had colonized
tumors (Figure a). This differential colonization
was also detected by bioluminescence  imaging
of the animals (Figure a). As a control for
specificity, a dose of 1 × 10 CFU of EcM1SAgfp strain was also administered systemically to a
group ( = 9) of Nude mice bearing tumors derived
from untransfected HeLa cells. Four days after inoculation, HeLa tumors
were colonized with low efficiency (2/9) by EcM1SAgfp strain, identical to that found with EcM1SAtir strain in HeLa-GFP-tm tumors (Figure a). In addition, livers and spleens of animals with colonized tumors
had undetectable levels of bacteria (Figure b). Taken together, these results demonstrated that engineered  with SAs were able to colonize solid tumors expressing
a target cell surface antigen with high efficiency and specificity
using low bacterial doses that are suboptimal for wild type  or engineered bacteria with a SA of a different
specificity. Several factors have been proposed to be involved
in the colonization
of solid tumors by  and other facultative
and anaerobic bacteria (e.g., , , ). The initial
bacterial entry seems to be due to the highly permeable and abnormal
vasculature of the tumor. Infecting bacteria
also induce pro-inflammatory signals (e.g., tumor necrosis factor
α; TNFα) that increase blood flooding into the tumor mass
assisting bacterial entry. At this stage,
bacterial adhesion to tumor cells mediated by SAs may facilitate successful
tumor colonization. At later stages, bacterial replication is favored
in the intratumoral microenvironment, rich in certain nutrients (e.g.,
amino acids, ribose) and having a low oxygen concentration that impairs
clearance of bacteria by the immune system. In the colonized tumors, we found similar bacterial
titers and intratumoral distribution irrespective of the specificity
of the SA or antigen expressed by the tumor, indicating that SAs appear
to have less influence in the replication and intratumoral distribution
of bacteria at a later stage of the colonization. colonization of tumors with low
doses
of  expressing synthetic adhesins. (a) Bacterial
colonization of HeLa-GFP-tm or HeLa tumors, as indicated on top, by
the following  strains: wild type K-12 (MG1655),
EcM1SAtir (SAtir), and EcM1SAgfp (SAgfp). Each bacterial strain was intravenously administered
(1 × 10 CFU/mouse) to tumor-bearing mice (experimental
groups  = 9) and 4-days postadministration the number
of CFU in each tumor was determined. Each circle in the graph represents
the CFU determined per gram of tumor (Log CFU/g) for
each animal in the different experimental groups. The ratio of colonized
tumors in each group is shown at the bottom along with the statistical
analyses between groups connected with lines. Two-tailed  values of Fisher’s exact test are indicated with one asterisk
(*) when  < 0.05 or two asterisks (**) when  = 0.015. On the right, bioluminescence live imaging of
HeLa-GFP-tm tumor-bearing mouse infected with 1 × 10 CFU of EcM1SAtir (left image) or EcM1SAgfp (right image). Images are overlays of photographic
white-light and bioluminescence signals from a representative tumor-bearing
mouse infected with the strains, as indicated on top. The intensities
of the bioluminescence signals are represented in pseudocolor according
to the scale bar. (b) Graphs showing bacterial titers in livers (left)
and spleens (right) from those animals with a HeLa-GFP-tm tumor colonized
in panel a by wild-type K-12 (MG1655), EcM1SAtir
(SAtir), or EcM1SAgfp (SAgfp) strains. Each circle
in the graph represents the CFU determined per gram of tissue (log CFU/g). Lower Retention
of Engineered  in Liver
and Spleen Next, we investigated whether the engineered bacteria
with SAs and lacking natural adhesins, in addition to the improved
colonization of target tumors shown previously, could have a lower
retention in normal organs compared to wild type . For this purpose, we analyzed bacterial titers in livers and spleens
of two groups ( = 9) of Nude mice without implanted
tumors in which a high dose (1 × 10 CFU) of wild
type  MG1655 or engineered EcM1SAgfp was inoculated. Three mice from each group were euthanized
at 4, 24, and 48 h after inoculation, and the bacterial titers in
liver and spleen were determined (Figure ).
This experiment revealed that, at all the time points analyzed, the
titers of the engineered  strain in these
organs were lower than those in the case of the wild type  strain, especially in liver where the titers of
engineered bacteria were ∼10–30 times lower than the
wild type strain (Figure ). In the spleen,
the engineered bacteria had titers ∼2–4-fold lower than
the wild type strain. Therefore, these data indicate that the engineered
bacteria exhibit a lower retention in healthy organs than the wild
type  strain. This phenotype might be due
to the deletion of natural adhesins in the engineered strain (i.e.,
type 1 fimbriae, Antigen 43, and MAT fimbriae) that have the potential
to bind receptors widely expressed in the surface of multiple host
cells and tissues. Hence, expression of SAs into
an  chassis lacking of a set of natural adhesins
generates bacteria with selective adhesion to target tissues and lower
adhesion to non-target organs. Low retention of the engineered  strain
in healthy organs. Bacterial titers (log CFU/g) recovered
from livers (left) and spleens (right) of tumor-less Nude mice at
4, 24, and 48 h after intravenous administration of 1 × 10 CFU of wild type  K-12 (MG1655) or
EcM1SAgfp, as indicated. Each bar represents the
average CFU/g with standard deviation determined from three mice from
each group at the indicated time postinoculation. We have engineered a stable and specific
adhesion of  bacteria with SAs based on the
β-domain from intimin and the Ig-domain
from VHHs. Constitutive expression of
SAs from the chromosome did not affect growth and viability of the
engineered  strain, being stably maintained
through multiple generations without selection pressure. The modular
architecture of the SAs makes possible the simple modification of
their specificity by an exchange of the VHH sequence, which can be
selected from repertoires employing phage and cell display technologies. This could allow the generation of SAs against virtually any antigen
of interest, enabling the design of  targeting
any chosen surface or cell. In addition, intimin β-domain and
VHHs are resistant to proteases and denaturant agents (e.g., SDS,
urea, temperature). Altogether, these properties
make SAs extremely robust, inducing the stable attachment of a great
number of  bacteria to the targeted surface
or cell. Furthermore, we have demonstrated the functionality of SAs  showing that the engineered  strain colonizes more efficiently solid tumors expressing a target
antigen. The higher efficiency introduced by the SAs allowed a significant
reduction (ca. 2 orders of magnitude) of the bacterial dose needed
for optimal tumor colonization , an important
issue in order to increase the biosafety of bacterial therapies. Tumors cells often deregulate the expression
and/or post-translational modification of cell surface proteins (e.g.,
growth factor receptors, mucins), which has been used as targets for
developing therapeutic antibodies against tumor cells. Hence, SAs against these validated targets could improve bacterial
colonization of specific tumors. Engineered  expressing SAs may be of interest for other biomedical and industrial
applications. For instance, SAs could help in the localized delivery
of antigens to specific immune cells for more effective vaccines based
on bacterial vectors. SAs could also
be targeted to antigens expressed by viral and bacterial pathogens,
which could facilitate the therapeutic intervention of engineered
bacteria against pathogens. In addition, targeting
of other bacteria could generate defined bacterial consortia for industrial
bioprocesses, whereas adhesion to abiotic
surfaces could improve the development of biosensors. Given the conservation of the cellular machineries used
for folding and insertion of β-barrel OM proteins, it is likely that the reported SAs of  could
be functional in other Gram-negative bacterial species, including
alternative nonpathogenic bacteria used in synthetic biology such
as . In conclusion, SAs could be applied in multiple synthetic biology
projects, and future work should expand their use in  and other bacteria for specialized applications. Bacterial Strains
and Growth Conditions The  strains
used in the experiments described in this
work are listed in . Bacteria were grown in Luria–Bertani (LB) liquid medium
and agar plates (1.5% w/v), at 37 °C, unless otherwise indicated.
When needed for plasmid or strain selection, antibiotics were added
to the media at the following concentrations: chloramphenicol (Cm)
at 30 μg/mL, ampicillin (Ap) at 100 μg/mL, and kanamycin
(Km) at 50 μg/mL.  DH10B-T1 strain was used as host for cloning and propagation of plasmids
with a pBR origin of replication (e.g., pAK-Not, pNV-derivatives).
For cloning and propagation of suicide pGE-plasmid derivatives, containing
the conditional pi-dependent R6K origin of replication, the  strains BW25141
or CC118-λpir were used. For inducible expression of the SAs
from plasmid vectors with  promoter (i.e., pNVfib,
pNVgfp), EcM1 bacteria bearing the corresponding plasmid were grown
in LB-Cm at 30 °C, and 0.05 mM isopropyl-thio-β--galactoside (IPTG) was added at an optical density 600 nm (OD0) of 0.5. The cultures were further grown for 2 h at 30
°C with agitation (160 rpm). Bacteria with constitutive expression
of the synthetic adhesins and the  operon from
the chromosome were always grown statically at 37 °C in LB, except
for analysis of their growth curve in which cultures were grown at
37 °C with agitation (160 rpm). Bioluminescence of bacterial
colonies grown on LB plates were monitored in a Chemi-doc XRS+ (Bio-Rad). Plasmids, DNA Constructs, and Oligonucleotides The
plasmids constructed and used in this study are summarized in . Oligonucleotides were
synthesized by Sigma Genosys and are listed in . PCRs were performed with Taq DNA polymerase
for standard amplifications in screenings and with proof-reading DNA
polymerases, Vent DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs) and High-expand
fidelity (Roche) for cloning purposes. All plasmid constructs were
fully sequenced (Secugen). Details of plasmid constructions are described
as . Genome Modification and Strain Construction Site-specific deletions and insertions in the chromosome of  were done with the marker-less strategy of genome
edition based on expression of I-SceI endonuclease. Briefly,
the  strain to be modified was initially transformed
with plasmid pACBSR (Cm), expressing I-SceI and λ Red proteins under the control of
P promoter (inducible with -arabinose), and
subsequently electroporated with the corresponding pGE-based suicide
vector (Km). Cointegrants were selected on LB-Cm-Km plates
incubated at 37 °C. Individual colonies were isolated and grown
for 6 h in LB-Cm liquid medium containing -arabinose 0.4%
(w/v) with agitation (160 rpm). After this period, a ∼1 μL
sample of these cultures was streaked on LB-Cm plates using an inoculating
loop and incubated overnight. Individual colonies were replicated
in LB-Cm and LB-Cm-Km plates to screen for Km-sensitive colonies that
have performed resolution of the cointegrant vector after I-SceI induction.
Individual Km-sensitive colonies were screened by PCR with specific
oligonucleotides to identify those with the desired modification in
their chromosome (i.e., deletion, insertion, substitution). Plasmid
pACBSR was cured from the final strain by growth in liquid LB and
streaking on LB plates. Individual colonies were replicated in LB
and LB-Cm plates to screen for Cm-sensitive colonies. Construction
details of individual  strains are described
as . Cell Culture and Plasmid Transfection The
human epithelial tumor cell line HeLa (ATCC, CCL-2) was grown
as a monolayer in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 2 mM glutamine
(complete DMEM), at 37 °C with 5% CO. For transfection,
HeLa cells were seeded in 24-well tissue culture plates (BD Falcon)
(∼10 cells/well), grown for 20 h at 37 °C
with 5% CO, and transfected with 0.6 μg/well of
plasmids pDisplay-GFP-tm or pDisplay-TirM-tm following the calcium
phosphate method. After 22 h incubation
at 37 °C with 5% CO, the medium was removed, and
wells were washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
and filled with complete DMEM medium containing G418 (0.5 mg/mL, Invitrogen,
Life Technologies). After 24 h incubation, cells were passed to a
T75 flask (BD Falcon) with the same medium and further grown. G418-resistant
HeLa cells expressing GFP or mWasabi fusion proteins were selected
from these cultures by fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS)
using an Epics-Altra Cell Sorter (Beckman Coulter). HeLa-GFP-tm and
HeLa-TirM-tm positive cells populations were expanded on complete
DMEM medium. Bacteria
(equivalent to a final
OD of 1.0) were harvested from cultures by centrifugation
(4000 × , 3 min), washed with PBS, and resuspended
in 1 mL of PBS containing 10% (v/v) goat serum (Sigma). An aliquot
sample of 200 μL was incubated for 1 h on ice with anti-myc
mAb clone 9B11 (1:200; Cell Signaling Technology). Next, bacteria
were washed in PBS, resuspended in 500 μL of PBS containing
10% (v/v) goat serum, and stained for 40 min in the dark with Alexa
488-conjugated anti-mouse IgGs (1:500; Molecular Probes, Life Technologies).
Bacteria were finally washed and resuspended in a final volume of
1 mL of PBS and analyzed in a flow cytometer (Gallios, Beckman Coulter). Protein Extract Preparation, SDS-PAGE, and Western Blots Whole-cell protein extracts were prepared in urea-SDS sample buffer
as described previously. SDS-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and immunoblotting conditions to polyvinylidene
difluoride membrane (PVDF, Immobilon-P; Millipore) have been reported. For immunodetection, the PVDF membranes were incubated with anti-myc
mAb clone 9B11 (1:2000; Cell Signaling Technology) to detect myc-tagged
SAs and anti-mouse IgG-peroxidase (POD) conjugate (1:5000; Sigma)
as secondary antibody. GroEL was detected with anti-GroEL mAb-POD
conjugate (1:5000; Sigma). Membranes were developed by chemiluminescence
using a mixture in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) containing 1.25 mM luminol
(Sigma), 0.22 mM cumaric acid (Sigma), and 0.0075% (v/v) HO (Sigma) and exposed to an X-ray film (Curix, Agfa). Adhesion Assays to Antigens Immobilized on a Plastic Surface Purified GFP (Upstate, Millipore) or human fibrinogen (Enzyme Research
Laboratories) as indicated was diluted in PBS to 10 μg/mL, and
100 μL was adsorbed onto ELISA plates (Maxisorb, Nunc) overnight
at 4 °C. Antigen-coated plates were washed with PBS and blocked
for 1 h at room temperature with PBS containing 3% (w/v) skimmed milk.
Next, a bacterial suspension (100 μL) of the indicated strain
was added at an OD of 3.0 in PBS and incubated for an
additional 1 h. The plates were then washed with PBS three times,
and the presence of bound bacteria was visualized by light microscopy
and macroscopically detected by staining with crystal violet solution
(Sigma). Adhesion Assays to  Cultured HeLa Cells
and Immunofluorescence Microscopy Bacteria of the indicated  strain were harvested by centrifugation (4000 × , 3 min) from static liquid LB cultures grown overnight
at 37 °C. An OD of 1.0 from these cultures grown
statically was determined to contain ∼3 × 10 CFU/mL by plating in LB agar. Bacteria were washed in PBS and resuspended
at 3 × 10 CFU/mL in PBS or DMEM. For an infection
at MOI 300:1, a 1 mL sample of this bacterial suspension was added
to a single well of a 24-well tissue culture plate having the indicated
HeLa cell line (∼10 cells/well). HeLa cells were
grown on sterile coverslips (13 mm diameter, VWR international) placed
at the bottom of the well. After 1 h infection at 37 °C, the
wells were aspirated and washed five times with 1 mL of PBS at room
temperature. The coverslips were fixed for 20 min at room temperature
with 0.5 mL of a paraformaldehyde 4% (w/v) solution in PBS and washed
three times with 1 mL of PBS. Coverslips were blocked and stained
for 1 h at room temperature in a wet chamber with 50 μL of PBS/10%
goat serum solution having a rabbit polyclonal serum anti- O and K antigenic serotypes (1:1000; Biodesign).
The coverslips were washed by immersion 15 times in a large volume
of PBS (100 mL), placed again the wet chamber, and incubated for 40
min at room temperature with 50 μL of PBS/10% goat serum solution
having a goat anti-rabbit IgG-Alexa 594 conjugated secondary antibody
(1:500; Molecular Probes, Life Technologies) and DAPI (1:500; Sigma).
Next, the coverslips were washed with PBS as above, the excess of
liquid was removed by touching a kimwipe with the edge of the coverslip,
and the coverslips were mounted with 2 μL of Prolong (Invitrogen)
on glass slides. The samples were examined by epifluorescence microscopy
(Zeiss Axio imager microscope) or by confocal microscopy (Leica TCS
SP5 multispectral confocal system). For time-lapse live cell video
microscospy, HeLa-GFP-tm cells, grown on 24-well tissue culture plates,
were infected with 1 × 10 CFU of EcM1SAgfp in a final volume ∼0.3 mL/well (MOI 100:1) and monitored
using an Olympus IX71 microscope equipped with an Olympus cellR motorized TIRF system. Infection of Tumor-Bearing
Mice and Recovery of Bacteria from
Tissues All animals experiments were done in accordance with
protocols approved by the CNB Ethics Committee for Animal Experimentation
(ref 11034) and by the Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro Animal
Care and Use Committee, in compliance with Spanish and European Union
legislation. Five-week-old athymic female Hsd:Athymic Nude- were obtained from Harlan
(Harlan Ibérica). Tumor-bearing mice were generated by subcutaneous
injection of ∼1 × 10 HeLa-GFP-tm or HeLa cells,
as indicated, in 100 μL of PBS containing 20% (v/v) Matrigel
(BD Biosciences), into the abdominal right flank of 6-week-old Nude
mice. Tumor volumes were estimated with calipers according to the
formula: width × length × 0.52. When tumors
reached a volume between 200 and 400 mm, the mice were
randomly divided into experimental groups. Bacteria were grown and
harvested as described above for the  adhesion
assays and resuspended in sterile PBS at 1 × 10 CFU/mL.
For each independent experiment the number of CFU in this bacterial
suspension was determined, showing an experimental error below 10%.
This bacterial stock was directly used for systemic inoculation of
mice receiving a dose of 1 × 10 CFU by injection
of 100 μL into the lateral tail vein using a 0.5 mL syringe
with a 29G needle (Becton Dickinson). Alternatively, for mice receiving
a dose of 1 × 10 CFU, the original bacterial stock
was diluted in PBS to 1 × 10 CFU/mL, and 100 μL
was injected per mouse as above. These bacterial doses did not cause
any apparent disease symptoms in the animals, which showed normal
phenotype throughout the entire experiment (i.e., mobility, weight,
feeding behavior). For determination of bacterial CFU per gram (CFU/g)
of tumors, livers, and spleens, animals were euthanized, and tumors
and organs were excised, placed individually into (preweighed) sterile
tubes containing 5 mL of PBS, and weighed. Samples were then transferred
to sterile sampling bags (VWR), and Triton X-100 (Sigma) was added
to a final concentration of 0.2% (v/v). Samples were homogenized by
soft mechanical squeezing. Next, a 100-μL sample of the homogenates
was serially diluted in LB, plated in LB agar, and incubated overnight
at 37 °C to determine CFU. Bacterial titers were expressed as
CFU/g of tissue. For statistical analysis a minimal bacterial titer
of 50 CFU/g, corresponding to the detection limit of the assay, was
considered in those cases in which no bacteria were detected by plating. Bacterial light emission from
LB plates or from tissue culture plates was captured using a ChemiDoc
XRS system (Bio-Rad). For live imaging of bioluminescent bacteria
in tumor-bearing mice, animals were anesthetized with 4% Isoflurane
(Forene, Abbott) and maintained under 1% Isoflurane in a thermostated
chamber with a high-resolution charge-coupled-device (CCD) cooled
digital camera ORCA-2BT (Hamamatsu Photonics). Imaging analysis was
done with the Hokawo software (Hamamatsu Photonics). Statistical analyses comparing the ratio
of colonized tumors between experimental groups were conducted with
Fisher’s exact test to determine two-tailed  values using Prism 5.0 (GraphPad software Inc.). Data were considered
significantly different when  < 0.05. For  histological
analyses, resected tumors were fixed with 4% (w/v) paraformladehyde
in PBS for 16 h at 4 °C and embedded in paraffin. Serial 6 μm
sections were cut at the tumor center with a microtome (Leica RM2155)
and placed onto glass slides. The samples were deparaffinized with
xylene and ethanol solutions, rehydrated in PBS, and incubated with
1 M citrate buffer (pH 6.0) and PBS-Tween (PBS, 0.1% Tween 20) to
unmask antigens. Tissue sections were blocked with 10% goat serum
in PBS-Tween and incubated with anti- polyclonal
serum (1:100) 1 h at room temperature in the same buffer. Next, samples
were washed with PBS-Tween and incubated with goat anti-rabbit IgG-Alexa
594 conjugated secondary antibody (1:500) in PBS-Tween with 10% goat
serum for 1 h at room temperature. Samples were mounted in Vectashield
media (Vector Laboratories), and images were obtained with a fluorescence
microscope (Leica DMI6000B fluorescence system with Orca R digital camera from Hamamatsu)..