A whole cell biosensor is a
biosynthetic system of cellular components designed to convert a stimulus
(, the presence of chemical, a change in osmolality
or redox state) into a measurable cellular response. Biosensors enable
fast, simple sensing of small molecule effectors through measurement
of a relatively easy quantifiable output. Compared to the low or medium
throughput of standard chemical analytical techniques, biosensors
can be constructed that allow easy, high-throughput assessment of
the stimuli in question. Allosteric transcription factors (aTFs) have
been widely co-opted for biosensing applications for the detection
of a wide range of stimuli. Repression based aTFs bind their cognate promoter-operator
in the absence of a specific effector, thus inhibiting transcription.
Binding of the effector molecule to the aTF induces a conformational
change, causing a loss of DNA binding and derepression leading to
the expression of a reporter gene, such as . Biosensors
have been exploited to control protein expression, monitor metabolism,
identify novel genes in metagenomics libraries, and have found application
in biotechnological and biomedical sensing, and diagnostic devices. Following initial construction of a biosensor system, further
iterative
refinement is often required to achieve a highly performing system
in its new genetic context. Several parameters must be optimized for
good biosensor performance: output in the OFF-state (leakiness) should
be minimized to allow accurate measurements at low signal levels;
output in the ON-state (reporter expression level) should be maximized
to allow signal detection in the presence of background noise and
to achieve high levels of gene expression for sensing and control
applications; dynamic range is the ratio of the system’s ON
and OFF states and a high dynamic range allows more confident “hit”
identification due to a high signal-to-noise ratio. Additionally,
for certain applications the sensitivity, the sensing range, and specificity
of a biosensor should be considered. For primary screening applications
biosensors should display high sensitivity to permit analyte detection
at low levels (<μM), and allow binary (yes/no) classification
of positive hits. For secondary screening applications biosensors
that respond over a wide range of inducer concentrations would allow
clustering of primary hits and separation into different subgroups
based on analyte concentration. For biotransformation and other diagnostic
applications the biosensor must also be highly specific to minimize
false detection from analytes with closely related chemical structures
or properties. Generic biosensor design and engineering rules are
currently lacking, which limits the broader adoption of biosensors
in sensing and control applications. Biosensors
have been optimized using directed evolution, mechanistic modeling,
and rational engineering. While these approaches have been successful in elucidating biosensors,
they often require resource intensive, iterative directed evolution
using technically challenging selection methods, or the use of well
characterized sensory elements. Structured, multivariate experimentation,
and statistical modeling have not been previously applied to this
problem but could offer rapid, resource-efficient means of optimizing
biosensors and elucidating universal design rules. Structured
multivariate experimentation and statistical modeling
is widely used in various engineering and process industries. This combined experimentation and modeling approach, referred to
as design of experiments (DoE), is a statistical tool used to systematically
explore multidimensional experimental space with the minimum number
of experimental runs (A). It allows researchers to optimize poorly understood processes
and decipher nonintuitive interactions with a series of statistically
designed experiments. DoE is commonly
used to optimize environmental factors such as temperature, time,
and concentration during bioprocess development. The continuous nature
of these factors makes structured experimental exploration over a
range of multivariate conditions facile. More recently DoE has also
been used successfully in a growing number of applications in optimizing
genetic factors for metabolic engineering of biosynthetic pathways; its utilization is a powerful means of dramatically improving the
performance of metabolic pathways. While these studies show the utility
of DoE for linear biosynthetic pathways, it has not yet been applied
to more complex genetic systems consisting of multiple protein–protein
and protein–DNA interactions that are more likely to display
nonlinear effects. Confounding this is the challenge of converting
different closely related, but discrete, genetic designs into so-called
continuous factors. Without this conversion, assessment of all experimentation
conditions would need to be repeated for all genetic designs, limiting
the potential for a reduction in the number of required experiments.
By applying a modern DoE framework to
biosensor development we demonstrate the utility of this approach
to the optimization of regulatory systems. Here we applied DoE to
address the challenge of standard iterative
design-build-test-learn experimental approaches for the optimization
of
genetic systems, which can be costly both in terms of resources and
time. To assess this methodology we sought to explore and optimize
the performance of various aTF-based small-molecule-responsive biosensors.
Three regulatory component libraries, two promoters and one RBS, were
generated and assessed for expression performance. Linear regression
modeling and fractional sampling were used to explore a highly efficient,
structured coarse-grained map of experimental space. This workflow
was applied to optimize performance of a two-gene protocatechuic acid
(PCA) responsive biosensor. PCA is an
aromatic chemical derived from lignocellulosic biomass, and a central
intermediate of lignin catabolic pathways in microorganisms, making
it of biotechnological interest for the valorization of lignin into
high value chemicals. An enhanced PCA biosensor was
then benchmarked against the commonly used  recombinant expression systems. The sensitivity of the PCA biosensor,
was then increased by incorporation the  transporter.
The DoE concept and regulatory components were then used to engineer
biosensors operating under an analogue dose response modality, by
placing  under the control of a PCA-responsive
inverter. Finally the DoE concept and regulatory components were assessed
using a more complex enzyme coupled biosensor, consisting of three
functional genes that allow detection of ferulic acid, a major aromatic chemical building block derived
from lignin. The results of this optimization
effort suggest that this approach could also be applied to enhance
the performance of other biosensors. Collectively the approach demonstrated
the ability of DoE to efficiently map experimental space and develop
genetic systems, with greatly enhanced output signal, basal control,
dynamic range (signal-to-noise), and sensitivity. Application of design
of experiments (DoE) to modulate biosensor
dose response curves. (A) An experiment can be considered as a point
in multidimensional space. DoE is a statistical tool that enables
the proper exploration of experimental space to understand and optimize
biology. (B) Modulation of biosensor dose response curves by increasing
maximum output in the ON state while minimizing output in the OFF
state (vertical extension; left), increasing sensitivity (middle),
and conversion of a digital response to an analogue one (horizontal
extension; right). In previous work we constructed
a two-plasmid PCA biosensor (PAB) composed
of the PCA-responsive allosteric transcription factor (aTF), PcaV
from , under control of a
constitutive  promoter on one plasmid,
and the PcaV repressible  promoter
upstream from a reporter gene (GFP) on a second plasmid. To simplify
its deployment the PAB was combined into a single plasmid (pP-GFP-pcaV). This single plasmid PAB displayed a good dynamic
range (ON/OFF = 417; ). However, only modest GFP expression was observed compared
to other commonly used  expression systems. To explore
whether biosensor performance could be improved, we
sought to optimize signal output and dynamic range by refactoring
the PAB and systematically varying the genetic elements making up
this biosensor using DoE to guide the process (A). By using DoE to optimize the PAB and
improve the performance of various iterations, we aimed to build a
statistical model describing the interaction of the genetic components,
which could serve as a guide in further efforts to construct, optimize,
and modulate biosensors. Definitive Screening
Design of Screen
Genetic Factors Constituting a PCA Biosensor http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf OFF and ON measurements
were made
in the absence or presence of 1 mM PCA, respectively. The values for
OFF, ON, and OFF/ON indicate the mean of three biological replicates
with ± denoting the standard deviation of those replicates. The
raw data for this table can be found in . Configuration of PCA biosensor and construction
of promoter and
RBS libraries. (A) The PCA biosensor consists of the PcaV repressor,
which binds to the  promoter controlling
sfGFP expression. In the presence of PCA the system is derepressed.
(B) The genetic elements regulating expression of the system components
were renamed as shown and mutated with degenerate oligonucleotides
to make individual libraries.  was substituted
with  to facilitate library screening. (C–E)
Transcriptional (C, D) and translational activity (E) of library variants
assessed by fluorescent protein synthesis rate (upper panels). Synthesis
rates were transformed into logarithmically scaled values (lower panels)
and “levels” for DoE were set at −1, 0, and +1. Refactoring of the PCA Biosensor Guided by
DoE DoE
consists of distinct phases: a screening phase is carried out initially
to identify those factors that are most important to the process under
investigation, which is followed by an optimization phase whereby
those factors are adjusted to obtain the desired optimum. These factors
are set at discrete “levels” that span a defined range:
the low level is coded as −1, the middle level as 0 and the
high level as +1. With this in mind, to refactor the PAB and apply
DoE, we first had to decide on which factors were likely to influence
biosensor performance and then convert those factors into levels suitable
for DoE. Three genetic regulatory components controlling the transcription
and translation of the components constituting the PAB were selected
and modified: (i) the constitutive proB promoter (henceforth ) controlling  expression;
(ii) the PcaV-repressible  promoter
(henceforth ); and (iii) the G10 RBS
(henceforth RBS), controlling the expression of the
sensor output  (A). These three factors have all been shown
to be important for the response of a biosensor so were selected for systematic investigation through Design
of Experiments. We decided to modify these independently as RNAP binding
and translation rate, set by the promoter and RBS, respectively, could
have different effects on the response curve of the system. We kept the transcriptional terminators, gene
orientation, antibiotic selection marker and plasmid copy constant
throughout the initial set of experiments, although we did modify
copy number in later experiments by converting a stable multicopy
system to single-copy system (see below). Having selected three
factors for study, we converted them into continuous variables by
generating, screening and ranking the performance of libraries for
each of these components (, , and RBS). This step facilitates
statistical-model based optimization by converting categorical variables,
in this case a particular promoter or RBS, into continuous variables
that span a wide expression range. Rather than use previously published
libraries we decided to generate new
libraries to provide greater confidence of the component performance
within the genetic context of the biosensor, and to ensure that the
expression level of the library was finely resolved and covered a
broad range. The libraries were constructed in the pSEVA131 vector
containing  as the biosensor output and  substituted for  to serve as
a proxy for regulator expression. Following library construction and
performance assessment  was replaced with  to reconstitute a functional biosensor (see below).
The genes encoding  and  were arranged in a divergent configuration to prevent transcriptional
read-through and separated by a ∼150 bp spacer.  and RBS were used to control expression
of  and  and
a strong RBS (gaaataaggaggtaatacaa) were used for
to control expression of , yielding a construct
termed p131B, which served as the starting point for library generation.
To generate the individual libraries, we chose to randomize the nucleotides
at the following positions: (i) for , 3 Ns were introduced at the −10 hex-box to make -lib (B); (ii) for , 3 Ns
were introduced at both the −10 and −35 hex-boxes to
make -lib (B); and (iii) for RBS, 6 Ns
were introduced at the core RBS binding region to make RBS-lib (B).
This produced total theoretical library sizes of 64 (4), 4096 (4), and 4096 (4) for -lib, -lib, and RBS-lib, respectively. The mutant libraries were screened for
sfGFP fluorescence in  for -lib and RBS-lib and for mCherry fluorescence
for -lib. Following the initial screen,
22 members from each library were selected to span a wide range of
fluorescence values. Promoter and RBS activity was calculated by determining
the rate of fluorescent protein (FP) production according to previously
published work with the following equation:The constructed libraries
spanned a wide range
of FP synthesis rates (C,D,E) with -lib having a
46-fold range (maximum of 17 340 and minimum 377), RBS-lib having a 160-fold range (maximum of 15 860 and
a minimum of 99), and -lib having
a 46-fold range (maximum of 8101.3 and minimum of 177). The expression
data from libraries generated were rescaled using a linlog transformation
described previously with the following
equation:The linlog transformation was previously found
to be essential
for successful application of a DoE-based optimization process as
logarithmic variables better reflect the cellular biophysics of transcription
and translation, hence its implementation
here. Library members were rank-ordered from −1 to +1 with
the strongest member of each library recoded as +1, the weakest as
−1, and the midpoint level 0 the geometric average of level
+1 and −1 (C,D,E). Given the size of the screened libraries, a
total of 10 648
(22 × 22 × 22) combinations would be needed to fully explore
the gene expression space. DoE aims to reduce the number of combinations
needed to properly explore an experimental space (A) and determine the importance
of different factors by using structured screening designs. A range of screening designs are available in
a DoE methodology, here definitive screening design (DSD) was selected
as it allows the identification of main (linear) factors and two-factor
interactions with a relatively small number of experimental runs while
avoiding confounding of pairs of second-order effects. DSD designs use 3 levels instead of 2 levels,
thereby permitting some estimation of curvature (nonlinearity) in
a factor-response relationship, which are likely to be found in biological
systems. Here using DSD was employed to reduce the total experimental
configurations from 10 648 to 13, a compression ratio of 819:1
(). Statistical
Modeling of PCA Biosensor Variants http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf The
constructs were designed according to the DSD shown in  (see  for the raw data), which was generated with statistical
software (). Additional
runs over the minimum required (2 + 1 = total run
number,  (number of factors) = 3) were included
to account for the predicted high number of statistically significant
factors and interactions. Following the replacement of  with , all 13 constructs ( and ) were assembled correctly and transformed
into . Next, we assessed the performance
of each of the different permutations of the PAB by measuring end-point
sfGFP fluorescence when uninduced (OFF) and induced with 1 mM PCA
(ON), and calculated the biosensor dynamic range (ON/OFF). The results
from these trials are shown in A,B and  and give a broad range of values for the measured responses.
The best performing candidate (pD2), displayed an excellent maximum
signal (62 071 RFU/OD) and good dynamic range (156-fold) while
maintaining tight basal control, whereas the poorest performer (pD8)
produced negligible output signal (50 RFU/OD) and was barely responsive,
with a dynamic range of 1.2-fold, highlighting the importance of a
library-based optimization approach. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf Factor screening analysis was used to assess the
importance of
each main effect and their interactions. Significant factors were
selected based on half-normal plots, which allows interpretation of
factor effect on each of the three responses (OFF, ON, ON/OFF). Factor
screening analysis revealed that the strongest significant effects
for dynamic range (ON/OFF) were from  ( < 0.0001),  × RBS ( < 0.0001), and  ( = 0.0004). For both
the ON and OFF biosensor output responses, , RBS and  × RBS showed the strongest significant effect
(). Using those
factors shown to be significant ( < 0.05) for
biosensor performance, we carried out statistical modeling of the
data using a standard least-squares regression (SLSR) model and analysis
of variance (ANOVA) (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf Supplementary Figure S1, Supplementary Table S2 and S3 Comparison of effect sizes in the SLSR shows the factors
and interactions
with the greatest impact upon the three responses (). A
prediction profile of the model is shown in C. As expected, for maximum output (ON)  and RBS are predicted to have
the greatest effect and should be set at +1 for maximum signal output,
while for basal output (OFF) RBS is the strongest determinant
and should be reduced if the basal output signal is too high. Increasing  and RBS improves ON/OFF, but
in a nonlinear manner when changing the expression level from midpoint
to maximal (0  +1). Here the model indicates an
interesting trade-off shown when comparing the effect of RBS at −1  0: both OFF and ON are scaled proportionality
leading to no significant change in ON/OFF. At high expression levels
of RBS (+1) the OFF level indicates a plateau, whereas
the ON level increases leading to vertical extension and increased
ON/OFF. Interestingly for the ON/OFF response a nonlinear effect is
also observed from changing the level of  controlling the expression of  (C). The optimal level of PcaV
to achieve highest dynamic range lies near the middle level (0) and
the system operates with poorer dynamic range at high (+1) and low
levels (−1) for . A lower biosensor
dynamic range at low levels of aTF expression is unsurprising as there
is insufficient transcription factor in the system to fully interfere
with RNAP-promoter complex formation. However, increased output signal at high levels of PcaV was unexpected
and suggests that excessive PcaV interferes with stable regulator-promoter
complex formation. Collectively, these findings highlight the importance
of a 3-level DSD as the nonlinear effect of  level would have been overlooked in a two level design
consisting solely of a high and low level. Through the use of the DSD we were able to confidently identify
nonlinear effects within the design space and assign the nonlinear
effects to the RBS and  levels. This assignment of nonlinear effects is not possible with
traditional DoE screening designs due to heavy aliasing between nonlinear
effect terms within the designed data structure. This means that while
traditional screening designs can indicate the presence of a nonlinear
effect, it is not possible to assign this nonlinearity to a causative
factor, without augmenting the DoE design with additional experimental
data, which would require further use of time and resources. This
highlights a significant advantage of the definitive screening design
employed here. The reliable resolution of this nonlinear effect removes
the need for further rounds of experimentation to identify the cause
of the nonlinear response. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf Following identification of nonlinearity
within the explored expression
space we sought to further resolve the curvature within the promoter
activity landscape of . To do so we
carried out additional trials in which  and RBS were set at the highest level (+1) and the
level of  was set
at 4 different levels (−0.56, −0.28, 0.36, and 0.67)
to explore the landscape around the  midpoint (A). The responses for these iterations of the PAB were measured and
their dynamic range is displayed. The results pointed to an optimum
for dynamic range between level 0 and 0.36, so a final construct,
p131C–B10, was created in which  was set at 0.14 with  and RBS kept at +1. This construct gave the best performance of
all tested with a dynamic range of 276-fold (A and ). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf The results of the validation trials were used
to modify the model
to generate a new prediction profile describing the data (B). From this model
we are able to elucidate some design rules that should be applicable
to other repression based aTF biosensor systems: (i) Construct the
strongest chimeric promoter-operator and RBS combination possible,
then (ii) fine-tune the level of regulator with a wide range of expression
levels. If a satisfactory dynamic range cannot be met after tuning
the regulator, then (iii) weaken the RBS driving signal output. Importantly,
we were able to map the optima and develop this statistical model
in a small number of experimental runs (18 constructs). Also, as the
experimental space has been efficiently mapped through this DoE approach,
we can be confident that an optimal configuration of the PAB has been
achieved. We carried out a titration of the best variant (p131C–B10)
and the original PAB with full induction at 4 mM PCA (C and ), which showed that we had improved the output signal
over 30-fold (3121 to 97 099 RFU/OD) and the dynamic range
by 25% (417- to 521-fold). Genetic configuration of biosensor designs
conforming to definitive
screening design. Following library construction  was reinstalled to create a functioning biosensor and regulatory
elements were cloned at the appropriate levels. Three out of 13 constructs
are shown, and the full table can be found in . Experimental
trials and statistical modeling. (A) GFP fluorescence
for PCA biosensor variants in the ON state (1 mM PCA; green bars)
and OFF state (no PCA; orange bars). (B) The dynamic range for PCA
biosensor variants (ON/OFF). Error bars represent the standard deviation
of three biological replicates. Each experiment was repeated a minimum
of two times and typical results are shown. (C) Prediction profile
of standard least-squares regression model based on experimental data. Optimization of PCA biosensor and effect of copy number.
(A) The
level of aTF was tuned to determine optimal dynamic range. Shown is
the dynamic range (ON/OFF) for the PCA biosensor when induced with
1 mM PCA with  set at different levels.
The blue circles represent the initial trials, the red squares represent
the first iteration with  set at different
levels and the green triangle represents the final iteration of  level. (B) Prediction profile of standard
least-squares regression model based on data from new trials. (C)
Comparison of original PCA biosensor with the optimized version (p131C–B10)
in an end point assay. Cells were induced with varying concentration
of PCA for 3 h at 37 °C then measured for GFP fluorescence. (D)
Performance of PCA biosensor when present as one-copy in the genome.
The level of repressor was tuned to determine optimal dynamic range
when present as a single copy. Shown is the dynamic range (ON/OFF)
for the PCA biosensor when induced with 1 mM PCA with  set at different strengths. Error bars represent the
standard deviation of three biological replicates. Each experiment
was repeated a minimum of two times and typical results are shown. Copy Number Effects upon Biosensor Performance http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf Next,
we investigated the effect of copy number on the performance of the
PAB by transferring the plasmid-based multicopy biosensor system into
single-copy system on the chromosome. Different permutations of the
biosensor were cloned into a pKIKO vector and inserted into the  locus (). As before,  and RBS were set at the highest level and the level of  was varied. The responses of the chromosomal PABs
were assessed. We found that the maximum level of output signal was
reduced ∼10-fold from the plasmid-based biosensor (), consistent with the
copy number reduction from the pBBR1 origin, which is reported to
have 5–10 copies per  cell. As shown in D, the level  needed for the optimal
dynamic range was increased from 0.14 to 0.61 (A,D) and the overall dynamic range of the
system was reduced (276-fold to 42-fold; ). It is well-known that expression correlates proportionally
with gene-dosage; however, this relationship is
complex, nonlinear, and copy reduction
is believed to perturb the equilibrium of aTF-based systems due to
a reduction in the steady state aTF concentration. Mechanistic based approaches have attempted to rationalize
these observations and indicate that increasing strength of the RBS
or promoter controlling the aTF is required to restore steady-state
levels to functionality. This explains
the requirement for a stronger promoter for  to
decrease basal expression of sfGFP from the biosensor when implemented
as a single-copy system. The wide range of expression space covered
by the calibrated regulatory component libraries enabled us to quickly
refactor the biosensor in order to retune biosensor performance of
the genome-integrated PAB. Enhancing the Sensitivity of the PCA Biosensor
and Modulating
the Dose–Response Curve http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf Having demonstrated the applicability
of DoE to improve the fold change and maximum, we turned our attention
to modifying the sensitivity and slope of response curve. Using the
DoE approach and the associated genetic libraries none the PAB variants
demonstrated a marked difference in sensitivity (EC)
or slope of the response curve (); therefore we first investigated whether the sensitivity
of the PAB could be attenuated by altering the internal PCA concentration.  cannot metabolize PCA and has no known transport
mechanisms. Therefore, we inserted the high affinity PCA transporter,  from , downstream
of  to form a synthetic operon (A). Expression of  led to increased sensitivity of the PAB to PCA of over 1500-fold
(EC from 557 μM to 0.335 μM; B and ). Following the dramatic increase in performance and sensitivity
achieved we were satisfied that we had constructed a robust and highly
functional biosensor system. Given these attributes we are confident
that this biosensor is adequate for high-throughput screening method
as its high sensitivity, large dynamic range and high output signal
make it ideally suited for detecting low concentrations of PCA. The
highly digital dose response gives an impressive signal-to-noise ratio,
allowing great confidence when assigning positive analyte concentration
above a required threshold for applications is screening genetic libraries
and others applications in environmental monitoring and medical diagnostics. While these characteristics are ideal for primary screening, the
binary nature of the dose–response means that this sensor is
not well suited for determining between variants or samples with similar
activities (, as a result of protein engineering).
For these applications it would be desirable to have a system, which
gives a shallow, more analogue dose response, to allow accurate distinction
between different analyte concentrations. We hypothesized that
by regulating the expression of the  transporter,
and therefore PCA uptake in the cell,
we could expand the sensing range of the biosensor and transform the
digital dose–response into an analogue response. We reasoned
that by enhancing PCA uptake at low concentrations and repressing
uptake at high concentrations we would be able to achieve this linear
response (A).
To achieve conversion of the dose response curve from a digital to
a more analogue signal a genetic system consisting of two plasmids
(B) was designed
to provide negative feedback control of  expression.
The biosensor system consists of the  gene downstream
of  and  downstream
of . Using
the negative feedback control of  expression
we expected that at low PCA concentrations  would
be maximally expressed ( controlling  repressed,  controlling  derepressed), giving greatest
PCA uptake, accumulation inside the cell and therefore biosensor sensitivity/linearity.
In contrast when PCA is at a higher concentration  would be minimally expressed ( derepressed,  repressed), leading to reduced PCA uptake and therefore
an extended biosensor response linearity. As designed the negative
feedback control should lead to horizontal extension of the dose response
curve giving a less binary, more linear/analogue response over a large
concentration range. Rather than designing a single extender system  and relying on iterative redesign we chose to construct nine variants
of the extender system. These constructs contain the full factorial
variants of three RBS sites, upstream of  ((−1),
(0) and (+1)) and  ((−1), (0) and (+1))
each selected from the RBS library described earlier
in this study. These combinatorial plasmids were constructed using
isothermal assembly of ssDNA containing the respective RBS sequences,
into a linear, PCR amplified backbone (pSEVA261). During assembly
we were not able to assemble the 3 constructs containing the LacI
(+1) RBS variant, presumably due to the potential toxic of very high  expression. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf Following cotransformation of the
six negative feedback controller
plasmids (p261_PcaK_LacI) and the sensor plasmid (p131C–B10)
we measured  expression following induction
with varying concentrations of PCA. Testing of the six biosensors,
showed successful transformation of the digital dose response of the
PcaK-sensitized PCA biosensor to an analogue system that is linearly
titratable with increasing PCA concentration and gives a response
over ∼4 orders of magnitude (see C). The digital  analogue
behavior can be determined by calculation of the dynamic range of
ligand response (DRLR; EC/EC). While all
of the RBS variants showed modified dose–response behavior,
the biosensor with most digital behavior, PcaK(+1)_LacI(−1),
was effective at sensing PCA over a small concentration range (DRLR
= 11.7,  = 1.8) (). Whereas, the biosensor
with most analogue behavior, PcaK(−1)_LacI(0), was effective
at sensing PCA over a larger concentration range (DRLR = 117.8,  = 0.9). Demonstrating that
PCA responsive inversion of  expression was successful
in expanding the sensing range of and converting the biosensor response
into a linear signal. The diverse performances of the different
extender PAB variants,
and the successful conversion of a digital to analogue dose–response
curves demonstrate the importance of correctly balancing the expression
of components within a regulatory system. By sparsely sampling the
expression landscape using the RBS library we were able to rapidly
identify a construct with the desired performance. Had we simply selected
a pair of RBSs, which did not give such a pronounced conversion in
dose response, it would have been easy to dismiss the system design
as nonfunctional. The objective approach taken here allowed proper
assessment of the expression landscape and selection of a functional
extender system. Increasing the sensitivity of the PCA biosensor. (A) The  gene from  was inserted
downstream of the  promoter and strong
G10 RBS (+1) and . (B) The expression of a high-affinity,
PCA permease leads to a reduction in EC of the PCA biosensor,
as shown here. We observed a shift of the dose response curve to the
left when  is expressed (orange), compared to
the p131C–B10 biosensor (green). Error bars represent the standard
deviation of three biological replicates. Extending biosensor linear range through transport modulation.
(A) Biosensors with analogue dose–responses have application
in protein engineering as they allow more accurate identification
of enzyme variants with improved function. To this end we designed
a regulatory network to convert the digital-like dose response to
an analogue output. (B) This circuit consists of a PcaV repressed ::, which in turn repress  expression. In the presence of high concentrations
of PCA LacI is produced, leading to restricted  expression, reducing ligand uptake, which ultimately reduces sfGFP
output. Without PCA,  expression is repressed,  is induced, leading to increased PCA uptake and accumulation
inside the cell, thus increasing derepression of  expression. (C) Six variants of the dose–response extender
circuit were designed and tested. The variants have different strength
RBSs upstream of the  (−1, 0) and  (−1, 0, +1). Expression testing under different
concentrations of PCA show the different dose response performance
of the construct variants. Error bars represent the standard error
of three biological replicates, and the area fill denotes the 95%
confidence interval for the fitted curve. Benchmarking of the Refactored PAB against
Commonly Used Expression
Systems http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf Given the high expression levels produced from the
refactored PAB we were interested in benchmarking the PAB against
popular inducible expression systems in. The low sensitivity PAB (, lacking the PcaK transporter) was used for benchmarking
as it displayed a superior dynamic range and maximum output (). We selected three commonly
used bacterial expression systems: (i) the pET vector system utilizing
a chromosome-integrated copy of T7 RNA polymerase to express the target
gene, both regulated by //LacI and induced with IPTG; (ii) the arabinose-inducible
plasmid-based system in which expression of the target gene is controlled
by /AraC; and (iii) the pCK302
rhamnose-inducible plasmid-based system in which expression of the
target gene is controlled by /RhaS.
To benchmark the PAB against these systems,  was cloned into pET44 and pBAD expression plasmids. pCK302 already
contains the sfGFP reporter so was not modified. The pBAD-sfGFP, pCK302, and p131C–B10 vectors were
transformed into  BL21 and pET44 was
transformed into  BL21(DE3) carrying
the T7-RNA polymerase. Titrations were carried out for each of the
expression systems using the appropriate inducer with samples analyzed
for end-point fluorescence at 3 h and 24 h after induction. The PAB
afforded comparable expression levels to the pBAD and BL21(DE3) expression
systems in terms of maximum protein produced per cell (RFU/OD) after
induction for 3 h (A and ) and
only the T7-RNAP system gave comparable amounts of protein at 24 h
postinduction (B and ). The PAB
showed a consistently high dynamic range (>200-fold) at both time-points
whereas the other systems displayed unwanted (leaky) expression during
the longer induction time, presumably due to endogenous effects associated
with catabolite derepression. Taken together, these
findings demonstrate the utility of a properly optimized expression
system from a heterologous source and highlight the potential of the
PAB as tool for producing recombinant protein using PCA as a cheap,
nonmetabolizable and orthogonal inducer. Benchmarking of PCA biosensor
with popular inducible expression
systems. (A,B) The PCA biosensor (p131C–B10; green circles)
was tested against three common expression systems—T7 RNAP/IPTG
(pET44-sfGFP; orange squares), /arabinose (pBAD-sfGFP; blue triangles), and /mannose (pCK302; purple diamonds)—in an end point
assay. Cells were induced with varying concentrations of inducers
for 3 h (A) and 24 h (B) at 37 °C then measured for GFP fluorescence.
Error bars represent the standard deviation of three biological replicates.
Each experiment was repeated a minimum of two times, and typical results
are shown. Optimization of a Ferulic
Acid Biosensor Guided by Statistical
Modeling http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf Given the outstanding performance achieved for the
PAB (), we
applied the above design rules to improve a ferulic acid biosensor,
(henceforth FAB) to demonstrate the wider
utility of the DoE approach. The ferulic acid biosensor is a three
gene system, and also differs from the PAB in that in addition to
an aTF (FerC) and inducible promoter (), an activating enzyme, feruloyl CoA ligase (FerA), is required
to convert ferulic acid into feruloyl-CoA (FA-CoA), which is the effector
able to bind to FerC leading to derepression (A). To optimize this biosensor,
first, the original promoter-operator  controlling the reporter gene was reengineered based on the strong
promoter from the Anderson library (BBa_J23119) to generate the  aiming
to improve the maximum expression level that could be achieved by
the reporter gene (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf Following the DoE strategy used
for the PAB biosensor, the original
FAB design was refactored and combined
into a single plasmid system where the expression of the reporter
sfGFP, driven by the promoter-operator () and strong RBS (RBS + 1), was initially fixed and
the expression levels of  and  were optimized using a full factorial design. The promoters controlling
the production of the transcription factor FerC () and the enzyme FerA () were set at 3 levels (−1, 0, and +1) using the promoter
sequences from the  library, which
led to 9 different designs (A and ). As described for PAB, performance of the designs was assessed
by measuring end-point fluorescence when uninduced (OFF) and induced
by 1 mM FA (ON), and calculating the dynamic range (ON/OFF). The expression
level of  was the main factor determining
the increase of dynamic range (ON/OFF) and expression level of  had smaller influence as observed by the
ON/OFF of the intermediate designs (B and ) as shown on the analysis of a full factorial model
for the expression (). The pFABs9 construct (//RBS levels +1/+1/+1), which had  and  both set at the highest levels
(+1) displayed the best dynamic range (52-fold), with an ON signal
of 74 893 RFU/OD and OFF signal of 1433 RFU/OD (B, ; see  for the raw data). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf However,
we felt that further reduction of leakiness would be important
for a high performance FAB biosensor. Therefore, following the design
rules elucidated for the PAB biosensor earlier we reduced the strength
of RBS controlling  expression. For this second
iteration the RBS upstream of the reporter was replaced with variants
from the RBS library set at +0.94, +0.89, +0.81, generating
pFABsG12 (//RBS pattern at levels +1/+1/+0.81), pFABsG19
(//RBS pattern at levels +1/+1/+0.89), and pFABsG21 (//RBS pattern at levels +1/+1/+0.94). As expected, when compared
to the best previous FAB variant pFABs9, these FAB variants showed
a reduction of the minimum and maximum signals, and the dynamic range
was increased significantly due to a greater relative reduction of
the OFF signal  the ON signal (C, and ). In summary, we improved the performance
of the FAB biosensor, relative to previously published designs, for both max output signal by 31-fold (992 RFU/OD
to 30,783 RFU/OD) and dynamic range by 5-fold (23-fold to 118-fold)
in a small number of experimental runs (12 constructs and two iterations). In summary, by applying a DoE approach to the genetic factors constituting
a biosensor, we were able to increase the maximum signal output from
the PCA biosensor over 30-fold (3121 to 97 099 RFU/OD) and
the dynamic range by 25% (417- to 521-fold). Further, we took advantage
of a high-affinity PCA permease, PcaK, to vary the slope of the dose–response
curve of the PAB and construct a whole cell biosensor with a linear
responsivity to analyte concentration ∼4-orders of magnitude.
We achieved coverage of the experimental space with 13 constructs
and were able to fully optimize the PCA biosensor with an extra five
constructs thereby demonstrating the efficient use of time and cost
that a DoE approach can provide. The statistical model built from
the experimental data allowed us to elucidate some design rules that
we applied to improve the performance of a ferulic acid-biosensor
in a small number of experimental runs. The following design rules
should be applicable to other repression based aTF biosensor systems:
(i) Construct the strongest chimeric promoter/RBS combination possible,
then (ii) fine-tune the level of regulator with a wide range of expression
levels. (iii) If a satisfactory dynamic range cannot be met after
(ii), weaken the RBS driving signal output. The  and RBS libraries we developed for optimizing
the PAB were successfully applied to improve the FAB demonstrating
the reusability of these parts in a different genetic context and
abrogating the need for library construction/screening each time a
biosensor is optimized. If library development is required, say for
the application of DoE in a different context, we would advocate the
use of empirically validated promoters/RBSs or validation of promoters/RBSs
designed using predictive tools, to allow for greater
confidence in the resulting data and model. The PCA and FA whole
cell biosensors we developed can detect key
aromatic chemicals in the lignin biomass valorization, permitting
applications for the renewable production of high value chemicals,
materials and fuels from biomass. These systems
can be employed for the high-throughput screening and of new enzymes, dynamic-regulation of metabolic pathways for production of target
chemicals, adaptive evolution of new phenotypes, and the integration of regulated individual
components in a whole cell bioprocess context. Furthermore, as demonstrated for PCA, the high performance
comparable to traditional inducible systems would allow broader synthetic
biology applications such as regulation of complex networks and cellular
computation. By applying statistical
modeling we are able to optimize biosensor
performance without needing to carry out modification to the repressor
protein or understanding of binding affinities of the DNA and ligand
binding domains, making this objective approach ideally suited to
building regulatory networks from uncharacterized genetic parts. By
systematically sampling the expression space of these multipart genetic
systems we can use statistical modeling approaches, which do not rely
on detailed mechanistic and/or kinetic knowledge, to guide rapid iteration
and performance optimization. These models also allow us to identify
nonlinear effects and trade-offs, which aid selection of highly functional
regulatory networks and pathways, enabling robust, data-led decision
making. The DSD framework developed here shows great potential for
the optimization of genetic systems by tuning component expression
level in a systematic and highly efficient way. Optimization of a FA biosensor. (A) Schematic representation of
a refactored FA biosensor. The FerC aTF (orange) represses sfGFP (green)
expression by regulating the P promoter. The FerA enzyme
(purple) metabolizes the sensed chemical ferulic acid into the ligand
effector feruloyl-CoA, which binds to FerC derepressing . (B) Dynamic range (ON/OFF) of the 9 DoE variants of the FA biosensor,
in the first iteration, set with combinations of promoter strength
levels of the FerC regulator ( at
levels −1, 0, +1) and the FerA enzyme ( at levels −1, 0, +1). (C) Performance of the 3
additional DoE variants of the FAB in the second iteration. The best
variant of the first iteration pFABs9, //RBS levels +1/+1/+1
(green circles), was compared to a group of new variants that had
RBS set at decreasing levels while the level of both  and  was
fixed at +1: pFABsG21, //RBS levels +1/+1/+0.94 (red diamonds);
pFABsG19, //RBS levels +1/+1/+0.89 (orange triangles);
and pFABsG12, //RBS levels +1/+1/+0.81 (blue hexagons).
The fluorescent signal (RFU/OD) is shown for the induction with increasing
concentrations of ferulic acid. (D) The dynamic range (ON/OFF) is
shown for the signal ratio of the variants at ON induced state (presence
of ferulic acid at 1 mM) or OFF uninduced state (absence of ferulic
acid). Error bars represent the standard deviation of three biological
replicates. Full Factorial Screening
of Screen
Genetic Factors Constituting a FA Biosensor http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf OFF and ON measurements
were made
in the absence or presence of 1 mM FA, respectively. The values for
OFF, ON, and OFF/ON indicate the mean of three biological replicates
with ± denoting the standard deviation of those replicates. The
raw data for this table can be found in . DH5α
(NEB, #C2987U) was used for cloning,  DNA
assembly, plasmid propagation, promoter/RBS characterization and biosensor
assays. For benchmarking studies,  BL21
(NEB, #C2530H) was used with different non-T7 expression systems and  BL21 (DE3) (NEB, #C2527H) with a genomic copy
of T7 RNAP was used for the T7 RNAP-based expression systems.  BW25113 was used as a host for the redesigned
ferulic acid-responsive biosensor.  strains
were grown Luria–Bertani
(LB) media for all experiments except for the promoter/RBS library
characterization where EZ rich (EZ rich defined medium kit, Teknova,
#M2105) was used. Unless noted, LB and EZ rich were supplemented with
ampicillin (100 μg/mL), kanamycin (50 μg/mL for plasmid
selection and 25 μg/mL for genome integration), or hygromycin
(100 μg/mL). Water was from a Milli-Q filtration system (Millipore).
Protocatechuic acid, isopropyl β--1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG), -arabinose, and -mannose stock solutions
were prepared in sterile water and a ferulic acid stock solution was
prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Chemicals and antibiotics were
purchased from Sigma, Fisher, or Formedium. DNA oligos and synthetic
genes were purchased from IDT and/or GeneArt. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf Supplementary Table S12 and S13 http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448/suppl_file/sb9b00448_si_001.pdf Primer sequences and a list of plasmids
can be found in , respectively. Restriction enzymes were purchased from NEB and digestions
were carried out according to standard protocols. Q5 polymerase (NEB,
#M0491S) was used to produce DNA fragments for cloning purposes and
Phire II (Thermo Fisher, #F126S) was used for genotyping of genomic
insertions. Isothermal assembly was performed
using NEBuilder (NEB, #E2621S). PCR-generated fragments were treated
with DpnI (NEB). All constructs were Sanger sequenced to verify sequence
identity. pSEVA131, containing the BBR1 origin and
ampicillin selection marker, was used for the PCA biosensor. pSEVA
261 containing the p15A origin and kanamycin selection marker was
used for the inverter system. pET28a (Novagen) containing the pBR322
origin and kanamycin selection marker was used for the ferulic acid
biosensor. Full details for the molecular cloning can be found in
the . Clones from the -lib, -lib
and RBS-lib libraries were selected and characterized
in two rounds. For the first round, 960 individual clones from each
library were picked from transformation plates and arrayed into square-welled
96 deep-well plate (DWP) fitted with breathable seals, containing
media (0.5 mL LB plus ampicillin) using a Hamilton Star robotic platform.
The plates were grown for 16 h at 30 °C at 950 rpm, 75% humidity
in a shaker-incubator (Infors HT). The next day, 2 μL of the
cultures were subcultured into 198 μL of EZ rich media plus
ampicillin in black, clear flat-bottomed 96-well microtiter plates
(MTP; Grenier) and were incubated for 3 h at 37 °C at 1000 rpm
in microtiter plate shaker (Stuart). Fluorescence and optical density
(OD λ = 700 nm) were measured in a ClarioStar microplate reader
(BMG) to obtain an end-point measurement. GFP fluorescence was measured
at λ/λ = 488/520 nm and mCherry
fluorescence was measured at λ/λ = 570/620 nm. OD was measured instead of OD to avoid bleed-through from mCherry fluorescence. Fluorescence was normalized to optical density and the
normalized value was used to select 22 clones from each library that
spanned a wide range of RFU/OD. For all RFU/OD measurements, the background
signal for autofluorescence was corrected for by subtracting the RFU/OD
value of the empty vector negative control. For the second round,
selected clones from each library were streaked onto ampicillin plates
and grown overnight. Individual colonies were arrayed in triplicate
in DWPs containing 0.5 mL LB plus ampicillin (with breathable seals)
and grown for 16 h at 30 °C at 950 rpm, 75% humidity in a shaker-incubator
(Infors HT). The overnight cultures were used to make “one-shot”
stock solutions for cryopreservation by transferring 75ul of culture
to a black microtiter plate containing 50 μL of 50% glycerol.
These plates were mixed briefly in a MTP shaker (1000 rpm, 1 min)
then stored at −80 °C. To determine promoter activity
the cryopreserved MTPs were thawed in a MTP shaker (37 °C, 1000
rpm) for 30 min then 5 μL of each well was inoculated into a
DWP containing 495 μL of LB plus ampicillin. The DWP plates
were grown for 16 h at 30 °C at 950 rpm, 75% humidity in a shaker
incubator. The overnight precultures were used to make the main culture
by transferring 4 μL of cells into a black, clear flat-bottomed
96-well MTP containing 196 μL of EZ rich plus ampicillin and
incubated in a MTP shaker at 1000 rpm at 37 °C. OD and FP (fluorescent protein) fluorescence was read at 2 and 3 h,
which was previously determined to the period of maximum growth rate
for  in our experimental conditions.
Promoter activity was calculated according to the literature (see ). Promoter
activity was transformed into a logarithmic dimensionless variable
according to the literature (see ). Genomic cassettes were inserted
into the chromosome of  DH5α using
lambda red recombineering. Selected PAB
variants were transferred to the pKIKOKM integration
vector, and then the integration cassette
was amplified with primers AB 39/40 and cleaned up with a Qiagen PCR
purification column.  DH5α was
transformed with the pSIM18 vector, grown to an OD of
∼0.3 and heat-shocked at 42 °C for 15 min to induce expression
of the λ Red recombinase proteins. The cells were washed 5 times
in ice-cold sterile water then electroporated with 300 ng of PCR product
and the transformants selected on LB plates supplemented with kanamycin
at 37 °C. Confirmation of cassette insertion at the correct locus
was confirmed by colony PCR with primers AB 34/61. To cure the strains
of pSIM18, clones were subcultured overnight on LB plus kanamycin
at 42 °C and restreaked onto LB plates containing kanamycin (growth)
or hygromycin (no growth) to confirm loss of pSIM18. DH5α
strains bearing the plasmid or chromosome-based PAB variants were
streaked on LB plus ampicillin or LB plus kanamycin plates, respectively.
Individual clones from each strain were used to make “one-shot”
stock solutions for cryopreservation as described above. For DoE trials
the cryopreserved MTPs were thawed in a MTP shaker (37 °C, 1000
rpm) for 30 min then 10 μL of each well was inoculated into
a DWP containing 190 μL of LB plus ampicillin (for plasmid-based
variants) or LB only (for chromosomally integrated variants). The
DWP plates were grown for 16 h at 30 °C at 950 rpm, 75% humidity
in a shaker incubator to make precultures, which were subsequently
used to make the main culture by transferring 5 μL of cells
into a DWP containing 445 μL of LB plus ampicillin. DWPs were
incubated in a MTP shaker at 1000 rpm at 37 °C for 2 h. The clones
were then induced by adding 50 μL of PCA (10 mM) for a final
concentration of 1 mM PCA and grown for another 3 h. The DWPs were
centrifuged at 2250 for 10 min to pellet the cells
and the spent medium was replaced with 500 μL PBS and mixed
by pipetting. The cells were pelleted and washed again, 50 μL
of cell suspension was transferred to a flat, clear-bottomed black
MTP containing 150 μL of PBS, and GFP fluorescence and OD were measured. Biosensor Titrations and Expression System
Benchmarking Strains containing inducible expression systems
were streaked onto
LB plates supplemented with ampicillin and individual clones from
each strain were used to inoculate 5 mL of LB plus ampicillin in a
50 mL conical tube, which was grown for 16 h at 37 °C at 180
rpm in a shaking incubator (New Brunswick I26). The overnight cultures
were diluted 1/100 into LB plus ampicillin in a DWP, incubated in
a MTP shaker (Stuart) at 1000 rpm at 37 °C for 2 h then induced
by adding the appropriate inducer and grown for a further 3 h. The
final inducer concentrations for the titration were as follows: 4000,
1000, 250, 62.5, 15.6, 3.9 μM, and no inducer. The FA Biosensor
titration was carried out in the same way, expect that concentrations
were 1000, 200, 40, 8, 1.6, 0.32 μM and no inducer. The cells
were pelleted, washed, and measured for OD and fluorescence
as described above. DH5α bearing the p131C–B10 biosensor and p261-lacI-pcaK
variants were plated onto solid LB medium containing ampicillin and
kanamycin (25 μg/mL and 12.5 μg/mL, respectively) and
1 mM PCA. Single isolated colonies were inoculated into 5 mL of LB
supplemented with the required antibiotics, in a 50 mL conical tube
and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h shaking at 180 rpm. Cells were
then diluted 100-fold in fresh LB media containing antibiotics and
transferred to a 96 well DWP then incubated at 37 °C in a MTP
shaker at 1000 rpm for 2 h. Following this outgrowth period the appropriate
concentration of inducer was added bringing the final culture volume
to 500 μL. Cells were incubated as before for a further 24 h.
An extended induction time was required as the two plasmid inverter
system and expression of the system components had significant deleterious
effect on the growth. Final concentrations of inducer were as follows:
1000, 200, 40, 8, 1.6, 0.32, 0.064, 0.0128, and 0 μM PCA. All data processing and
statistical analysis was carried out in JMP Pro 12 (SAS Institute
Inc.), including design of experiments, factor screening, and standard
least-squares regression. Response data were transformed to log10.
The DSD data table was constructed using the DoE definitive screening
function and factors were selected based on the Lenth’s ratio and Half-Normal plot analysis of the factor contrast
and Lenth’s pseudo standard error (PSE). Factor contrasts which
deviated from the half-normal distribution were deemed important for
the model and so were included in SLSR fitting. Factor significance
was assessed by analysis of simultaneous values,
allowing the assessment of factor importance in the model. Effect
heredity was maintained and so if a factor was not deemed significant
individually but was included in a significant interaction term with
another factor then both terms contained in this interaction were
included in model fitting. Simultaneous values
were generated using the PSE, which is derived from an estimation
of the residual standard error using inactive terms within the model.
From this PSE a 10 000 run Monte Carlo simulation was carried
out to allow estimation of the -value. Graphs were
generated in PRISM 7 (GraphPad Software) and fit using a Hill fit..