Synthetic biology has made great strides in engineering living
systems for desired purposes and in creating novel biological processes
with compositions and properties not found in nature. While the field is historically rooted in the development of methods
to better read, write, edit, and design DNA, synthetic biology has
since leveraged these tools to impact a wide variety of applications
which require understanding and harnessing cellular processes mediated
by post-translational modifications (PTMs), a task that
remains one of the key challenges of the postgenomic era. Protein
glycosylation, the attachment of complex sugar moieties (glycans)
to amino acid side chains, is among the most diverse, abundant, and
important PTMs, making it of particular interest to the academic and
industrial research communities. Glycosylation is present in all domains of life and over half of eukaryotic proteins, playing important roles in protein folding and
function. Secreted and
cell-surface proteins are glycosylated at particularly high rates,
making glycans important for cell–cell signaling, host–pathogen interactions, and immune
responses. In addition, 70% of approved or preclinical protein
therapeutics are glycosylated, having
profound effects on protein stability, immunogenicity, and activity. Biopharmaceutical
glycosylation patterns must be rigorously controlled during development
and production and can be intentionally engineered to produce desired
properties in protein therapeutics and vaccines. Taken together, these factors make it clear that fulfilling the
vision of synthetic biology to precisely control and construct novel
biological systems will require the design and understanding of protein
glycosylation. Drawn by new opportunities to understand fundamental
biology as
well as compelling applications in medicine and materials, researchers
have begun to use tools originally developed for metabolic engineering,
genetic editing, protein engineering, and chemical biology to manipulate
glycosylation. These lines of inquiry have recently coalesced to form
the field of synthetic glycobiology which, broadly defined,
seeks to apply the tools of synthetic biology to the engineering and
design of glycosylation systems. Because this field has advanced rapidly
over recent years and involves a unique set of biological parts and
methods compared to more traditional applications of synthetic biology,
a systematic review is warranted. Here, we review the exciting
area of synthetic glycobiology with
a focus on useful abstractions, tools, and methods regularly employed
by the synthetic biology community at large. Specifically, we outline
the functional parts required to manipulate protein glycosylation
and how they are organized within natural systems. We then describe
how these parts have been assembled to construct synthetic glycosylation
systems in mammalian, insect, plant, and bacterial cells, as well
as cell-free systems. Finally, we review select applications of synthetic
protein glycosylation systems and present outstanding opportunities
to use synthetic glycosylation systems to solve compelling problems
in medicine, materials, and beyond (). We note that glycobiology and therefore synthetic glycobiology
is a broad field, and there are important innovations in the areas
of glycolipids, glycosylated natural
products, glycomimetic systems, free oligosaccharides, and cell-surface
(glycocalyx) engineering that have been
recently reviewed elsewhere. However, this review focuses on protein
glycosylation because of its relevance to techniques (DNA assembly,
transcription/translation control, genetic editing, metabolic engineering, .) and applications (therapeutics, vaccines, diagnostics,
materials, .) that are often of interest to synthetic
biologists. As bioprocessing methods to control glycosylation within
their native hosts and methods for complete
chemical synthesis of glycans and glycoproteins were recently reviewed elsewhere, this work focuses instead on a
more detailed description of highly engineered biosynthetic systems
where synthetic biology tools are most readily applicable. Parts, systems, and applications of synthetic
glycobiology. Glycosylation
is mediated by five key parts: sequons, glycosyltransferases, glycosidases,
sugar donors, and lectins which accept, add, trim, supply, and bind
sugars, respectively. Synthetic glycobiology repurposes, recombines,
and engineers these parts to construct biosynthetic systems that produce
designer glycoproteins for compelling applications in therapeutics,
vaccines, diagnostics, and materials. The “Parts”
of Synthetic Glycobiology: An Engineer’s
Guide to Protein Glycosylation In order to design and build
a biological process for a desired
function, one must first understand the parts available for its construction.
Here, we briefly review the key mechanisms of protein glycosylation
found in nature as well as important characteristics for the construction
of synthetic glycosylation systems (). The reader may consult more exhaustive
reviews of protein glycosylation systems in bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes and how they compare for further
information. For the construction of synthetic pathways, it is useful
to abstract glycosylation systems into a set of five functional parts:
glycosyltransferase enzymes (GTs), sugar donors, sequons, glycosidases,
and lectins. GTs covalently attach glycans to target proteins at a
glycosylation site, which is found within a sequence of amino acids
known as a sequon. GTs use activated sugar donors as substrates which
are made up of saccharides linked to lipids or nucleotide-diphosphates
such as uracil (UDP-), guanine (GDP-), cytosine (CMP-), thymine (TDP-),
or adenine (ADP-). In the protein modification step, a polypeptide
glycosyltransferase (ppGT) transfers one or more saccharides from
a sugar donor to a sequon within a target protein. While a sequon
is the sequence of amino acids required for glycosylation to occur,
it is important to note that overall target protein structure and
folding can also influence modification efficiency. Following protein modification,
glycans can be further modified
by elaborating GTs and trimmed by glycosidases. There are two major
classes of glycosidases. Exoglycosidases remove sugars from the termini
of glycans while endoglycosidases hydrolyze glycosidic bonds within
glycan chains. Glycosidases have been employed and engineered for
glycoprotein analysis, remodeling, and even therapeutics. Once constructed, glycoproteins often interact with lectins which
specifically bind to certain glycan structural motifs. Although this
review focuses primarily on the synthesis of glycoproteins, knowledge
of lectin specificities has often been leveraged in the field of synthetic
glycobiology to design glycan-based selection schemes, develop new approaches to fight infectious and autoimmune disease, produce functional biomaterials, and to understand and
manipulate protein trafficking within the human body. Key resources for the identification of relevant enzymes, glycans,
and glycan-binding proteins include the Carbohydrate-active enzyme
(CAZY) database (exhaustive list of genetically identified GTs and
lectins), the GlyCosmos Portal (especially
the GlyTouCan glycan search and the Lectin Frontier database), and the GlycoGene Database (a curated list
of key classes of GTs). The five
functional parts outlined in  are assembled in a multitude of naturally
occurring glycosylation systems across the three domains of life.
These glycosylation pathways can generally be classified in terms
of the topology, chemical bond, and specificity of its polypeptide
modification step (). Two major glycosylation system topologies differ in the
type of ppGT which performs the critical polypeptide modification
step which controls the location and diversity of the installed glycan. The first topology is oligosaccharyltransferase (OST)-dependent
in which prebuilt glycans are transferred  from a lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO) onto a specifically targeted
sequon by an OST. The second topology is OST-independent in which
the glycans are built in a sequential fashion on a sequon within a
target protein. The most common protein
conjugation bonds are -linked (most often on Asn
residues but can also include Arg) and -linked (most
often on Ser or Thr residues but can also include Tyr, hydroxylysine,
and hydroxyproline). Enzymes that modify nitrogen within Arg side
chains are commonly referred to as -linked. Other
conjugation bonds include -linked (Cys residues)
and -linked (Trp residues). The level of specificity of ppGTs to both sugar donors
and protein
acceptor sequences (, sequons) is important in
determining the potential utility of a glycosylation system for engineering. Glycans conjugated to proteins have directionality,
defined from the reducing end sugar (attached to the amino acid side
chain) to the nonreducing end (termini). These sugars can be conjugated
in a variety of linkages between saccharides at the anomeric carbon
(α-linkage or β-linkage) and the carbons on each sugar
involved in those linkages (notated as, for example, β1–4
linkages or α2–3 linkages). Linkage differences can change
the physical and biological properties of glycans and can be important
in GT, glycosidase, and lectin specificities. PpGTs are particularly specific for the sugar at the reducing end
of a sugar donor. PpGTs also have specificity for the glycosylation
site or sequon.
The modification of a sequon by a given ppGT is highly dependent on
neighboring amino acids and/or its structural
context. In fact, some ppGTs are dedicated
to the modification of a single protein in their natural systems, while others are more general. PpGTs with more
relaxed specificities can be used to modify diverse target proteins
by introducing an engineered sequence of amino acids known as a glycosylation
tag (GlycTag), into the target protein sequence. GlycTags can refer to native
sequons that are engineered to optimize glycosylation efficiency or
sequons that are introduced in diverse nonnative target proteins to
enable glycosylation, similar to the addition of an affinity tag for
protein purification. This protein specificity factor highlights the
importance of the design and understanding of acceptor sequons to
the bottom-up construction of synthetic glycosylation pathways. Overall,
the classification of glycosylation systems by the topology, bond,
and specificity of their polypeptide modification step is useful for
synthetic biologists to design the site-specific attachment of diverse
glycans to proteins, a key advantage of biosynthetic glycoprotein
systems over purely chemical methods. Here we describe the mechanisms of protein glycosylation systems
found in various domains of life with the goal of defining the parts
that they supply to engineers for the construction of synthetic systems. Selected naturally occurring
glycosylation systems and the parts
they supply for synthetic glycobiology. The parts of sequons, sugar
donors, glycosyltransferases, glycosidases, and lectins are arranged
as they interact in OST-dependent and OST-independent glycosylation
systems in eukaryotes or bacteria. (a) OST-dependent glycosylation
systems in eukaryotes transfer sugars  from
lipid-linked oligosaccharides (LLOs) to asparagine (-linked) residues within proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. These
sugars are then trimmed down by glycosidases and elaborated by other
GTs in the Golgi. (b) OST-dependent glycosylation systems in bacteria
work similarly, but -linked OSTs (-OSTs) transfer sugars to asparagine as well as -linked OSTs (-OSTs) transfer sugars to serine
and threonine (-linked) residues in the periplasm  single-subunit OSTs. (c) Eukaryotic OST-independent
glycosylation systems of interest for glycoengineering include mucin-type
glycosylation (-linked GalNAc) and glycosaminoglycan
(GAG) glycosylation (-linked xylose) in the Golgi
as well as -linked GlcNAc glycosylation in the cytoplasm.
(d) Bacterial OST-independent glycosylation systems of interest for
glycoengineering primarily glycosylate autotransporter/adhesion proteins
in the cytoplasm and are initiated by -glycosyltransferases
(-linked Glc), the GtfA/B complex (-linked GlcNAc), or BAHT (-linked Heptose). Bacterial
effector toxins including SetA (O-linked Glc), NleB (arginine or -linked GlcNAc), and EarP (-linked Rhamnose)
that are secreted into eukaryotic host cells are also of interest.
Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells are surrounded by a glycocalyx
layer and use lectins to selectively bind to glycans in their environment.
(e) Symbol key for parts of synthetic glycobiology. The Consortium
for Functional Glycomics symbol nomenclature is used for sugar monomers.
Polypeptide GTs are color-coded to correspond to the sugars that they
conjugate to proteins. Summary of Protein Glycosylation Systems
Discussed in This Review, with a Focus on Relevant Information for
Glycoengineering sugar substrate requirements (reducing end) optimized minimal amino acid recognition motif ManGlcNAc with organism dependent mannose
and glucose elaboration Acetamido group at the C2/galactose (Gal) Acetamido group at
the C2/galactose (Gal) /glucose (Glc) within isotype specific sequence X-X-X-X--G/A, X-X = acidic residues Glucose (Glc) or galactose (Gal) within a 13 aa β-helix structural motif 25 aa tag within erine-rich repeat proteins (SRRP) W motif
within host death domain-containing proteins
and GAPDH within translation
elongation
factor P (EF-P) Here, we categorize protein glycosylation
systems by the topology, chemical bond, and specificity of their polypeptide
modification step. The specificity of the polypeptide glycosyltransferase
(ppGT) is described by its reducing end sugar substrate requirements
and its optimized minimal amino acid recognition motif (if known).
The domains of life in which each ppGT naturally occurs is also listed.
Enzymes that modify nitrogen within Arg side chains are commonly referred
to as -linked (*). -linked
OST-dependent glycosylation is the most well-studied type of glycosylation
in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Notably,
most eukaryotic OSTs are composed of multiple subunits with the STT3
integral membrane protein forming the catalytic core. However, single-subunit
OSTs have been discovered in some parasites such as (,) and () which contain multiple STT3-like proteins with
distinct specificities. Similarly, bacterial OSTs, such as  PglB (PglB), are
generally composed of a single subunit which is homologous to the
STT3 catalytic domain of eukaryotic OSTs. There is a strong topological resemblance between bacterial and
eukaryotic OST-dependent glycosylation as they both involve the cytoplasmic
construction of an LLO that is flipped into an oxidative compartment
(the periplasm in bacteria and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in eukaryotes)
before being transferred to an acceptor sequon. The colocalization of both the LLO and the OST in the membrane
means that polypeptide modification is only dependent on 2D diffusion
and enables cotranslational modification in eukaryotic systems. The
fact that bacterial OSTs are not as closely coupled to the translocon
as eukaryotic OST-complexes, makes bacterial
OST-dependent glycosylation more dependent on structural context and
generally requires the placement of glycosylation sites in flexible
regions of the protein. That said, recent
studies suggest that the efficiency of glycosylation can be impacted
by the secretory pathway (Sec or Tat) used to secrete the target protein, indicating that glycosylation can also occur before complete folding
in bacterial systems. Glycans transferred by OSTs are often complex,
as they are first built up by multiple GTs on a lipid before transfer
to a protein. Therefore, the  transfer mechanism
employed by OSTs have made OST-dependent glycosylation systems promising
engineering methods to transfer large glycans structures. In
eukaryotes, GTs use nucleotide-activated forms of -acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and mannose (Man) sugar donors to assemble
a ManGlcNAc LLO that is linked to a dolichol
pyrophosphate lipid on the cytoplasmic side of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) membrane (). This LLO is then flipped into the ER lumen by a flippase enzyme,
elaborated by GTs using dolichol-phosphate-linked Man and glucose
(Glc) sugar donors, and then transferred to a nascent polypeptide
chain by the OST. Except in a few rare
cases, the sequon for -linked OSTs in eukaryotes is N-X-S/T where N is the glycosylated
asparagine and X is any amino acid except proline. The glycan initially transferred by the OST from the LLO may be
as complex as GlcManGlcNAc, but
it is then processed in the ER and Golgi by glycosidases and GTs to
create a myriad of structures that vary across protein identity, glycosylation
sites on the same protein, cell type, disease state, and time such that only a -linked ManGlcNAc core structure is conserved among all -linked
eukaryotic glycans. In humans, the ManGlcNAc core is generally elaborated by GTs utilizing
nucleotide-activated sugar donors with GlcNAc, galactose (Gal), fucose
(Fuc), and sialic acid (Sia) to form many branched, complex glycans
resembling the biantennary, -linked glycan in . This dynamic process of glycan trimming and elaboration
also serves as a protein proofreading system that directs misfolded
proteins to a ER-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway. Once thought to exist only in eukaryotes,
OST-dependent, general
glycosylation pathways are now known to be abundant and far more diverse
in bacteria and archaea. For example, bacteria possess
both - and -linked OSTs. Generally,
bacterial glycans are assembled in the cytoplasm by GTs and then flipped
into the periplasm before being transferred in their final form by
the OST to an acceptor protein. The best characterized and most commonly
engineered prokaryotic glycosylation system is from the bacterium (,,) in which an -linked OST, called PglB, installs an -linked heptasaccharide (). The glycosylation
system in  and many other bacteria
are associated with virulence and host–pathogen interactions. There are three key differences between bacterial
and eukaryotic OST-dependent glycosylation systems that are important
to keep in mind for engineering strategies. First, bacterial LLOs
are generally assembled on undecaprenyl (rather than dolichol) pyrophosphate
lipids and the glycan linked to this LLO is generally not extensively
trimmed and elaborated once leaving the cytoplasm. Second, the simplicity
of single-subunit bacterial OSTs make them easier to purify and recapitulate
outside of natural systems and facilitates post-translational modification
of folded proteins. Finally, bacterial
OSTs possess unique specificities for acceptor sequons and LLOs compared
to eukaryotic OSTs. Acceptor sequons for bacterial -linked OSTs do resemble the eukaryotic N-X-S/T motif;
however, some bacterial OSTs additionally require a negatively charged
residue (D/E) at the X position relative to the
glycosylated asparagine. For example, an optimized acceptor sequence, D-Q-N-A-T, has been
identified for PglB and has been implemented as a GlycTag to direct glycosylation to
flexible regions of proteins of interest. In terms of LLO specificity, bacterial -linked
OSTs are known to transfer a broader array of glycan structures than
their eukaryotic counterparts, but they do still possess unique LLO
specificities that limit the transfer of some glycans. For example,
naturally occurring -linked OSTs generally require
acetylation at the C2 position of the reducing sugar. Compared to -linked OSTs, -linked
OSTs generally possess less stringent specificities for glycans and
more stringent specificities for peptide acceptors. Three main classes
of bacterial -linked OSTs with clear applicability
to synthetic glycobiology have been described: PilO, PglL, and PglS
which were first identified in , , and , respectively. Each of these classes
are known to glycosylate pilin proteins within their native hosts.
The acceptor sequences of the PilO from  and the PglL from  have been
reduced to GlycTags of a C-terminal TAWKPNYAPANAPKS sequence and the so-called minimal optimal -linked recognition (MOOR) motif WPAAASAP, respectively. PglS glycosylation has only been demonstrated to target
its native pilin-like ComP. While these
complex GlycTag sequence and structure requirements make it more difficult
to direct glycosylation by -linked OSTs onto recombinant
proteins, these enzymes still hold great promise for engineering due
to their promiscuity in the sugars that they can attach to proteins. For example, PglS is the only OST known to
be able to transfer LLOs with glucose at the reducing end and PglL has been shown to transfer a single ′-diacetylbacillosamine from a nucleotide-activated
sugar. While archaea possess both - and -linked protein glycosylation systems,
most research has been dedicated
to the -linked OST-dependent glycosylation systems
in these organisms. Interestingly, archaeal -linked
OST-dependent systems use both dolichol-phosphate and dolichol-pyrophosphate
LLOs, attach a greater variety of sugars than bacteria and eukaryotes,
and are even known to attach multiple distinct -glycans
to defined positions onto a single protein. While the diversity of tools offered by archaeal glycosylation systems
holds great theoretical potential for biosynthesis, the difficulties
associated with culturing and manipulating these organisms has prevented
the engineering of those systems until very recently. Several previous works provide systematic descriptions of archaeal
glycosylation systems and the full diversity of known prokaryotic protein glycosylation
systems. Much progress has been
made in the last two decades in elucidating the diversity, importance,
and utility of OST-independent glycosylation systems in both eukaryotes
and bacteria (). For synthetic glycobiology, OST-independent pathways provide three
key advantages that make them complementary to OST-dependent systems. First, most OST-independent systems do not require
lipid-associated GTs or sugar donors, making them easier to synthesize
and manipulate outside of their native hosts. Second, OST-independent
systems generally do not require transporting target proteins or sugar
donors across membranes, enabling the synthesis of glycoproteins in
the cytoplasm of . Third, OST-independent systems install sugars in a stepwise
fashion by sequentially transferring monosaccharides from sugar donors,
allowing for greater modularity and freedom of design that is unconstrained
by OST specificities for LLOs. Compared with OST-dependent pathways,
OST-independent pathways are more diverse in their topologies, sugar
constituents, and possible amino acid linkages (including Asn, Arg,
Thr, Ser, Tyr, hydroxylysine, hydroxyproline, Trp, and Cys). Several
systematic reviews and useful visualizations of the diversity of glycosylation systems are available. Glycosylation
systems of greatest interest to synthetic glycobiology are discussed
below, including: -GalNAc (mucin-type) glycosylation, -GlcNAc glycosylation, glycosaminoglycan (GAG) biosynthesis,
cytoplasmic bacterial glycosylation systems (such as -glycosyltransferases or NGTs), and bacterial effector toxin GTs
(). The
most characterized OST-independent pathway is the -GalNAc glycosylation system found in higher eukaryotes that modifies
Ser and Thr residues of proteins. In
humans, a family of 20 polypeptide -acetylgalactosaminyltransferases
(GalNAcTs) located in the ER and Golgi utilize nucleotide-activated
sugar donors to glycosylate Ser and Thr residues on specific protein
substrates, including the extensively modified mucin family of glycoproteins. A combination of quantitative glycoproteomics and genetic knockouts as well as  characterization methods have revealed that these GalNAcTs
possess unique, but partially overlapping polypeptide acceptor specificities
that depend on primary amino acid sequence, presence of nearby glycans,
colocalization in the Golgi, and protein structure. These unique specificities
provide cells with the ability to dynamically control the glycoproteome and present synthetic glycobiologists with a diverse toolkit to
construct glycoproteins. After initiation by GalNAcTs, -GalNAc residues are often sequentially elaborated to a wide variety
of structures containing Gal, Sia, GalNac, Fuc, and GlcNAc that play critical roles in human biology and can affect protein
stability, proteolytic processing, immunogenicity, and trafficking. The synthesis of -linked glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs)
also takes place within the ER and Golgi of higher eukaryotes. GAGs
are long, linear polysaccharides that form the glycan moieties of
proteoglycans found on cell surfaces or secreted into the extracellular
matrix. GAGs modulate cell-signaling, tissue growth, cytokines, and
chemokines, but much of the interest in GAGs for engineering has been
due to the anticoagulant properties of heparin sulfate (a GAG structure)
which binds to and activates antithrombin. GAG synthesis is initiated by one of up to two -xylosyltransferases (-XylTs) whose specificities
are not fully understood, but are known to prefer serine residues
immediately flanked by glycines with nearby acidic residues in the
X to X positions. This xylose (Xyl) residue is then sequentially
elaborated by three GTs producing a tetrasaccharide linker of the
form glucuronic acid (GlcA)-β1,3-Gal-β1,3-Gal-β1,4-Xyl-β1-O-Ser
where the proximal Gal residue must be phosphorylated by a glycan-modifying
enzyme to permit extension. This linker
can then be further extended to form heparan sulfate, chrondroitin
sulfate, or dermatan sulfate, which are composed of sulfated disaccharide
repeat units of (GlcNAc-α1,4-GlcA-β1,4-), (GalNAc-β1,4-GlcA-β1,3-),
and (GalNAc-β1,4-IdoA-β1,3-), respectively, where IdoA is iduronic acid. There are two
other GAG structures synthesized in vertebrates: keratan sulfate (which
can be linked to oligosaccharide -linked glycans, -GalNAc-type glycans, and single -Man
residues) and hyaluronic acid (which is not covalently attached to
proteins). Glycosylation machinery producing
GAG or GAG-like polymer backbones has also been discovered in bacteria,
providing promising enzymes for GAG synthesis in microbes, particularly
when exact sulfation patterns are not required. Eukaryotes also possess a soluble -linked -acetylglucosamine transferase (OGT) which
installs GlcNAc
moieties onto Ser and Thr residues of diverse target proteins, playing
important roles in stress response and disease states including cancer,
diabetes, and neurodegeneration. The three splice variants of OGT in humans, sOGT, ncOGT, and mOGT,
are found in the cytoplasm, nucleus, and mitochondria, respectively. The OGT glycosylation system is somewhat unique
because its polypeptide modification step is regularly reversed by
the -GlcNAcase (OGA) enzyme which removes -GlcNAc residues installed by OGT. The dynamic interplay between OGT and OGA as well as protein
kinases and phosphatases for occupation of Ser and Thr residues allows
cells to modulate complex signaling cascades. Many structural, proteomic, and biochemical studies have
endeavored to characterize the peptide acceptor specificity of OGT,
revealing a complex set of rules and interactions that determine -GlcNAc modification. An optimal recognition motif
of PPVSR has been identified; however,
the complexity of -GlcNAc recognition means that
the modification of a given sequence still requires empirical measurement
or at least the application of computational techniques, reviewed
here. The promiscuity of OGT for azido-sugars
or the derivatization of -GlcNAc sugars with azido-sugars
has been exploited to learn much about the functions of these systems
in their native cellular contexts, reviewed here. In addition to its -GlcNAc transferase
activity, OGT is also known to catalyze the addition of -linked glucose and -linked GlcNAc as well as the proteolytic
cleavage of the human protein HCF-1. Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae Recently, several - and -linked
glycosylation systems that function in the bacterial cytoplasm have
been discovered. These systems often glycosylate extracellular adhesion
and autotransporter proteins that facilitate adherence of pathogenic
bacteria to human cells.-glycosyltransferases
(NGTs) are one such class of enzymes that have been recently characterized and have elicited great interest from the glycoengineering community
for their ability to initiate -linked glycosylation
in the bacterial cytoplasm when heterologously expressed in . NGTs bear structural homology to eukaryotic OGTs, but were first
identified as part of an extracellular adhesion operon in , founding
a new functional class of GTs that install monosaccharides onto asparagine
residues in the cytoplasm using UDP-Glc or UDP-Gal as soluble sugar
donors. In some species, the single
glucose residues installed by NGTs are extended into a dextran polymer
by a glucose polymerase (α 1,6 GlcT). Despite their lack of homology to OSTs, NGTs share the same general
acceptor motif, N-X-S/T. Rigorous characterization
of the acceptor specificity of NGTs using glycoproteomics and  as well as cell-free methods has illuminated detailed rules for the prediction
and design of sequons for various NGTs. So far, the NGT from  (ApNGT) has been the most
extensively characterized and most often used for glycoengineering
efforts, discussed below. Other
OST-independent glycosylation systems that also act on adhesions
and autotransporters but have little homology to NGTs, continue to
emerge and may be of interest for future applications in synthetic
glycobiology. For example, the -linked autotransporter
heptosyltransferase (BAHT) GTs which glycosylate autotransporter proteins
with heptose residues in Gram-negative bacteria have been shown to
target a 13 amino acid structural motif that could be used to direct
modification for glycoconjugate vaccines. Another -linked cytoplasmic
glycosylation system initiated by a dimeric GT called GtfA-GtfB modifies
serine-rich repeat (SRRP) adhesion proteins with α-linked GlcNAc
in  and  bacteria, has been shown to modify a 25 amino-acid tag and could
provide methods to display various glycans on bacterial surfaces. Finally, effector GT toxins
that are secreted into host cells by
bacteria to facilitate infection and pathogenesis may provide GTs
of interest for synthetic systems. For example, -linked effector glucosyltransferases
from  and SetA from  have recently been characterized and used to modify recombinant
proteins using nine amino acid (YAPTVFDAY) and seven amino acid (GKTTLTA) GlycTag
sequences, respectively. Other arginine ()-linked
effector -acteylglucosaminyltransferases, SseK in  or NleB in  and , modify eukaryotic proteins involved
in metabolism and cell signaling. However,
these -linked effector GTs as well as the -linked EarP glycosyltransferase that modulates polyproline
synthesis by modification of EF-P in , , and () appear to be dedicated to the modification
of a single or a few substrates and are of greater interest for antibiotic
intervention than use in synthetic protein
glycosylation systems. Synthetic Glycosylation Systems In this section, we describe key paradigms and examples of how
the parts of synthetic glycobiology outlined above have been assembled,
repurposed, and engineered to produce glycoproteins. Because the host
organisms in which these glycosylation pathways are constructed strongly
affect their challenges, advantages, and applications, we describe
examples of synthetic glycosylation pathways developed in mammalian,
insect, plant, yeast, and bacterial cells, cell-free, and chemoenzymatic
backgrounds. This order represents a spectrum from the remodeling
of natural systems that already function similarly to human glycosylation
pathways where genes must generally be knocked out to obtain structures
generally desired for therapeutics (eukaryotic systems shown in ) to the bottom-up
construction of highly engineered synthetic glycosylation systems
where many new parts must be assembled (bacterial, cell-free, and
chemoenzymatic systems shown in ). Synthetic glycosylation systems constructed by remodeling
natural
systems. Key examples of synthetic glycosylation systems generated
by remodeling naturally occurring glycosylation pathways in mammalian,
insect, plant, and yeast cells. (a) Mammalian glycosylation systems
are often remodeled to produce protein therapeutics. Much effort has
been directed toward knocking out or supplementing GTs and enzymes
involved in sugar donor metabolism to tune glycosylation structures
and produce more homogeneous structures. More dramatically, a highly simplified trisaccharide glycan known
as GlycoDelete has been generated using these methods. Remodeling mammalian pathways have also generated
libraries of cells displaying various glycosylation structures. (b) Insect cell and insect cell-based baculovirus glycosylation
systems have been remodeled to obtain full-length bianntenary N-linked
glycans without α1,3 fucose residues. (c) Remodeled plant glycosylation systems have reduced arabinosylation
of prolines and produced human -GalNAc glycans and
full-length bianntenary -linked glycans. (d) Extensive remodeling of yeast glycosylation
pathways have worked to eliminate oligo-mannose structures from - and -linked glycans and introduce human
terminally sialylated, full-length human -linked
and -linked glycans. Synthetic glycosylation systems constructed from the bottom-up.
Key examples of synthetic glycosylation systems constructed from the
bottom-up in bacterial cells, cell-free, and chemoenzymatic backgrounds.
(a) The introduction of eukaryotic glycosylation machinery with the
ppGTs PglB, human GalNAcT2, and human OGT into  bacteria have enabled the synthesis of glycoproteins
modified with the eukaryotic trimannose core, the human -linked Core 1 structure, and -GlcNAc, respectively. The coexpression of -linked and -linked OSTs with bacterial -antigen pathways in  have
enabled the production of bacterial glycoconjugate vaccines. The introduction of synthetic glycosylation
pathways with NGTs as ppGTs results in the synthesis of diverse, minimal
glycan motifs with applications in vaccines and therapeutics. (b) The recapitulation and construction
of glycosylation systems in cell-free platforms has enabled the  expression of OSTs in nanodiscs, the rigorous characterization of ppGT specificities, the rapid discovery of new synthetic glycosylation pathways, and the on-demand production of glycosylated
therapeutics and vaccines by cell-free glycoprotein synthesis (CFGpS). (c) Chemoenzymatic methods have been developed to install full-length
human glycans. Primary strategies include: (i) endoglycosidase-mediated
transglycosylation for remodeling glycans
produced in yeast or CHO cells; (ii) enzymatic “tag and modify”
approaches which use engineered bacteria or purified enzymes to install -linked GlcNAc,-linked GlcNAc from an exoglycosidase-treated  heptasaccharide,-linked Glc installed by NGT, or an -linked GlcNAc installed by NGT and acetyltransferase GlmA which can then be elaborated to full-length -linked glycans using transglycosylation; (iii) chemical
“tag and modify” methods that directly modify cysteine
or noncanonical amino acids within proteins to install glycan handles
that can be further elaborated by transglycosylation; and (iv) total chemical synthesis approaches that use solid phase-peptide
synthesis to directly incorporate glycosylated amino acids into peptides
which can then be linked together using native chemical ligation approaches. Synthetic
Glycosylation Systems in Mammalian Cells Despite the many
efforts to characterize and harness microbial protein
glycosylation systems during the last two decades, the majority of
glycobiology and glycoengineering efforts still focus on mammalian
systems. Nearly all glycoprotein therapeutics are currently produced
at the industrial scale in Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells, due in large part to the similarity between
CHO glycosylation structures and those in the human body. The importance of the glycosylation structure located at Asn297
on the constant region of human immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies
for antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), protein
trafficking, and circulation time, make the -linked glycosylation systems in mammalian cells the most
extensively studied and engineered protein glycosylation systems.
For decades, glycosylation patterns in CHO cells have been closely
monitored and controlled during development and production of protein
therapeutics through the use of specific culture conditions and proprietary
cell lines. The first methods for genetically
controlled glycosylation in CHO cells were based on lectin screens
that identified random mutants of cultured mammalian cells. However, the advent of improved gene editing
strategies and increased knowledge of glycosylation pathways have
substantially increased the ability to genetically define glycosylation
structures in mammalian cells by the introduction of new glycosylation
sites as well as the knock-in and knockout
of specific glycosylation related genes such as GTs, metabolic enzymes,
and glycosidases. A key aim for genetic
glycoengineering of mammalian cell lines has been to produce more
homogeneous glycosylation patterns. Proteins derived from natural
systems and nonengineered cell lines are generally composed of a heterogeneous
mixture of glycosylation structures. This heterogeneity complicates
drug approvals and the optimization of glycosylation structures for
desired purposes. Three exemplary engineering
studies have recently addressed this problem by engineering CHO cells
to produce more homogeneous glycans. The first study knocked out MGAT1,
which adds a β1–2 linked GlcNAc to the α1–3
arm of the trimannose core, and introduced an endoglycosidase (EndoT)
to truncate multiantennary human glycans to a single GlcNAc residue
which can then be elaborated to a much more homogeneous Siaα2–3-Galβ1–4-GlcNAc
trisaccharide (called GlycoDelete). While
this structure cannot fully recapitulate the ADCC binding of full-length
human glycans, it does promise to simplify approval of antigen-neutralizing
antibodies. Another pair of studies have used
large zinc-finger nucleases and CRISPR-Cas9 genetic editing libraries
to strategically introduce GT knockouts and knock-ins to achieve more
homogeneous, full-length, human-like glycosylation structures in CHO
cells for applications in IgGs and enzyme replacement therapies. While the engineering of -linked glycoproteins
has received the most attention in mammalian systems, platforms have
been developed to produce and display -linked glycoproteins
using mammalian cells. There is gathering evidence that -GalNAc glycosylation structures can be important for glycoprotein
therapeutic efficacy. However, the engineering of -GalNAc pathways in mammalian cells thus far has been primarily limited
to the development of research tools to study natural glycosylation
pathways. Another area of research has
involved the display of -linked,-GalNAc, and GAG pathways on the surface of mammalian
cells. These cells can then be used to study the function of glycosylation
biosynthesis genes and to characterize the biological function and
properties of certain glycosylation structures. Now that these research
tools and the design rules they have generated are established, it
is expected that future glycoengineering efforts will involve greater
engineering of -linked glycoproteins. Despite
advances in the engineering of mammalian glycosylation
systems, limitations remain in the variety of glycosylation structures
that can be generated in these systems (due to the limited set of
nucleotide sugars and the inability to knockout some essential glycosylation
pathways while maintaining cell viability), the ability to obtain
homogeneous products, and the high cost and development time associated
with mammalian cell culture. These limitations have led to the exploration of alternative organisms
and the construction of synthetic glycosylation pathways, described
below. Synthetic Glycosylation Systems in Insect Cells Drosophila
melanogaster, Trichoplusia ni Insect
cells lines (S2, High Five, and Sf9 derived from , and , respectively), as well as insect-based baculovirus expression vector
systems (BEVSs), have long been of interest for the production of
glycoproteins as they have the potential to offer more flexibility
in glycosylation system design and lower costs than mammalian cells. Though the vast majority of biologics are made
in CHO cells, two vaccines protective against cervical cancer and
influenza, as well as an adenovirus gene therapy treating familial
lipoprotein lipase deficiency produced in insect cells have been already
approved for clinical use. Thus, it
is possible that the glycoengineering of insect cells could unlock
the production of traditional protein therapeutics in this desirable
expression host. While insect cells do contain sufficient enzymatic
machinery to produce full-length sialylated -glycans,
the reliable production of human-like glycoproteins generally requires
several glycoengineering strategies (reviewed here) including the knockout of the β-hexosaminidase FDL; inhibition
of endogenous α1–3 fucosylation machinery; and addition of machinery to install GlcNAc, Gal, and sialic
acids onto the -linked
ManGlcNAc core. -linked
glycosylation has not yet been extensively engineered in insect cells;
however, insect cells do contain the endogenous machinery to make
human-like -GalNAc glycans. While BEV systems obtain high-yields and enable faster
production and development timelines, they present other challenges
including genetic instability as well as the additional process complexity
and contamination risk associated with using a live virus. Improvements in genetic engineering methods
may enable further customization of stable insect cell lines and expedite
glycoengineering efforts, thereby increasing the reliability and adoption
of insect-cell based systems for glycoprotein production. Synthetic Glycosylation Systems in Plants Plants may
offer a promising low-cost glycoprotein manufacturing host that is
more compatible with distributed manufacturing than traditional fermentation-based
production methods. Plants can generally
produce correctly folded human proteins and contain similar glycosylation
systems to those found in mammalian cells. Despite containing nonhuman
glycan modifications, an approved enzyme replacement therapy, glucocerebrosiase
(taliglucerase alfa), is currently produced in carrots. However, it is likely that the wide adoption
of plant-based glycoprotein therapeutic production will require glycoengineering
plant cells to humanize their glycosylation patterns. Notably, the analogous glycosylation pathways
in plants are considerably simplified compared to mammals. There is
no -GalNAc glycosylation in plants and -glycans generally terminate with -linked ManGlcNAc that may be modified with bianntenary GlcNAc
residues. These simplified pathways
and the apparent tolerance of plants for heterologous glycosylation
pathways offer excellent opportunities for  construction of desired glycosylation systems with a freedom of
design and homogeneity that may be more difficult to achieve in mammalian
systems. Thus far, glycoprotein engineering
in plants (reviewed thoroughly here) has focused
on (i) ensuring homogeneous expression of -linked
GlcNAcylated trimannose by removal of β-hexosaminidases; (ii) the removal of nonhuman sugar linkages
including β1–2 Xylose, α1–3 Fucose, arabinosylated hydroxyproline, and Lewis A structures; and (iii) the addition of metabolic machinery and human
GTs to obtain human-like, sialylated - and -glycans. Similarly to the GlycoDelete strategy in mammalian cells, plants
were also recently engineered to generate a minimal trisaccharide. The end result of these works is the ability
to produce glycoprotein therapeutics in a number of model plant and
plant cell systems (such as , , and ) with highly similar glycosylation to mammalian systems. Key remaining challenges lie in the optimization
of homogeneity and production levels without affecting plant fitness
and control of potentially immunogenic nonhuman hydroxylproline modifications. Synthetic Glycosylation Systems in Yeast Due to its
low fermentation costs, fast doubling time, ability to secrete products
at high titers, and genetic tractability, yeast strains are in widespread
use in industrial biotechnology to produce small molecules as well
as approved protein therapeutics, including insulin and glucagon.
There have been many efforts to expand yeast production methods (usually
in the strains  and ) to glycoprotein therapeutics in academia and
industry. While early steps in the -glycosylation
pathways of yeast and mammalian cells are topologically similar, yeast
lack much of the machinery to trim down and elaborate the mannose
glycans transferred by the OST that is required to arrive at human-like
bianntenary glycans terminated in sialic acid (see ). Furthermore, essential -linked glycosylation pathways
in yeast and mammalian cells are very different, constructing mannose
chains rather than mucin-type -GalNAc glycans. As in insect and plant-based systems, yeast glycoengineering efforts
(reviewed here) have focused on the removal
of endogenous machinery producing potentially immunogenic glycosylation
structures and knocking in heterologous glycosylation enzymes to construct
human-like glycan motifs. Specifically, the hypermannosylation of -glycans can be removed by the knockout of mannosyltransferases and -mannosylation can be
partially reduced (but not fully eliminated) by knockout of PMT genes
and addition of small molecular inhibitors. A combinatorial approach was used by Gerngross and colleagues to
knock in mannosidases as well as human galactosyltransferases and
sialic acid installation machinery in order to create “humanized”
yeast that can, in some cases, produce homogeneous, sialic acid-capped,
human-like -glycans on protein therapeutics. Human-like -GalNAc pathways have also been introduced
into yeast. Interestingly, the introduction
of the STT3D OST from  into yeast
successfully increased -glycan occupancy, likely
by augmenting the endogenous yeast OST activity and specificity. While yeast-based glycoprotein production systems
have continued to receive significant investment and are nearing commercialization,
some concerns remain regarding the presence of -mannosylation
structures that cannot be eliminated while maintaining cell viability,
and FDA approval of molecules produced in glycoengineered yeast platforms
has not yet occurred. Synthetic Glycosylation
Systems in Bacteria Since the
functional recapitulation of the -glycosylation system in , the field of bacterial glycoengineering has
grown rapidly. Laboratory  strains lack native glycosylation machinery, providing a blank canvas for the modular construction and
control of glycosylation pathways. This bypasses the heterogeneity
and design limitations imposed by the endogenous and often essential
glycosylation pathways of eukaryotic expression systems for the production
of novel and homogeneous glycoforms. As bacterial
glycoengineering continues to advance, it is now possible to imagine
developing  as a low-cost, high-titer,
and fast-growing expression host to produce glycoprotein therapeutics, motivating the development of new synthetic glycosylation systems
and biosynthetic parts for the construction of therapeutically relevant
glycans in bacteria. Most bacterial
glycoengineering efforts so far have focused on the use of the bacterial
OSTs to transfer glycans in living  by
hijacking its lipopolysaccharide (LPS) synthesis system ().  and many other bacteria naturally synthesize
LPS by building diverse polysaccharide structures on LLOs within the
cytoplasm which are then flipped into the periplasm by the flippase
Wzx. The sugar structures on these LLOs
can then be polymerized by the enzyme Wzy to form a larger undecaprenyl-linked -antigen. This -antigen is then transferred
onto a lipid A carrier by the enzyme WaaL before being displayed on
the outer membrane. This process can
be engineered in laboratory strains of  by heterologously expressing an LLO biosynthesis pathway and a bacterial
OST. This OST will transfer glycans from these LLOs onto target proteins
bearing GlycTag acceptor sequences. This
process can be optimized by knocking out WaaL in the host strain so that LLOs accumulate on the periplasmic
membrane. This strategy for constructing synthetic OST-dependent
glycosylation
systems has proven to be a powerful technology, enabling the site-specific
installment of diverse glycans onto diverse heterologous proteins
both  and . By overexpressing different naturally occurring
or synthetic bacterial -antigen biosynthesis gene
clusters, a wide variety of glycans can be installed using this method.
For example, a single study demonstrated the transfer of nine unique
glycans by the bacterial -linked OST PglL. Due to the inherent compatibility of bacterial -antigen pathways with this system and the somewhat relaxed
sugar specificity of bacterial OSTs, most applications of OST-dependent
bacterial glycosylation systems have sought to synthesize vaccines
against pathogenic bacteria, with vaccines against  and  in clinical trials. The discovery and engineering of -linked OST variants with greater promiscuity for acceptor sequons (not requiring a negatively charged
residue at the X position) or LLO donors (not requiring an acetyl group at the C2 position
of the reducing sugar) has expanded the set of glycoproteins that
can be generated using this strategy. In pioneering work, the eukaryotic
core ManGlcNAc glycan has also been successfully
transferred by overexpressing part of the yeast LLO biosynthesis pathway, opening the door to the production of glycoproteins
with human-like glycosylation. Unfortunately, even after optimization, current bacterial -linked
OSTs still exhibit low turnover rates with LLOs containing the GlcNAcβ1,4GlcNAc
chitobiose core (found in all eukaryotic -linked
glycans) at the reducing end. Future
protein engineering and phylogenetic screening efforts are expected
to reveal new -linked OSTs that can enable the more
efficient synthesis of eukaryotic glycoproteins using bacterial systems. OST-independent glycosylation systems such as NGTs, OGTs, and GalNAcTs
have been far less explored for bacterial glycoengineering than OST-dependent
systems. As previously described, the stepwise and lipid-independent
nature of these systems may provide complementary technologies to
OST-dependent techniques. NGTs are particularly
promising glycoengineering tools because they are the only known cytoplasmic
enzyme class capable of installing glycans onto asparagine residues
at eukaryotic-like N-X-S/T sequons. For example, ApNGT
has been functionally expressed in  where
it was found to glycosylate several autotransporter proteins, some
native  proteins, and recombinant human
erythropoietin (EPO). Other studies
have developed short, optimized GlycTag sequences for NGT and have shown that the modification of a target
protein with these GlycTags (such as GGNWTT) can successfully direct
efficient NGT glycosylation of diverse recombinant proteins  and . Later studies have found that
the single glucose residue installed by NGT can be elaborated to a
dextran polymer (which could be useful
for vaccines against pathogenic bacteria that use NGTs to adhere to
human cells), polysialic acids (which
may prolong the serum-half-life of small therapeutic proteins), -acetyllactosamine (LacNAc), and other fucosylated and sialylated forms of lactose by overexpression of elaborating GTs within the cell. This sequential elaboration technique may also
allow an NGT-based system to circumvent the limits on glycan structure
found in OST systems. However, the inability of NGTs to utilize UDP-GlcNAc
or UDP-GalNAc sugar donors has complicated their application to the
production of authentic -linked and -linked human glycans which have GlcNAc and GalNAc as their reducing
end sugars, respectively. Thus far, naturally occurring and engineered
NGTs have been shown to utilize UDP-glucosamine (GlcN), UDP-Glc, UDP-Gal, UDP-Xyl, GDP-Glc, and GDP-Man. The discovery or engineering of NGTs capable of transferring these
acetylated sugars remains an active area of research. Aside from NGTs, human -GalNacTs and OGTs have
also been transferred to  in order to
produce glycoproteins in bacterial systems. Specifically, GalNAcT2
has been transferred to  with oxidizing
cytoplasms to enable modification with -GalNAc. This system was later improved to enable the
modification of proteins with Core 1 (Gal-GalNAc-Ser/Thr) within cells.-GlcNAc modified proteins
have also been produced in  by coexpression
of OGT with a target protein. Cell-Free
Synthetic Glycosylation Systems Cell-free
protein synthesis (CFPS) systems use cell lysates, amino acids, nucleic
acids, and cofactors to produce proteins without intact cells. First used to decipher the genetic code in the 1960s and throughout the late 20th century for fundamental
biology studies, crude lysate based-CFPS technologies experienced a technical renaissance
in the mid-2000s with the ability to use less costly reagents, sustain synthesis for days, produce protein in g/L quantities, and make
far more diverse products including integral membrane proteins, proteins with noncanonical amino acids, toxic proteins, proteins containing multiple disulfide bonds, portable diagnostics, and even educational kits. Now in use across the microliter and industrial
scales, CFPS reactions are scalable
over 6 orders of magnitude. The compatibility
of CFPS with 96-well plates, liquid handling robots, and microfluidic
platforms provides an attractive high-throughput protein expression
platform. While no FDA-approved protein
therapies have been made in CFPS so far, cell-free systems still hold
great promise for glycoengineering because they serve as an intermediate
point between bacterial systems and completely purified  synthesis, enabling the production and study of complex
biological molecules with greater control and simplicity of handling.
Although certain CFPS systems based on mammalian cell lines allow
for some level of glycosylation that can be increased by the addition
of microsomes, CFPS systems based on bacterial lysates (the most well-described,
economically viable, and highest-yielding CFPS system) were unable
to produce glycoproteins until recently. Bacterial cell-free
protein glycosylation systems introduce glycosylation machineries
from across the domains of life into bacterial lysates. In 2011, the
first bacterial cell-free glycoprotein production system was developed
by adding purified PglB and LLOs to a completed -based CFPS reaction. Building upon this work, a single-pot, Cell-free Glycoprotein Synthesis
(CFGpS) platform was developed that simultaneously synthesized and
glycosylated target proteins . In this study, CFGpS was used to install a
variety of glycans including the  heptasaccharide
and the eukaryotic core ManGlcNAc onto glycoproteins
by overexpressing plasmids encoding PglB and the
LLO biosynthesis pathways in the bacterial chassis strain before lysis
and then expressing the target protein in CFPS reactions containing
these lysates. This all-in-one CFGpS
platform has recently been used to synthesize a variety of glycoconjugate
vaccines using freeze-dried lysates that can be rehydrated at the
point-of-care by overexpressing various bacterial -antigen gene clusters. Whereas
the CFGpS method utilizes enzymes and LLOs synthesized
in living cells to produce preparative quantities of glycoproteins , other efforts in cell-free systems have sought
to use the flexibility and throughput of CFPS to better understand
and engineer synthetic glycosylation pathways. For example, one study
overcame the difficulties associated with expressing OSTs (which are
integral membrane proteins containing with 13 transmembrane helices)
in living bacterial cells by expressing several active bacterial -linked OST homologues in CFPS by supplementing extracts
with protein–lipid nanodiscs. Other works have focused on the development of OST-independent cell-free
glycosylation systems based on NGTs, OGTs, GalNAcTs, . to completely decouple glycosylation pathway construction from
living cells by using enzymes generated in CFPS to build glycans step-by-step
from sugar donors. A recent study in OST-independent glycosylation
systems used CFPS and high-throughput mass spectrometry of self-assembled
monolayers to develop a platform for Glycosylation Sequence Characterization
by Rapid Expression and Screening (GlycoSCORES). GlycoSCORES has been used to rigorously characterize the acceptor
sequence specificity of NGTs, GalNAcTs, and human OGT and then leverage
this information to design GlycTags that were more efficiently modified
by ApNGT than naturally occurring glycosylation sites, both  and in the  cytoplasm.
The GlycoSCORES method has also been adapted to analyze intact glycoproteins,
enabling the high-throughput synthesis and analysis of target protein
variants with glycosylation sites at different positions. While GlycoSCORES enabled optimization
of the initiating step of
glycosylation, CFPS has also been used to develop a method for multienzyme
Glycosylation Pathway assembly by Rapid  Mixing
and Expression (GlycoPRIME). The GlycoPRIME
system uses CFPS to enrich crude bacterial lysates with GTs which
are then combined in a mix-and-match fashion to construct new glycosylation
pathways. In this way, 37 putative synthetic glycosylation pathways
initiated by ApNGT were rapidly tested ,
leading to the development of biosynthetic routes to 23 distinct glycosylation
structures. These pathways were then translated to the cytoplasm of
living bacteria to produce sialylated IgG Fc or to a one-pot CFPS-driven
CFGpS system where all enzymes and the target protein were simultaneously
synthesized . The continued development of cell-free glycosylation systems will
enable new applications in GT characterization and engineering, biosynthetic
pathway prototyping, and on-demand production of therapeutics and
vaccines. Chemoenzymatic Protein Glycosylation Methods While
biosynthetic methods for glycoprotein production can be operated at
large scales and take advantage of endogenous protein synthesis machinery,
they often result in heterogeneous mixtures of various glycoforms.
These heterogeneous mixtures complicate structural and functional
studies as well as the characterization and approval of therapeutics. To address this problem, many chemical and
chemoenzymatic synthesis strategies have been developed to produce
structurally homogeneous glycoproteins. This section discusses key
methodologies employing chemical synthesis methods for glycoprotein
research and production. The reader can find more detailed reviews
elsewhere. One way to synthesize
homogeneous glycoproteins is to remodel native glycan structures,
typically -glycans, found on recombinantly produced
proteins (usually derived from CHO or yeast cells). Glycans can be
“polished”  by adding exoglycosidases
and/or GTs to edit glycans in a user-defined
way. An advantage of performing these polishing steps  is the ability to incorporate abiological or modified sugar monomers
or PEGylation as a strategy for functionalization. However, achieving homogeneous, human -glycosylation
structures generally requires that the native glycan is enzymatically
trimmed to the reducing end GlcNAc residue and then built back up
to create the desired uniform structure using glycosyltransferases
to sequentially add sugars or by transferring
a chemically synthesized glycan  using an
endoglycosidase. Specifically, a class
of endoglycosidases called endo-β--acetylglucosaminidases
(ENGases) that naturally cleave -glycans from proteins
between the reducing end GlcNAcs have been repurposed to catalyze
the reverse reaction to form a glycosidic bond between the released -glycan and the GlcNAc residue on the protein. One particular benefit of this synthetic method
is the conservation of the native sugar linkages. This technology,
known as transglycosylation, has become an increasingly efficient
synthesis strategy through the use of synthetic sugar oxazolines as
improved glycosyl donors and the discovery
of mutant ENGases with more specific activities. A similar, but more “bottom-up” application
of the
transglycosylation approach (, enzymatic “tag
and modify”) is to obtain the protein-linked monosaccharide
substrate for ENGases from bacterial cells or directly from an  enzymatic reaction rather than by truncating a
eukaryotic -glycan. For example, PglB can be used to install a single -GlcNAc (using
synthetic lipid substrates or trimming
down a larger glycan installed in living ()) which is then elaborated to a eukaryotic
glycan using transglycosylation methods. Transglycosylation has been
used to elaborate a protein-linked -GlcNAc residue
installed by OGT in living bacteria and
a peptide-linked -Glc installed by ApNGT to generate
eukaryotic-like -glycans. A variation of this method using an engineered NGT (ApNGT) to install GlcN along with an acetyltransferase (GlmA) enabled
the synthesis of an authentic human -linked glycopeptide
with GlcNAc at the reducing end. The
discovery of NGT homologues with unique and conditionally orthogonal
peptide acceptor specificities combined with transglycosylation strategies
has recently enabled the sequential, site-specific installation of
multiple distinct glycans on a single target protein. While further efforts are needed to enhance efficiency
of such an approach, this advances a new concept for synthesizing
defined glycoproteins for research and therapeutic applications. The incorporation of specific natural and noncanonical amino acids
at desired glycosylation sites can also provide chemical handles for
modification of proteins. This chemical “tag and modify”
strategy has been used with a wide variety of chemistries and reactive
amino acids, including cysteine residues or noncanonical amino acids
carrying azide–alkyne click chemistry handles. In one particularly compelling example, dehydroalanine
(Dha) residues inserted using an orthogonal translation system in  were harnessed to generate stabilized radicals
that could be used to introduce many post-translational modifications
including both - and -linked GlcNAc
residues that differ only by one carbon from natural structures. The modification of both natural and noncanonical
amino acid handles has permitted the site-specific installation of
multiple distinct glycans. In
addition to modifying recombinant proteins, these glycan remodeling
tools can be interfaced with chemical peptide synthesis methods. For
a few glycoproteins, complete chemical synthesis of homogeneous glycoproteins
has been demonstrated using ligation and modification of peptides
produced by solid-phase peptide synthesis (SPPS). The types of glycans that can be generated by chemical or chemoenzymatic
synthesis have been greatly expanded by the development of automated
glycan assembly (AGA) platforms and commercially available synthesizers. At present, these systems can generate increasingly complex structures
ranging from GAGs to biantennary glycans that could be used for many different glycoengineering
applications. However, the site-specific coupling of these glycans
onto proteins is always a key challenge that must be overcome in the
various ways discussed above. While chemical synthesis is a promising
route for homogeneous glycoprotein synthesis for study, these approaches
require large quantities of purified enzyme and nucleotide-activated
sugar donor substrates or many protection and reaction steps. Further
development will be required to simplify and scale these reactions
before they can widely adopted as practical means for industrial-scale
production of glycoproteins. Applications
of Synthetic Glycosylation Systems Synthetic glycobiology
has been used in a wide variety of applications.
This section describes selected applications of the synthetic glycoprotein
production systems described above to solve compelling problems in
the fields of therapeutics, vaccines, diagnostics, and glycomaterials
(). Selected application
areas of synthetic glycobiology. Key applications
of synthetic glycosylation systems to therapeutics, vaccines, diagnostics,
and glycomaterials. (a) Applications of synthetic glycobiology to
therapeutics include the development of afucosylated antibodies with
increased antibody-directed cell-mediated toxicity (ADCC) and increasing the circulation times of enzyme
replacement therapeutics by precise manipulation of terminal glycosylation
structures, erythropoietin by introduction
of additional glycosylation sites, and
Factor IX by GlycoPEGylation. (b) Synthetic glycosylation
systems have produced bacterial, fungal, and viral vaccines carrying
glycan epitopes specific for these infectious diseases; cancer vaccines carrying tumor-associated carbohydrate antigens; as well as protein and nanoparticle vaccines
adjuvanted by glycan structures such as the αGal motif. (c) Synthetic glycosylation systems have also been used to generate
diagnostic assays to detect bacterial infections and cancer. (d) Finally,
glycoengineering has enabled the production of functional glycomaterials
including biomaterials that control and promote tissue growth, self-assembling glycopeptides
that form nanofibers and bind to galectins, and virus-like particle vaccines. Engineering of the glycocalyx as a glycomaterial by overexpression
of mucin proteins has generated mammalian expression hosts with decreased
aggregation. Synthetic protein glycosylation
systems, particularly those in mammalian cells, have been applied
in numerous ways to the production of glycoprotein therapeutics. Here,
we highlight three key application areas: the study and modulation
of antibody therapeutic ADCC activities, the improvement of protein
therapeutic delivery and circulation time, and the development of
portable or on-demand protein therapeutic production systems. More
complete reviews of the application of glycoengineering to protein
therapeutics can be found here. Many antibody-based therapeutics, like those used to treat
cancers, direct the patient’s immune system to attack targeted
cells by antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). ADCC activity requires the binding of FcγRIIIa
receptors present on natural killer (NK) cells to the Fc region of
the antibody therapeutic. In 2002, a pivotal study showed that antibodies
derived from Lec13 CHO cells (which produce IgG antibodies with significantly
reduced levels of α1–6 fucosylation on the reducing end
GlcNAc of the -glycan present at Asn297 of the Fc
domain of human IgG antibodies) bind 50 times tighter to the FcγRIIIa
compared to IgGs produced in standard CHO cells. Further testing confirmed that this tighter binding is
only observed when the FcγRIIIa receptor itself is glycosylated,
indicating the importance of glycan–glycan interactions. Many later studies have used chemoenzymatic
transglycosylation methods to generate homogeneous IgG glycosylation
structures for functional analysis, providing critical design rules
for optimizing ADCC activity. Since
these pioneering works, there has been an explosion of clinical trials
investigating antibodies lacking core fucosylation. As described in
a recent review, afucosylated antibodies have
been investigated in clinical trials, and three have already been
approved with indications in lymphoma and severe asthma. These three
approved antibodies are produced either by overexpression of bisecting
GnT-II and αMan-II which prevent modification with Fut8 or direct
knockout of Fut8 in CHO cells. The intentional engineering of protein glycosylation structures
has also been shown to increase the stability and circulation time
of protein therapeutics. While the effect
of glycosylation on each protein may be different, studies have generally
concluded that the stabilizing effect of glycoengineering for therapeutics
is achieved by (i) preventing denaturation, aggregation, and degradation
by shielding protein regions that are unstructured, hydrophobic, or
liable to proteases; (ii) increasing
the molecular weight and hydrodynamic radius of the molecule to prevent
kidney filtration; (iii) removing immunogenic
glycan motifs to prevent clearance by the immune system; and (iv) capping or removing terminal motifs
that are selectively cleared by human lectins. Several key examples showing how these mechanisms have
been used to increase glycoprotein therapeutic stability are described
below. In a landmark study in 2003, the introduction of two
additional
glycosylation sites into human erythropoietin (EPO) by mutation of
the native amino acid sequence and expression in CHO cells provided
increased  activity and prolonged serum half-life,
eventually leading to the development of the drug darbepoetin alfa. This study, along
with later works using chemoenzymatic synthesis, indicate that the glycans in EPO cover hydrophobic patches
on the protein and increase the molecular weight of the overall molecule,
preventing aggregation and clearance. Glycans containing sialic acids
have been shown to be particularly effective at stabilizing EPO and
other therapies. The negative charge of sialic
acids is thought to prevent aggregation by creating a repulsive force
between therapeutic molecules and preventing kidney filtration. Accordingly, polysialylation of therapeutics
has been shown to significantly increase half-life. Similar increases in half-life can be obtained by the conjugation
of polyethylene glycol (PEG) to therapeutics. While most methods of PEGylation involve direct modification
of amino acids, this can also be accomplished using glycans as a conjugation
point. This “glycoPEGylation” method
has been implemented by modifying Factor IX in the cytoplasm of bacteria
and then using a sialyltransferase to conjugate a PEGylated sialic
acid moiety , leading to the approved therapy
Rebinyn. In contrast to the general
stability of EPO, other examples of
glycoengineering involve the removal of specific glycan motifs that
cause an immune response or clearance. For example, the presence of
α-galactose motifs at the terminus of the antibody therapeutic
cetuximab expressed in murine cells was shown to generate a strong
immune response and even anaphylaxis. In this case, expression in CHO cells (which do not express large
amounts of the α-1,3 galactosyltransferase) produced therapeutics
without this immunogenic motif. Other
glycoengineering efforts seek to remove or cap glycan motifs which
are not immunogenic but are selectively cleared by human lectins,
leading to shorter circulation times. Specifically,
terminal galactose or mannose residues are often associated with clearance
as they are bound by asialoglycoprotein receptors and mannose receptors. A recent study systematically compared the properties of α-galactosidase
A (a lysosomal replacement enzyme for Fabry disease) with a wide variety
of glycosylation structures generated
using CRISPR/Cas9 glycoengineered CHO cell lines. Previous enzyme
replacement therapies have been glycoengineered to contain terminal
mannose or mannose-6-phosphate for cellular targeting. However, the
presence of these terminal mannose residues also shortens half-life
and directs the protein therapeutic immediately to the liver and spleen.
In this study, the researchers generated dozens of unique CHO cell
lines (knocking out 46 genes individually or in parallel) to generate
different glycoforms of α-galactosidase A, which they then tested
in a mouse model to determine the optimal glycan for the desired biodistribution
profile. They found that a bianntenary glycan terminated with α2–3
sialic acids (rather than terminal mannoses or α2–6 sialic
acids) increased circulation time and enabled drug delivery to harder
to reach organs such as the heart. In addition to optimizing the molecular structure of protein therapeutics,
the development of synthetic glycosylation systems in alternative
(nonmammalian) hosts holds great potential in facilitating distributed,
on-demand, and more cost-effective production of therapeutics. Most
development for these applications has focused on plant, yeast, bacterial,
and cell-free expression systems. For example, a recent study reported
the use of glycoengineered  plants
to produce an antibody cocktail protective against  virus. The plants were engineered
to avoid nonmammalian α1,3 Fuc and β1,2 Xyl epitopes and
produced approximately 80% afucosylated complex-type glycans. After
purification, a cocktail of three IgGs produced in these plants was
effective in preventing Ebola infection. In fact, these IgGs were
more effective than similar IgGs produced in CHO cells (likely because
of the lack of core fucosylation on the IgGs produced in plants). Another study in yeast showed that dried IgA
glycoproteins produced in engineered  yeast cells administered orally without purification were effective
in preventing gastrointestinal infection within a pig model. Glycoengineered yeast have also been directly
integrated with an on-demand protein production, purification, and
formulation system. Due to their low
cost and relative simplicity, bacterial glycoprotein production strategies
using OST-dependent and OST-independent synthetic glycosylation systems
may be useful in the more cost-effective and distributed production
of therapeutics. Cell-free glycoprotein production
systems may be especially amenable to distributed manufacturing as
they can be freeze-dried and reactivated to produce glycoproteins
at the point of care. For example, freeze-dried CHO
cell lysates have been implemented to synthesize, purify, and formulate
various therapeutics on-demand. One-pot
bacterial cell-free glycoprotein production systems have been shown
to generate glycoproteins with the eukaryotic trimannose core glycan, glycoconjugate vaccines with -antigen bacterial glycans, a vaccine
candidate with an adjuvanting α-galactose glycan, and proteins modified with minimal sialic acid
motifs with possible utility in stabilizing therapeutics. Glycoprotein
vaccines leverage
the roles of carbohydrates in disease to train the immune system to
respond when it encounters specific glycans. A glycoconjugate vaccine
is comprised of three main parts, the carrier protein, the glycan
antigen, and the adjuvant. While glycans have been developed as vaccine
candidates, a polysaccharide antigen alone has poor immunogenicity
and results in a T-cell independent immune response that does not
generate an IgM to IgG transition. Thus, when covalently conjugated
to a carrier protein, the body is able to generate long-term B-cell
memory of the vaccine and protect the recipient, and is particularly
important for vaccine efficacy in infants. Commercially approved carrier proteins are typically inactivated
toxins that can improve immunogenicity of the vaccine. An adjuvant molecule is then usually coformulated
with the vaccine or covalently attached for immune system stimulation.
Since the first antibacterial glycoconjugate vaccine was approved
in the 1980s, great strides have been
made to enable protection against a wide range of diseases. All currently licensed glycoconjugate vaccines protect against bacterial
infections and include the bacteria  type B, multiple serotypes of , and . The corresponding antigens are typically either capsular
or -antigen polysaccharides, which decorate the
cell-surface of the pathogenic bacteria and are presented to the body
during infection. Current industrial
processes involve culturing pathogenic bacteria and extracting the
LLOs. The LLO is then chemically linked to recombinantly produced
carrier proteins following additional chemical priming and processing.
In addition to requiring the use of pathogenic bacteria, this process
is expensive and typically employs nonspecific conjugation, resulting
in heterogeneous products. Thus, there
has been a compelling opportunity to use glycoengineering solutions
to improve the process and enable future generations of glycoconjugate
vaccine molecules. production in  is the primary glycoengineering strategy to
produce antibacterial
vaccines. As the bacterial polysaccharide antigens of interest are
typically large structures consisting of multiple repeating units
of smaller sugar motifs,  transfer by OST-dependent
glycosylation systems have been employed for protein modification.
This bioconjugation or protein glycan coupling technology (PGCT) involves
expression of the LLO biosynthesis pathway, carrier protein, and OST
to create a glycoconjugate product  that can
then be purified. The -linked OST PglB has been the most commonly used enzyme for this
purpose, successfully producing vaccine candidates against  2a, Extraintestinal
Pathogenic ,, O157,,, and . As discussed previously, limitations in the diversity of sugar donor
substrates that can be utilized by PglB have been circumvented by
using -linked OSTs to produce glycoconjugate vaccines . Specifically, PglL has been used to produce vaccine
candidates against  2a and  serovar
Paratyphi, while PglS has been used
to recombinantly produce vaccine candidates against () as well as hypervirulent . Vaccines protecting against fungi, parasites and viruses, which
are commonly decorated with glycoproteins or glycans, have also been
developed primarily with chemical synthesis strategies. Antifungal
conjugate vaccines have been developed to protect against  using the major natural capsular polysaccharide,
glucuronoxylomannan (GXM). Due to challenges
with natural polysaccharide structures, shorter synthetic antigens
for antifungal vaccines have been shown to protect against () and  species. Beta-glucan conjugates have
also been investigated as a potential broad spectrum antifungal vaccine. There are also examples of glycoconjugates
protecting against the HIV virus which has a high concentration
of oligomannose glycans on its surface, but identifying a successful
vaccine that elicits neutralizing antibodies has proven difficult.
While parasitic mechanisms of infection are still poorly understood,
a  conjugate vaccine utilizing the lipophosphoglycan
cap has also been investigated. A recent
review has discussed developments for vaccines against these targets. Glycoconjugate vaccines can also be used
to direct the immune system
against cancers which specifically display abhorrent glycosylation
patterns called tumor-associated carbohydrate antigens (TACAs) on
their cell surface. While chemical extraction
of natural LLOs has been common for the production of antibacterial
vaccines, isolation of TACAs is difficult due to expression and glycan
heterogeneity. Research on cancer glycoconjugate
vaccines has been greatly enabled by novel chemical synthesis strategies.
TACAs are either found as glycoproteins such as mucins (Tn, TF, STn,
Globo-H, and Lewis Y (Le)) or glycolipids in the case
of gangliosides (GM2, GD2, GD3, fucosyl-GM1, Globo-H, Le). As described above, some blood group
antigens such as Le can be either glycoproteins or glycolipids.
TACAs have poor immunogenicity, making it even more important to conjugate
to a carrier protein such as keyhole-limpet hemocyanine (KLH) that increases the recognition and memory of
the presented antigen. Initial development of cancer vaccines
focused on synthetic monomeric
vaccines including ganglioside based antigens GM2, GD3, and GM3 conjugated to a KLH carrier
to treat melanoma. Mimicry of the natural presentation of TACAs which
cluster on the cell surface has been advantageous, particularly for
mucin-based vaccines. Multivalent vaccines that present glycopeptide
clusters of either Tn, sTn, or FT antigens conjugated to KLH have
improved immunogenicity over a single presented antigen. Multivalent vaccines have also been developed to mimic specific
cancer types by combining a range of characteristic antigens in a
single vaccine. Additional information on cancer vaccines
and strategies for engineering TACA presentation on carrier proteins
is available in recent reviews. The
use of adjuvants to increase immune responses to both protein
and glycoconjugate vaccines is critical for eliciting immune responses.
However, most adjuvanted vaccines contain simple coformulations of
immunostimulatory molecules with antigens, meaning that once these
molecules separate in the body, the effect of the adjuvant may be
lost. Recently, several glycans have been shown to have adjuvating
effects which could enable site-specifically modified glycoprotein
conjugates with self-adjuvating properties. For example, The αGal
motif is an effective self:nonself discrimination epitope in humans
and has been shown to confer adjuvant properties when associated with
various peptide, protein, whole-cell, and nanoparticle-based immunogens. The Lewis X motif has been shown to specifically target vaccine
antigens to DC-SIGN receptors on dendritic cells which then present
the antigen  the major-histocompatibility complex
class I-restricted and class II-restricted systems, ultimately leading
to increased antigen-specific antibody titers. A Siaα2–3Gal structure has been shown to enable
selective targeting and endocytosis of antigens by binding to siglec1
(Sn, CD169) on the surface of macrophages, ultimately resulting in
increased antigen presentation to T-cells. Ultimately, the ability to produce defined glycoproteins with these
self-adjuvating groups could increase vaccine effectiveness or lead
to the development of new vaccines. The important carbohydrate
interactions discussed so far have also been leveraged for diagnostics
in the form of lectin arrays, glycan
arrays, and glycoprotein arrays. This section discusses the synthetic glycoprotein
approaches that have been employed to detect and diagnose both infectious
diseases as well as cancer biomarkers. Additional glycan diagnostic
tools and applications have been recently reviewed elsewhere. Antibodies generated during an adaptive
immune response to a bacterial infection have specificity for glycan
structures, which is leveraged in conjugate vaccine production. This
relationship can also be used to detect the presence of antibodies
generated in infected patients. There have been multiple approaches
using an ELISA-based system using glycoproteins made with the PglB
OST and the native AcrA acceptor protein for rapid diagnosis. These works have used glycoproteins decorated
with  O157, O145, and O121 glycan antigens
to diagnose HUS (an illness caused by Shiga toxin-producing  bacteria) and  O3 antigen to detect Brucella infections
(a common bacterial zoonosis) through specific antibody binding. Autoantibodies generated in response to cancer glycoproteins
are
a promising biomarker for early cancer detection and can also be analyzed  glycoprotein
diagnostics displaying cancer glycopeptides. In recent work from Pederson , a glycopeptide array was printed using synthetic -glycosylated mucin fragments. Two different methods were pursued, including chemoenzymatic synthesis
of short glycopeptides as well as enzymatic production of larger mucin
fusion proteins in  followed by -linked glycosylation using GalNAcTs. These works showcase the opportunities and
ability to harness multiple glycoprotein synthesis platforms for use
in diagnostic applications. Glycomaterials
are synthetic
molecules including, but not limited to, lipids, polymers, supramolecular
structures, and nanoparticles that have been decorated with glycans
for use as therapeutics, vaccines, biomimetic materials, adaptive
and nonadaptive infection prophylaxis. In this section, we focus specifically
on examples of protein-based materials. Other types of glycomaterials
have been reviewed elsewhere. Synthetic
glycobiology can enable the design of glycomaterials by providing
additional control over glycan spacing, valency, and organization
on unique structures not accessible using traditional protein expression
or synthetic chemistry approaches. This precise control over glycan
display can be useful for recapitulating natural properties, countering
challenges faced by current therapeutics (such as the weak affinity
of protein-carbohydrate interactions), and providing control over self-assembly properties of nanomaterials.
Recent works using synthetic glycosylation systems to generate glycoprotein
materials with unique or beneficial properties, many that cannot be
found in naturally glycosylated products or traditional protein scaffolds,
are discussed below. On the nanoscale, glycans and glycoproteins
are useful for the creation of self-assembling functional materials.
Recent work leveraged self-assembling glycopeptides to create nanofibers
to control galectin activity, an important consideration for multiple
therapeutic applications. A similar strategy
employing self-assembling MUC1 glycopeptides to form β-sheet
nanofibers has been used to generate a self-adjuvating anticancer
vaccine. Sulfated glycopeptide nanostructures
can mimic GAG structures and bind and increase bioactivity of glycan-binding
proteins such as growth factors. In
addition, glycopeptides have been used in self-assembling active polymersomes
for drug delivery. Another glycoprotein
material strategy utilizes virus-like particles (VLPs) as supramolecular
carrier proteins for vaccine antigens. In recent work, up to 340 copies
of the Tn antigen (a common trisaccharide TACA) have been displayed
on Q-beta bacteriophage capsids with addition by click chemistry. On the microscale, engineering cell surfaces
as a glycomaterial
is emerging as a useful approach to control and study cellular behavior. Cellular surfaces are coated in a thick layer of saccharides tethered
to glycoproteins and glycolipids called the glycocalyx. Engineering
the glycocalyx can be accomplished by chemoenzymatic remodeling of
the cellular surface, direct addition
of glycomaterial substrates to cells, or by engineering
the cell to produce and display various glycoproteins. Tuning the glycocalyx of mammalian cells has been shown to extensively
modulate cellular behavior and responses to mechanical perturbation,
which plays a particularly important role in cancer. An exemplary application of cellular glycomaterial engineering is
the prevention of mammalian cell aggregation in a bioreactor by overexpressing
heavily glycosylated mucin proteins on the surface of HEK cells. Diverse cellular functions such as adhesion
and, by extension, replication can be similarly modulated using glycocalyx
engineering. Other efforts in glycocalyx
engineering have been recently reviewed. Finally, a macroscale
application of glycoprotein materials involves
surface functionalization of biomimetic materials. For example, specific
sialoside epitopes chemically incorporated into a collagen biomaterial
have selectively directed the fates of mesenchymal stem cells toward
osteogenic or chondrogenic states. ECM
proteins decorated with poly-LacNAc glycans are known to interact
with several important human galectins (notably Galectins 1, 3, and
8) which mediate cross-linking events that promote and modulate cell
growth and adhesion. Thus, glycosylation
to create biomimetic materials or smart biomaterial scaffolds for
use in regenerative medicine have also
been investigated. Heavily modified glycoproteins produced in human
cells have also recently been shown to provide a promising glycomaterial
lubricant (lubricin). Driven by a rapidly increasing toolkit of natural and engineered
biological parts, improved biosynthetic and analytical methods for
testing designs of novel glycosylation systems, and an increasing
appreciation for the unique biophysical and immunomodulatory properties
that can be obtained using protein glycosylation, the field of synthetic
glycobiology has a bright future. Key areas of focus in the upcoming
years are likely to be (i) commercialization of highly engineered
CHO cell systems for producing therapeutically relevant, homogeneous
human glycans, (ii) methods to synthesize diverse glycoproteins in
bacteria and  (particularly for vaccines),
(iii) the study and application of minimal protein glycosylation structures
for stability or immunomodulation, (iv) the development of new therapeutic
modalities based on the modulation or targeting of glycan structures
in the human body, and (v) the development of glycoprotein-based materials,
diagnostics, and other  applications which
become viable with lower-cost, nonmammalian production systems. The field of synthetic glycobiology is at an important inflection
point. Thus far, limitations on our knowledge of glycosyltransferases
and low-throughput methods for protein glycosylation pathway construction
have led to the engineering of biological systems to contain nearly
exact replicas of natural glycosylation systems. While this is certainly
an important approach because it can help ensure that obtained structures
and biological activities match those in nature, it also constrains
the simplicity, robustness, and available design space of structures
and pathways that can be exploited for societal and commercial benefit.
We believe that increases in fundamental understanding of natural
systems as well as improved methods to build and test glycoproteins
for desired properties will drive the field toward a new generation
of glycoengineering strategies that move beyond recapitulating pathways
found in nature to the simplified and tailored design of glycoproteins
with desired properties..