Protein evolution and engineering
have improved a wide range of enzymes relevant to biotechnology. Phage-assisted
continuous evolution (PACE) and phage-assisted noncontinuous evolution
(PANCE) enable rapid protein evolution without regular researcher
intervention and have been used to rapidly evolve a wide variety of
phenotypes that impact protein synthesis or degradation, protein and DNA binding, or transcription. To date, no PACE or PANCE selections have been described that evolve
enzymes that biosynthesize small molecules. The evolution of such
enzymes poses unique challenges due to the limited range of available
biosensors that link the small molecules to a selectable or screenable
output, the challenge of evolving complex
or non-native biosynthetic transformations, and the large size of
many biosynthetic gene clusters. Despite
these challenges, the ability to evolve enzymes that mediate small-molecule
biosynthesis has the potential to advance industrial production of
important industrial compounds and drug precursors, processing of waste products such as cellulosic biomass
and methane, and other important biosynthetic processes. Methane
is a compelling target for microbial and enzymatic conversion
given its cost effectiveness compared to other feedstocks such as
glucose. Naturally occurring microbial
communities are capable of using methane as a sole carbon source,
raising the possibility of using microbial engineering to better harness
this resource. However, methane is expensive
to transport and contributes significantly to global warming. A popular strategy for removing excess methane
is wasteful combustion into carbon dioxide, a less potent greenhouse
gas. Developing methods to transform
this single-carbon resource into higher molecular weight products
through biorefining could provide a less harmful and wasteful route
to processing methane. Methane oxidation yields methanol,
which can be fermented by bacteria into higher-value products. Engineering microbes to assimilate
methanol more efficiently is thus an attractive stepping-stone to
the bioconversion of methane into commodity chemicals. A variety of methylotrophic microbes that
can grow on methanol
as their sole carbon source assimilate methanol into central metabolism
through oxidation of methanol by a methanol dehydrogenase (Mdh) enzyme.
The resulting formaldehyde is then funneled into one of two assimilation
pathways: the ribulose monophosphate (RuMP) pathway or the serine cycle. Engineering
native methylotrophs directly to both consume methanol and convert
it into high-value products poses a significant challenge due to limited
information and biochemical techniques available for modifying these
organisms. While tools are in development
to manipulate organisms such as , a promising alternative is to develop synthetic methylotrophy in
model organisms such as  that are
natively incapable of growing on methanol. The RuMP pathway is an attractive choice for engineering synthetic
methylotrophy in  given its higher theoretical
yield and greater compatibility with  metabolism compared to the serine cycle. Expressing an NAD-dependent methanol or alcohol dehydrogenase along
with hexulose-6-phosphate synthase (Hps) and 6-phospho-3-hexuloisomerase
(Phi) from native methylotrophs is sufficient to incorporate carbon
from methanol feedstocks into  central
metabolism, but still falls far short
of enabling  to use methanol as an exclusive
carbon source. Further engineering to improve ribulose-5-phosphate
regeneration can enable methanol-dependent growth, but requires gluconate
to be fed as a cosubstrate. The poor
activity of methanol dehydrogenase enzymes, which typically exhibit millimolar  values, low catalytic rates, and a preference for oxidizing other
alcohols, is considered a key barrier to enabling  to use methanol as its sole carbon source. Alternative methanol dehydrogenases
such as those from  use pyrroloquinoline
quinone (PQQ) as a cofactor, which is not natively synthesized by . As a result,
identifying and engineering improved NAD(P)-dependent Mdh variants
that can oxidize methanol more selectively, more efficiently, or in
a manner that results in greater assimilation of methanol represents
a major aspiration of developing synthetic methylotrophy in . A variety
of NAD-dependent Mdh enzymes have been isolated, characterized,
and evolved. The Mdh2 enzyme from  was engineered
for improved kinetics using a combination of  library generation, automated colony picking, and a plate-based
screen for formaldehyde production. On
the basis of reported  kinetic parameters,
this evolved Cn Mdh2 CT4–1 enzyme represents the state-of-the-art
for methanol assimilation pathways in . However, colony picking only screens several
thousand variants per generation of evolution, in contrast with the
mutational diversity sampled in selections such as PACE, which can
process >10 variants per phage generation (as short
as
10 min). To test the ability of
PACE to evolve improved Mdh variants, we
first developed an  selection that links methanol
oxidation to phage propagation. We used this selection in a series
of PANCE and PACE experiments to evolve several Mdh variants with
improved kinetic properties that assimilate approximately twice as
much methanol as the previously reported state-of-the-art Cn Mdh2
CT4–1 enzyme. Our findings also inform future Mdh engineering
efforts by identifying a critical region of mutations that impact
Mdh activity and methanol assimilation near the predicted active site
of  Mdh2 (Bm Mdh2). Design and
Characterization of Mdh PANCE PACE and PANCE
are laboratory evolution systems that couple a target phenotype to
the life cycle of M13 filamentous bacteriophage. Gene III, required
for phage propagation, is replaced on the phage genome with the gene(s)
of interest, creating selection phage (SP) that are unable to propagate
on their own. Host  cells are engineered
to contain a copy of gene III on an accessory plasmid (AP), which
links gene III expression to the desired target gene function. SP
propagate only if their evolving gene(s) possess the desired activity,
thereby activating gene III expression on the AP. Fresh host cells
continuously (PACE) or periodically (PANCE) dilute a fixed-volume
vessel called the “lagoon” that contains the evolving
SP population. Library diversity is generated
in cells using a mutagenesis plasmid (MP), eliminating the need for  library construction. To apply PACE and PANCE to Mdh, we constructed an AP with gene
III downstream of an optimized P promoter. The P promoter and its corresponding
regulator, FrmR, allow gene transcription only in the presence of
formaldehyde, thereby linking gene III expression to conversion of
methanol to formaldehyde by functional Mdh variants (A). Formaldehyde reacts irreversibly with a key cysteine residue
of the FrmR repressor protein, releasing it from its cognate promoter
sequence and permitting recruitment of the  σ factor. In this manner, the concentration of
formaldehyde determines the relative amount of transcription from
this promoter based on the ratio of active to inactive FrmR present
in the cell. We constructed a corresponding selection phage (SP) in
which gene III in the M13 phage genome was replaced with the  gene from  MGA3. To avoid cross-talk between infected cells producing
differing amounts of formaldehyde, we added glutathione to the growth
media, which we previously showed acts as an extracellular formaldehyde
sink to prevent cell-to-cell formaldehyde diffusion (A). Phage propagation rates were initially too low to support
evolution
in a continuous flow system, even when using formaldehyde-sensitized
S1030 Δ host cells that lack the full detoxification
pathway needed to convert formaldehyde into formate. Nevertheless, Mdh2-mediated gene III expression was sufficient
to support phage-assisted noncontinuous evolution (PANCE) (B). The PANCE system uses iterative rounds of overnight phage
propagation in discrete cultures of host cells and phage, instead
of a continuous-flow lagoon (A), allowing more stable monitoring, lower selection
stringency, and maintenance of evolving phage populations since phage
are only lost upon periodic dilution into fresh media with host cells.
Upon addition of SP to cultures containing host  with an AP and MP, SP expressing functional variants of Mdh will
trigger gene III expression  FrmR on the AP, enabling
the production of infectious progeny phage that can persist through
multiple rounds of infection and replication. After 12–18 h,
we isolated phage from the culture and passaged a small aliquot (2
to 200 μL) into a fresh culture of host cells (2 mL) to prevent
the accumulation of mutations in the  genome that could interfere with the evolution. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf We adjusted
the stringency of Mdh PANCE by changing both the amount
of phage added from the previous passage and the amount of methanol
added after phage addition. (). We used an ATc-inducible phage shock promoter (PSP) upstream of a second copy of gene III to periodically
bypass the need to express gene III in response to Mdh activity. These
periods of minimal selection stringency (evolutionary drift) allowed
gene populations to diversify and expand between periods of more stringent
selection conditions. We found that alternating between selection
phases and ATc-induced “drift-phases” maintained a stable,
high-titer phage population of -encoding SP and
prevented the gradual loss of SP populations that occurred when drift
phases were not included (C). Because the process of measuring phage population
size takes a cycle of overnight growth, the actual number of phage
(measured as plaque-forming units, pfu) used to infect each round
was variable. Nevertheless, we never infected with fewer than 10 pfu for any given PANCE round using this approach (C). Starting at passage
10 we also seeded fresh host cell cultures with a negative control
SP encoding an enzyme with an unrelated biosynthetic function ( from ()). This negative control population failed to persist during
PANCE selection conditions despite always being passaged with the
least stringent dilution rate between rounds (200 μL of added
phage). Together, these results demonstrate that SP lacking Mdh activity,
even with periodic drift, were lost over successive PANCE rounds (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf Sequencing data across 70 overnight
PANCE passages of Bm Mdh2 showed
strong enrichment of M163V ().
This position is adjacent to A164, the amino acid homologous to the
critical mutated A169 that was discovered during the evolution of
Cn mdh2 CT4–1. We subcloned several genes from
sequenced individuals at intermediate passages and assayed these variants
using a FrmR-mediated luciferase reporter system (). The assay results
revealed that three representative individuals from passages 38 and
45 all increased apparent activity relative to wild-type Bm Mdh2 by
20 to 50-fold, with the M163V mutation on its own improving luciferase
signal by over 30-fold, consistent with its proximity to A169 in Cn
Mdh2. These findings suggest that M163V greatly improves apparent
Mdh2 activity, consistent with its prevalence across all 70 PANCE
passages. Phage assisted noncontinuous evolution of methanol dehydrogenase.
(A) General procedure for PANCE. Starting from a saturated, overnight
culture of host cells containing the accessory plasmid (AP) and mutagenesis
Plasmid (MP), cultures are (1) diluted; (2) grown to log-phase; (3)
infected with selection phage (SP) and treated with desired inputs
(, methanol, arabinose, ATc, glutathione); and
(4) grown overnight and isolated the next day as a new population
of SP; before (5) infecting a fresh log-phase host cell culture. In
the selection circuit, black stars represent permissive and beneficial
mutations, and red stars represent detrimental mutations. (B) The
selection circuit for evolving methanol dehydrogenase genes in PANCE.
Phage-associated genes are shown in blue, genes related to mdh activity
are shown in orange, and genes relating to mutagenesis and drift regulation
are shown in green. “ara” = arabinose. (C) Phage titers,
dilution rates, and selection conditions for a single, 2 mL culture
of a Selection Phage encoding  evolved for 70 passages in total. Multiplexed Plate-Based PANCE of Bm Mdh2 http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf Having demonstrated
that an Mdh2-encoding phage can propagate in a 2 mL culture undergoing
alternating drift and selection phases, we next sought to expand the
throughput of PANCE by using 0.5 mL populations cultured in 96-well
plates. We evolved populations of Bm Mdh2 SP in triplicate across
six different concentrations of methanol, totaling 18 separate evolving
populations. All passages were evolved using common dilution rates
(0.5–50 μL) and alternating drift schedules designed
to mimic the first experiment (). We performed this plate-based PANCE for 40 passages (counting
each drift or selection phase as a separate, numbered passage) without
changing methanol concentrations. After passage 38 we analyzed remaining
phage population size in each well and found that only populations
fed 250 mM or 500 mM methanol persisted at high titers (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf Sequencing of passage 38 phage
revealed abundant Mdh2 mutations within each population, but with
little similarity between the mutations in different PANCE culture
wells evolved under the same conditions. Additionally, individuals
within each population frequently contained different sets of mutations
(), similar to the results from
passage 38 from the initial PANCE experiment (), although none of the major genotypes in the plate
selection contained the mutations from the single-culture selection.
While the M163V mutation appeared in one clone in one of the populations
evolved in the presence of 500 mM methanol, this mutation did not
spread throughout the population and was not observed in other PANCE
populations. We focused our analysis on the four phage populations
that exhibited
the highest phage titers (>10 pfu/mL) after 38 PANCE
passages
(). Among the
new, predominant mutations, A164P was notable as adjacent to M163V
and homologous to the critical A169 mutation reported in the evolution
of Cn mdh2 CT4–1. All but one
of the clones containing the most abundant mutations in each PANCE
well showed at least a 2-fold increase in apparent Mdh2 activity in
crude lysate assays compared to wild-type activity, with the A164P
containing variant showing roughly 6-fold higher activity (). Comparatively,
a Q5L M163V clone representing the major outcome of the first PANCE
experiment performed in culture tubes showed a 4.5-fold increase in
activity, consistent with the improvements observed in the plate-based
evolution. The fold increase in crude lysate assays was significantly
lower than the apparent increase in luciferase assays, implying that
there could be other factors that impact the  activity of these variants. Nevertheless, the crude lysate activities
clearly show that these mutations are not merely artifacts of the
FrmR reporter system, but instead reflect improvements to the  kinetic parameters of these mutants. Together,
these results suggest that PANCE using miniaturized, multiplexed,
plate-based replicate populations can rapidly provide access to Mdh2
mutations that increase apparent activity. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf Four  populations emerging from PANCE contain
variants that improve activity in cell lysate. (Left) Surviving populations
after 38 passages evolved in the presence of 250 mM or 500 mM methanol.
Within each population, all listed mutations were present in at least
two sequenced individuals. Mutations in parentheses were present within
a smaller subset of individuals containing the other listed mutation.
Mutations preceded by an asterisk represent a separate set of converged
mutations from those without asterisks. (Right) Crude lysate assays
on isolated individuals from each surviving population show general
improvements in activity  for all converged
genotypes. Darker bars show assays in the presence of 500 mM MeOH,
while lighter bars show assays in the presence of 50 mM MeOH. Bars
show the average of two biological replicates, while the top and bottom
of error bars show each measured value. mCherry serves as a non-Mdh
negative control. Activity is normalized to the total measured mg
of protein in cell lysate. Variant “V” shows a representative
M163V variant from the first PANCE experiment for comparison. Variant
“70” shows a representative of passage 70 from the first
PANCE experiment. A negative control strain expressing mCherry in
place of Bm Mdh2 is shown as “—”. The genotypes
of assayed clones are listed in . Next, we combined separate
PANCE populations together in one PACE experiment to determine if
a more active evolved Mdh2 variant would emerge. We increased the
stringency of the selection by switching to PACE and infected our
lagoon with equal volumes of every methanol-treated population from
passage 39 of our plate-based PANCE (). We measured high phage titers for this
lagoon in methanol concentrations as low as 125 mM methanol and at
flow rates as high as 2.0 lagoon volumes per hour, which exceeded
the stringency of the PANCE conditions used previously both in dilution
rate and in methanol concentration. The survival of phage under these
PACE conditions implied that Mdh2 populations could now survive under
conditions that were not permissive for phage propagation when using
wild-type Mdh2 as input. DNA sequencing revealed a mixture of genotypes
mostly observed in the input PANCE populations, with only three new
mutations (Q5H, A70T, and A197V) appearing in three or more sequenced
clones. PACE sampled many other coding mutations, but none that became
predominant within the population. Additionally, two mutations observed
during PANCE (S250G and M163V) appeared to enrich during PACE. Most
notably, the M163V mutation was seen after the methanol concentration
was decreased to 125 mM. The Q5L M163V variant from our first PANCE
experiment provided a similar increase in Mdh activity in cell lysate
as the other variants from the plate-based PANCE experiment used as
input for PACE, and its presence in the PACE experiment suggests that
it has a similar fitness to the rest of the PANCE. () These results collectively
suggest that both PANCE and PACE evolved a variety of Mdh2 mutations
that increased selection fitness (). PACE of PANCE-evolved Mdh2 populations converges
on variants that
bind directly to FrmR. (Top) Overview of PACE. A constant volume evolving
population of SP is maintained in the “lagoon”, analogous
to the evolving passages in PANCE. The syringe pump adds arabinose
(10 mM final concentration), glutathione (5 mM), and methanol (125–250
mM) directly to the lagoon. (Bottom) Sequencing data for a PACE experiment
seeded with plate-based PANCE populations. Flow rate is in lagoon
volumes per hour. The dotted line shows where methanol concentrations
were decreased from 250 to 125 mM methanol. The heat map indicates
the percentage of sequenced individuals containing each mutation.
Only coding mutations observed in at least three independent clones
across all time points are shown. If no mutation was observed, the
cell is colored white with the wild-type residue listed. Evolution at Low Methanol Concentrations
Leads to FrmR-Binding
Mdh Variants http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf While PACE took place at methanol concentrations
as low as 125 mM, our first PANCE experiment showed strong propagation
at 62.5 mM methanol (). Mutations emerging from PANCE at 62.5 mM methanol, however,
had strong activity in FrmR reporter assays even in the absence of
methanol () despite showing no
activity in cell lysate (). We speculated that this phenotype was due either
to a direct interaction between the mutant Mdh2 and the FrmR repressor,
bypassing the methanol oxidation requirement, or to production of
an off-target aldehyde that could interact with FrmR similarly to
formaldehyde. In an effort to avoid propagating clones that would
derepress FrmR from gene III and provide propagation in the absence
of methanol oxidation, we designed a negative selection phase based
on the gene III-neg system to augment
the existing selection and drift phases in PANCE. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf The gene III-neg
system consists of a plasmid almost identical to the standard FrmR-regulated
AP, but instead of encoding gene III it encodes a dominant negative
gene III variant that produces nonviable progeny in response to FrmR
derepression in the absence of methanol (). Phage that do not trigger the FrmR response are provided
with gene III constitutively from a separate plasmid and propagate
normally. As a result, the negative selection phase preferentially
propagates phage that do not trigger the FrmR response in the absence
of methanol over those that do (), in principle removing “cheater” Mdh2
mutants that cause FrmR derepression in a methanol-independent manner.
To further limit the evolution of undesired phenotypes, we switched
from using ethanol as a carrier for our chloramphenicol antibiotic
during positive and drift selections (which results in a final ethanol
concentration of 12 mM, likely competing with methanol for Mdh binding)
to using DMSO, which has no known crosstalk with Mdh. We retained
the ethanol during negative selection to penalize any possible effects
of ethanol oxidation on the FrmR circuit. We used up to three negative
selection phases with no methanol between selection phases with 125
or 62.5 mM methanol (), but the
dominant evolved variants we tested from the 62.5 mM selection phases
still showed a strong FrmR response in the absence of methanol (), suggesting that the fitness benefit
of passing the selection phase at low methanol concentrations overcomes
the fitness penalty of FrmR response during the negative selection
phase. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf To test whether or not methanol-independent FrmR derepression
resulted
from direct interaction between Mdh variants and FrmR, we cloned a
variant of our AP that encodes a FrmR C35S mutant, which lacks the
reactive cysteine required for formaldehyde response. Because FrmR requires condensation of C35 with a reactive aldehyde
species in order to change conformations and release its cognate DNA
target, we assumed that derepression of FrmR C35S
would rule out oxidation of off-target substrates (, ethanol) as a mechanism for cheating the selection. The mutations
that fixed first in the PANCE experiment (Q5L, M163V, and E180), and
which persisted in all Bm Mdh2 cheater variants, do not derepress
FrmR C35S on their own. However, two of the major genotypes isolated
from the end of negative selection PANCE showed strong derepression
of FrmR C35S (), suggesting that
the evolved cheater variants bind directly to FrmR. While one variant
showed a slight increase in wild-type FrmR response upon addition
of methanol, the other showed the same degree of derepression regardless
of added methanol, suggesting that methanol oxidation no longer contributes
to FrmR response for these cheaters. All other dominant variants from
evolutions at 62.5 mM methanol similarly derepress FrmR C35S (), suggesting that PACE and PANCE of
Mdh2 at these lower concentrations preferentially leads to this undesirable
phenotype rather than improved methanol oxidation. Evolved Bm
Mdh2 Variants Show Improved Activity Despite the evolution of some FrmR-binding Mdh2 variants,
mutations at E123, M163, A164 and A363 improve bona fide Mdh activity
() and were
all observed among various genotypes emerging from PACE. However,
none of these mutations occurred simultaneously in the same variant.
Wu and co-workers previously observed that higher activities could
be achieved by manually recombining individual mutations emerging
from a high-throughput screen for Cn Mdh2 variants. To test if a combination of our independent Bm Mdh2 mutations
would similarly improve activity, we manually cloned every possible
single mutant and combination into a shared Q5L E180 background and
compared their activity in both crude lysate and luciferase reporter
assays ().
Every individual mutation we tested in this background showed improved
activity over wild-type in both reporter and cell-lysate assays, with
A164P having the highest increase in luciferase reporter assays (over
10-fold higher than wild-type at 50 mM methanol) and A363L having
the highest crude lysate activity (over 7-fold higher than wild-type
at 50 mM methanol). While the luciferase reporter assay data suggested
that some of these single mutations in combination may have a slight
improvement in activity (less than a 2-fold further improvement in
relative luminescence signal), crude lysate data suggested that, in
general, the A164P and A363L mutations on their own provided the best
activity improvements. In crude lysate assays, recombining these two
best-performing mutations with each other or E123G/M163V either has
no apparent effect on activity compared to each individual mutation
or significantly reduces activity, suggesting a negative epistatic
interaction. In contrast, the reporter assays showed these combinations
as generally better than individual mutants, particularly for A363L.
None of these variants showed activity when no methanol was added
to the culture, and similarly showed no activity when using a FrmR
C35S reporter at any methanol dose (maximum signal for all tested
strains was below 800 RLU/OD), suggesting that other
factors are responsible for the disproportionate FrmR response. It
is worth noting that the lysate assays were performed at a pH 9.5
following literature precedent. Previous Mdh characterizations
typically show a higher activity for Bm Mdh2 at this pH compared to
the presumed pH of the  cytoplasmic environment
(7.4). However, the variants carrying
multiple mutated residues may have a stability trade-off not observed
under physiological conditions that limits their activity at higher
pH. To further characterize
these mutations, we purified N-terminal
His-tagged Mdh2 variants carrying each of the single mutations tested
as well as the combination mutant with the highest luciferase reporter
signal for  characterization (A164P A363L)
and determined their Michaelis–Menten kinetic parameters (). Despite observing
that the E123G variant was not substantially improved over wild-type,
we measured up to a 3.5-fold higher  for all other evolved mutants compared to wild-type Bm Mdh2. Surprisingly,
while the  of Bm Mdh2 seemed the most
likely candidate for improvement given its high value (636 mM), the
largest improvement was seen in the A164P A363L double mutant, which
showed only a 1.9-fold improvement over wild-type (329 mM). While
this  value was lower than either the
A164P or A363L mutations on their own, the A363L single mutant still
had a higher  value (), corroborating our previous
cell lysate data (). Next, we compared our evolved variants to the state-of-the-art
Cn Mdh2 CT4–1. While Cn Mdh2 CT4–1 still showed at least
3.7-fold lower  than any Bm Mdh2 variant,
consistent with previous  characterizations, we observed a 1.2-fold higher  (127 mU/mg) for Bm Mdh2 Q5L A363L compared
to Cn Mdh2 CT4–1 (106 mU/mg) (), although the / of Cn Mdh2 remains 4-fold higher
than our best variant (4.77 s M for Cn Mdh2 CT4–1  1.18 s M for Bm Mdh2 Q5L A363L). Compared to the evolution
of Cn Mdh2 CT4–1, which improved  activity
largely through a significant decrease in  a key A169V mutation, our results suggest potential importance of these mutations in altering
the rate of methanol oxidation rather than altering substrate binding
to the enzyme. Surprisingly, the A164P variant is mutated at a homologous
residue to the A169V variant reported by Wu and co-workers, which
for Cn Mdh2 provides a significant reduction to . further implicating the importance of this residue
in the activity of these enzymes. Together, these results imply that
the high  of Bm Mdh2 is not the only
limiting factor in its activity. The lower  of Cn Mdh2 compared to the evolved Bm Mdh2 variants suggests
that there may be further room for improvements  additional active site mutations, but as seen in the A164P A363L
double mutant these improvements may come at the expense of . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00481/suppl_file/sb8b00481_si_001.pdf One of the key differences between
Cn Mdh2 and Bm Mdh2 is the former’s
reported lack of activation by nudix hydrolases such as  activator protein (Bm Act). We determined whether or not our evolution impacted the  activation previously observed for Bm Mdh2 by purifying Bm Act and testing the variants
in  for methanol
oxidation in the presence or absence of added Bm Act (). As expected, we saw a strong (7.5-fold)
improvement in wild-type Bm Mdh2 activity after the addition of Bm
Act, whereas Cn Mdh2 CT4–1 showed a much lower (2.4-fold) activation.
The evolved Bm Mdh2 variants showed lower activation than the wild-type,
but still far more activation (4.6 to 5.6-fold) than Cn Mdh2 CT4–1.
The general trend of lower activation suggests that further evolution
of Bm Mdh2 could enable additional activator independence. Alternatively,
recent work by Wang and co-workers published during the review of
this manuscript shows that overexpression of the native  Act homologue NudF can significantly improve methanol consumption
in  expressing both Bm Mdh1 and Bm Mdh2. This contribution of NudF could possibly explain
the similar activities of Bm Mdh2 variants and Cn Mdh2 CT4–1
in our cell lysate assays despite the superior kinetics of purified
Cn Mdh2 CT4–1, despite previous work on wild-type Bm Mdh2 activation
in  cell lysate suggesting little-to-no
major contribution from any such factors at their native expression
levels. Further research will be required
to fully determine the impact of Act homologues on Mdh activity , and future evolution of Mdh in  should consider the contribution of these factors toward activity.
While there is likely room for further improvement of these enzymes
both through strain engineering and further evolution, these data
together validate PANCE as an effective way to access a variety of
mutations that can improve the kinetic parameters of Bm Mdh2. Cell lysate and luciferase reporter assays for Bm mdh2 variants
with combined mutations. Diamonds show the maximum luminescence signal
observed during continuous measurements taken for 4 h after induction
of Mdh and addition of methanol to log-phase cultures in DRM. Separate
diamonds for each strain show biological replicates measured across
separate experiments. Filled diamonds = S1030; empty diamonds = S1030
Δ. Bars show the average of crude lysate  activity assays for two replicates, while the top
and bottom of error bars show each measured value. RLU = relative
luminescence units; OD = optical density at 600 nm.
All activities were measured in the presence of 50 mM methanol. G,
V, P, and L stand for the mutations E123G, M163V, A164P, and A363L,
respectively. Kinetic Parameters for Evolved Bm
Mdh2 Enzymes Values are based
on Michaelis–Menten
fit for the data sets shown ± the asymptomatic standard error.
mU/mg = milliunits per milligram of enzyme, with 1 unit defined as
producing 1 μmol NADH per minute. Homology
Models Reveal a Common Region for Key Bm Mdh2 Mutations To
better understand why our individual evolved mutations improve
activity individually, but not consistently when used in combination,
we constructed a homology model of Bm Mdh2 with close alcohol dehydrogenase
homologues using the Phyre 2 software developed by Kelley () Bm Mdh2 has strong (>50%)
sequence identity with several alcohol dehydrogenases. We aligned
our homology model to the NAD-bound structure of  ZM4 ADH2 alcohol dehydrogenase to approximate the location of the NAD molecule within the active site of our model (). All key PANCE- and PACE-evolved mutated
residues are predicted to localize to the same region proximal to
the NAD cofactor binding pocket on this model, close to the expected
redox-active region of the cofactor (). Interestingly, E123, M163, and A164 all
localize to one domain, while A363 localizes to a second domain on
the other side of this binding pocket. Residues associated with cheater
mutations conversely map away from the active site on the outer face
of the domain containing the E123, M163 and A164 mutations, consistent
with their ability to directly bind FrmR. Site-saturation mutagenesis
of these residues and other residues near them may represent a promising
strategy to further improve Bm Mdh2, and the similarity of these residues
to the improvements seen in Cn Mdh2 suggests that other methanol dehydrogenases
may also benefit from targeted mutagenesis within this region. Mapping representative
mutations in Bm mdh2 suggests possible mechanisms
of improvement. Alignment of a Bm Mdh2 homology model to the highly
similar  alcohol dehydrogenase 2
(ZM4 ADH2) enables prediction of the NAD-binding region. Evolved Bm Mdh2 Variants
Outperform a State-of-the-Art Variant
for  Methanol Assimilation Finally,
we tested whether our evolved Mdh variants could improve methanol
assimilation in . We previously showed
that during xylose/methanol cofeeding, Mdh kinetics limit C-methanol assimilation into central metabolism, even with evolved
Cn Mdh2 CT4–1. We compared the
most improved  variants to both the wild-type
Bm Mdh2 and  Mdh2 CT4–1 using the same experimental
setup and plasmid architecture as in our previous study. All of the assayed evolved variants incorporated
approximately twice as much methanol into central metabolites compared
to both wild-type Bm Mdh2 and Cn Mdh2 CT4–1 (). Interestingly, wild-type
Bm Mdh2 performed as well as Cn Mdh2 CT4–1 despite the large
disparity in their  activities. The reasons
for the discrepancy between  activity and
pathway efficacy for these two enzymes is currently unclear, but may
arise from more efficient expression and solubility, factors that
would not have greatly influenced the  kinetics
assays. These results show the viability of PANCE selections for evolving
mutations that improve Mdh activity not just , but also for use in methanol assimilation pathways . Improved C-labeled methanol feedstock incorporation
by evolved Bm mdh2 compared to the state-of-the-art methanol dehydrogenase.
(Left) Metabolic network map showing the path of C-labeled
methanol through hps-phi and subsequent assimilation into central
metabolism. Red lines show assimilation pathway reactions, blue lines
show glycolysis reactions, and green lines show pentose-phosphate
pathway reactions. Empty circle nodes and corresponding metabolites
downstream of formaldehyde were measured metabolites in labeling experiments.
(Right) C enrichment for assimilation pathways using
different Mdh enzymes (or GFP as a negative control) under equivalent
xylose-fed conditions. Values and error bars show the average and
standard deviation across three biological replicates. F6P = fructose
6-phosphate; FBP = fructose 1,6-bisphosphate; R5P = ribose 5-phosphate;
DHAP = dihydroxyacetone phosphate; H6P = -arabino-3-hexulo-6-phosphate;
G6P = glucose 6-phosphate; Ru5P = ribulose 5-phosphate; G3P = glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate; E4P = erythrose 4-phosphate; S7P = sedoheptulose 7-phosphate;
Xu5P = xylulose 5-phosphate. In five separate evolved populations, we
observed distinct mutations
that each improve Bm Mdh2 activity but are still insufficient to support
synthetic methylotrophy in  given our
inability to grow strains expressing these variants using methanol
as the sole carbon source. Further activity improvements might be
achieved by increasing the stringency of our selection conditions,
but lower methanol concentrations in our selections resulted in takeover
by FrmR repressor-binding cheater variants. Given the high  values of the dehydrogenases characterized,
gaining the ability to run our selections at lower methanol concentrations
using selection techniques like fluorescence-activated cell-sorting
(FACS) may allow researchers to more directly cull cheaters from an
evolving population. Alternatively, further increasing the throughput
of plate-based PANCE, for example using robotics platforms, could
allow for a broader range of conditions to be tested to better avoid
the rise of cheaters. The results from this study, together
with the homology models
described above, provide a clearer picture of which residues are poised
to impact activity of a given alcohol dehydrogenase with high sequence
homology to Cn Mdh2 and Bm Mdh2. These developments thus make structure-driven
rational engineering approaches an attractive alternative strategy
for further Mdh engineering. Beyond methanol dehydrogenases, our work
demonstrates the feasibility of PANCE for future metabolic enzyme
evolution efforts, provided that appropriate care is taken to prevent
intercellular diffusion of target molecules. While our approach used
an extracellular chemical sink to sequester a reactive, diffusible
molecule, not all metabolic products will have the required properties
to take this approach. Other methods such as transporter knockouts
or intracellular sequestration in polymers or inclusion bodies might
be used to similar effect depending on the desired target activity.
The 96-well PANCE format allows high-throughput protein evolution
with minimal infrastructure requirements, providing an attractive
alternative to more expensive, specialized platforms such as robotics-enabled
high-throughput screens or FACS. Unless specified, all chemical reagents were
purchased in the highest grade available from Sigma–Aldrich.
For luciferase reporter assays, M9 salts and LB, 2xYT, Agar, and casamino
acids were purchased from US Biological Life Sciences. Trace Elements
(MD-TMS) and Vitamin Solution (MD-VS) were purchased from ATCC. Antibiotics
and Arabinose were purchased from GoldBioTechnology Inc. Invitrogen Mach 1 T1R (Invitrogen)
or NEB Turbo (NEB) chemically competent  strains were used as cloning hosts. Luciferase reporter assays,
phage-based assays, and all evolutions were carried out using  S1030. The original
plasmid containing the  cassette
from which the SP21 -encoding SP was cloned (pMC001579)
was gifted by Michelle Chang’s Research group at University
of California Berkeley. pETM6-mCherry was a gift from Mattheos Koffas
(Addgene plasmid #66534). Plasmids and selection phage
were constructed
using USER cloning or KLD Enzyme Mix (NEB, Ipswich, MA). DNA fragments
were generated by PCR using Pfu Turbo Cx Hotstart DNA Polymerase (Agilent),
VeraSeq 2.0 High Fidelity DNA Polymerase (Enzymatics), or Phusion
U Hot Start DNA Polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All amplicons
were purified using kits from Qiagen and digested with DpnI during
PCR fragment assembly for USER cloning. All restriction endonucleases
and USER enzyme were purchased from NEB. Assembled vectors were transformed
into chemically competent  of various
strains and verified by Sanger sequencing after amplification from
individual colonies using Illustra TempliPhi DNA Amplification kits
(GE Healthcare). Cell growth for cloning purposes was carried out
using 2xYT media supplemented with appropriate antibiotics (Kanamycin,
50 μg/mL; Carbenicillin, 50 μg/mL; Spectinomycin, 100
μg/mL). For phage cloning and replication, phage were transformed
directly into S1059, S1381 or an equivalent phage containing a PSP-gene
III plasmid (, pJC175e or similar) and grown overnight. All transformed phage cultures
were then plated on lawns of this same strain and individual plaques
were picked into fresh media, grown for a minimum of 6 h, and verified
by Sanger sequencing after amplification using Illustra TempliPhi
DNA Amplification kits (GE Healthcare). For all reporter assays,
the desired number of individual colonies from transformation plates
were grown overnight at 37 °C in Davis Rich Media (DRM) supplemented with carbenicillin (50 μg/mL
from 1000× aqueous stock solution) and spectinomycin (100 μg/mL
from 1000× aqueous stock solution). Cultures were diluted 100
to 1000-fold into fresh medium supplemented with 40 ng/mL anhydrotetracycline
(ATc) if needed for FrmR expression from the pTR47m4 reporter plasmid
and grown until early exponential phase (OD approximately
0.4). At this stage, arabinose was added to induce expression of Mdh
from the P promoter, with full induction assumed at
1–10 mM. For continuous monitoring of luminescence, 200 μL
of sample were placed into a Corning black clear bottom 96 well
plate and analyzed for optical density at 600 nm and luciferase activity
at 37 °C on an Infinite Pro M1000 plate reader (Tecan). For discrete
time points, 150 μL of culture was transferred to the same plates
at given times postinduction and measured the same way. All liquid
cultures and continuous cultures during plate-reading were grown with
regular shaking (200 rpm) or stirring. Plaque Assays for Phage
Titer Quantification For plaque
assays used to clone and titer phage, the desired host strain for
plaquing was grown at 37 °C to late log-phase (OD 0.6–1.2). 100 to 200 μL of host culture was infected
with 10 μL of a phage dilution series and diluted into 1 mL
of molten 0.75% (w/v) agar in 2xYT and immediately plated on 1.5%
(w/v) agar in 2xYT media. Agar was cooled and set before plates were
inverted and grown overnight at 37 °C. PACE experiments were performed as
previously described. All chemostat and lagoon systems were maintained using Masterflex
Digital Pump systems (Cole-Parmer) at fixed RPM values manually calculated
to provide a desired flow-rate for the tube diameter used during the
experiment. TSS chemically competent () S1030 were transformed with desired
AP and MP and plated on 2xYT agar containing 0.5 to 2% glucose (w/v).
A single colony was grown to saturation overnight at 37 °C in
DRM containing appropriate antibiotics and diluted the next day 100-
to 1000-fold into a chemostat at 37 °C containing 50–100
mL of Davis Rich Media supplemented with appropriate antibiotics for
the AP/MP used (Carbenicillin, 50 μg/mL; Chloramphenicol, 40
μg/mL, all dissolved directly into growth media from solid salts).
Once the chemostat reached an OD of ∼0.8–1.2,
dilution was started and adjusted in order to best maintain this OD range, which varied by host but typically fell in the range
of 0.5–1.2 chemostat volumes per hour. Chemostat media was
flowed into lagoons at a desired flow-rate. Lagoons were treated with
1 M arabinose solution to 10 mM final lagoon concentration pumped
from a syringe pump (New Era Pump Systems) and 1.5 mL/h of a 5–20%
methanol and glutathione solution from a second syringe pump to achieve desired
final concentrations of 0.5 to 2% (v/v) methanol (125 mM to 500
mM) and 5 mM glutathione. Phage were injected into lagoons to start
the evolution and collected from lagoon waste needles or waste lines
at desired time points. Phage titers were determined by plaquing onto
pJC175e-containing S1030 derivatives, typically S1381. Sequencing
data was collected by picking individual plaques into fresh media
and growing overnight. Overnight cultures were spun down and the supernatant
used as template material for rolling circle amplification using Illustra
TempliPhi DNA Amplification kits (GE Healthcare). Sequences were determined
by Sanger sequencing and results were aligned using SeqMan alignment
software (DNAStar) and manually analyzed and recorded. All liquid
cultures and were grown with continuous shaking (200 rpm) or stirring. TSS chemically competent () S1030 were transformed
with desired AP and MP and plated on 2xYT agar containing 0.5 to 2%
glucose (w/v) along with appropriate concentrations of antibiotics
(Carbenicillin, 50 μg/mL from 1000× aqueous stock solution;
Chloramphenicol, 40 μg/mL from 1000× ethanol stock solution).
A single colony was grown to saturation overnight at 37 °C in
DRM containing appropriate antibiotics and diluted the next day 100-
to 1000-fold into fresh DRM. Cultures were grown to log-phase (OD 0.3–0.6), treated with 10 mM arabinose to induce
mutagenesis, the desired amount of anhydrotetracycline for a given
passage (0 or 40 ng/mL unless otherwise indicated), glutathione solution
to a final concentration of 10 mM, and the desired amount of methanol
(0 to 500 mM). Treated cultures were split into the desired number
of either 2 mL cultures in single culture tubes or 500 μL cultures
in a 96-well plate and infected with selection phage. Infected cultures
were grown overnight at 37 °C and harvested the next day  centrifugation (20 000 rcf for 2 min for individual
culture tubes, 3000 rcf for 10 min for 96-well plates). Supernatant
containing evolved phage was isolated with optional filtration through
a 0.2 μm Costar spin filter (Corning) and stored at 4 °C.
Isolated phage were then used to infect the next passage and the process
repeated for however many passages were desired for the selection.
Phage were diluted passage to passage a maximum of 10-fold and a minimum
of 1000-fold. Phage titers were determined by plaquing onto pJC175e-containing
S1030 derivative strain S1381. Sequencing data was collected by picking
individual plaques into fresh media and growing overnight. Overnight
cultures were spun down and the supernatant used as template material
for rolling circle amplification using Illustra TempliPhi DNA Amplification
kits (GE Healthcare). Sequences were determined by Sanger sequencing
and results were aligned using SeqMan alignment software (DNAStar)
and manually analyzed and recorded. All liquid cultures and were grown
with continuous shaking (200 rpm) or stirring. TSS chemically competent () S1030 were transformed
with desired pTR48 plasmid derivative encoding a given  gene and plated on 2xYT agar containing spectinomycin (100 μg/mL).
Colonies were cultured overnight in DRM media containing spectinomycin
(50 μg/mL), then diluted 100-fold into fresh media in the morning
and incubated with shaking (200 rpm) at 37 °C until OD 0.5–0.6. Mdh expression was induced with 10 mM arabinose,
and growth continued for another 2 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation
(20 000 rcf, room temperature, 5 min), washed once with PBS,
and the pellets frozen at −20C. Lysis was achieved with B-PER
complete (0.1 mL B-PER per 1 mL culture, room temperature, 15 min),
and the soluble fraction isolated by centrifugation (20 000
rcf, 4 °C, 20 min) and stored on ice until used. Methanol dehydrogenase
activity was measured by following the methanol-dependent reduction
of NAD at 340 nm in 250 μL final volume using a
clear, flat-bottom 96 well plate and SpectraMax model M2e plate reader
with SoftMax Pro 6.5 software. The assay consisted of 100 mM glycine-KOH
(pH 9.5), 5 mM MgSO and 1 mM NAD, and was
initiated by the addition of methanol to a final concentration of
50 mM or 500 mM. Product formation at 37 °C was quantified in
comparison to a NADH standard curve. Total protein concentration in
crude lysate was determined by Pierce BCA Assay (ThermoFisher). Activities
are reported as arbitrary units, with one unit defined as 1 μmol
NADH per minute, and normalized to total lysate protein concentration. pET vectors encoding 6x-His-Mdh genes
were transformed into BL21* (de3) Chemically Competent  (Invitrogen) and plated on LB Agar with 50 μg/mL kanamycin
at 37 °C. A single colony of each variant was inoculated into
2 mL of LB media with 50 μg/mL kanamycin and grown overnight
at 37 °C. Overnight cultures diluted 1000-fold into to 200 mL
of LB with 50 μg/mL kanamycin, 20 mM MgSO, and 100
μM ZnCl and grown to OD 0.6–1.2,
induced with 0.1 mM IPTG, and grown overnight at 22 °C (220 rpm).
Cultures were spun down at 10 000 rcf for 15 min at 4 °C,
decanted, and resuspended in 3 mL B-PER reagent treated with EDTA-free
protease inhibitor (Roche cOmplete, Mini, EDTA-free) and left at room
temperature for 30–60 min. Lysed cells were spun down for 20
min at 20 000 rcf at 4 °C. Soluble lysate was decanted
directly onto 2.5 mL of Ni-NTA resin (5 mL of a 50% solution washed
with PBS, pH 7.4 with 10 mM imidazole to remove all ethanol). Flow
through was collected by gravity and/or light application of vacuum
to speed up the initial flow. The column was then washed with 2 to
10 mL of ice cold wash buffer (PBS pH 7.4 with 25 mM imidazole), followed
by elution with 2 mL ice cold elution buffer (PBS pH 7.4 with 250
mM imidazole). Elution fractions were checked  SDS-PAGE gel, pooled, and transferred to Amicon 3 kDa CO Spin Columns
and concentrated. Proteins were exchanged a total of 5 times into
Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) to remove imidazole before overnight storage at
4 °C and kinetics analysis the following day, with a final estimated
imidazole concentration of no more than 1 mM. Final protein concentrations
were determined  Pierce BCA Protein Assay (ThermoFisher).
One μg of each enzyme was analyzed  SDS-PAGE
using a Bolt 4–12% Bis-Tris Plus Gel (ThermoFisher) and visualized
with Instant Blue stain (Expedeon) to verify the purity and size of
each enzyme. Enzyme not used for kinetics assays within 24 h was flash-frozen
in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. 1 mM NAD was added to
reaction buffer (100 mM glycine-NaOH (pH 9.5), 50 mM MgSO), and was incubated for 5 min with about 10 μg of Mdh enzyme
at 37 °C. The methanol dehydrogenase reaction was initiated by
the addition of methanol to a final concentration of 0, 10, 25, 50,
62.5, 125, 250, 500, 750, 1000, 1500, or 2000 mM at a final volume
of 100 μL in a Corning black clear bottom 96 well plate. Product
formation at 37 °C was quantified in comparison to an NADH standard
curve prepared in reaction buffer. Total protein concentrations were
reconfirmed by Pierce BCA Protein Assay (ThermoFisher). We note here
that 50 mM MgSO is ten times more concentrated than typical
assay conditions, but this did not noticeably alter our observed reaction
rates. Reactions were all blanked to a well containing reaction buffer
with 1 mM NAD. Initial velocities were determined from
the slope of a plot of the calculated concentration of NADH based
on absorbance at 340 nm. Steady-state kinetic parameters were calculated
by fitting these velocities to the Michaelis–Menten equation
using the “fit” command in gnuplot (). Freshly transformed
colonies of MG1655(DE3) Δ were precultured overnight in Medium A (LB + 5 g/L xylose,
20 mM MgSO, 100 μM ZnCl, 50 μg/mL
kanamycin from 1000× aqueous stock solution), then diluted 100-fold
into fresh Medium A and incubated with shaking (200 rpm) at 37 °C
until OD 0.5–0.6. Pathway enzyme expression was
induced with 100 μM IPTG, and growth continued for another 2
h. The culture was then centrifuged (10 min at 3500 rcf), washed once
with an equal volume of M9 medium, and resuspended in an equal volume
of M9 containing 5 g/L -xylose, and 250 mM C methanol (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, 99%). Cells were incubated
with shaking for a further hour before intracellular metabolites were
extracted as described previously. Briefly,
1 mL of liquid culture was filtered through a 0.45 μm nylon
filter, washed with 10 mL room-temperature water, and then the filter
was transferred into a 50 mL falcon tube containing 5 mL of extraction
solution (40:40:20 acetonitrile:methanol:water) at −20 °C.
After 30 min, the filter was removed, the samples were centrifuged,
and the supernatants dried overnight under air. The next morning,
dried metabolites were resuspended in 150 μL water, centrifuged
at 13 000 rpm for 40 min, and injected into an LC–MS/MS
system as previously described..