Regulatory processes in biology
often require switch-like behaviors that are resistant to noise. Although
it has become clear that feedback loops are critical for mediating
precise switching between mutually exclusive ON and OFF states in
regulatory networks (e.g., calcium signaling, p53
regulation, galactose regulation, cell cycle, and budding yeast polarization), their relationship to noise propagation is less
clear. For example, some have demonstrated that positive feedback
loops amplify noise and negative feedback loops attenuate noise, while others have suggested that positive feedback loops can also
attenuate noise and that there is no strong correlation between the
sign of feedback loops and their noise propagation properties. In a particularly insightful study of the latter, Brandman et al.
proposed that two interlinked positive feedback loops with dual time
scales (one slow and one fast) could effectively reduce noise in signal
output and at the same time respond promptly to an activating signal. Since the sign of feedback does not by itself explain the
noise
propagation features of biological circuits, is there an intrinsic
quantity that does? To address this question, we previously conducted
a mathematical analysis and discovered that a critical quantity, termed
the signed activation time (SAT), succinctly captures a system’s
ability to maintain a robust ON state under large disturbances. The SAT is defined as the difference between
a switch’s deactivation and activation times multiplied by
input noise frequency. We showed that systems with a small SAT are
easily susceptible to noise in the ON state (intuitively, this is
because input fluctuations can turn the switch off more quickly than
they can turn the switch back on), whereas systems with a large SAT
buffer noise at the ON state (Figure ). This
means that noise attenuation can be achieved even in a single positive
loop system, as long as the dynamics satisfy a high SAT. While the focus of the previous study was on the ON state,
many
biological systems require a robust switch that not only prevents
spurious deactivation at the ON state, but also spurious activation
at the OFF state. Given that a high SAT buffers noise at the ON state,
it stands to reason that a high SAT amplifies noise at the OFF state.
A trade-off therefore emerges: how does a biological circuit prevent
spurious activation at the OFF state and, at the same time, deactivation
at the ON state? Here a common property of biological switches, bistability,
sheds light. In the hysteresis region of a bistable switch, the ON
and OFF states are both immune to changes in input concentration,
thereby displaying superior noise buffering at both states. If we ask what the SAT is in this hysteresis region, we quickly
realize that there are in fact two SATs, since the ON state does not
deactivate and the OFF state does not activate. That is, coming from
a high input concentration, the SAT at the ON state is infinity, and
coming from a low input concentration, the SAT at the OFF state is
negative infinity. The SAT, therefore, is not a single constant describing
a circuit but is associated with the state of the circuit. Since we
are interested in the noise tolerance of the OFF and ON states, we
may introduce two SATs, which we call input-associated SATs (iSATs),
each of which corresponds to the significantly different mean input
concentration at the OFF and the ON states. With these new quantities,
we hypothesize that systems exhibiting
superior resistance to input noise at both ON and OFF states are those
exhibiting high iSATs at the ON state and low iSATs at the OFF state.
In this paper, we first extend our mathematical analysis of SATs to
noise propagation in the OFF state of switches, demonstrating that
a low SAT indeed leads to a stable OFF state. We then explore 33 three-node
circuits to find networks that can achieve high iSAT at the ON state
and low iSAT at the OFF state. Though there is a general trade-off,
we identify five networks that readily satisfy this condition. Interestingly,
we find that all five networks share the mutual activation motif,
suggesting the advantage of positive feedback in buffering noise.
More generally, we believe that analyzing a network’s iSAT
values can provide a concise description of how a circuit may respond
to input noise. To further understand noise management, we also analyze
the relation of sensitivity (or susceptibility), noise amplification
rate, and iSATs. SAT and noise
attenuation property at the ON state. (a) The single
positive feedback module. (b) The definition
of SAT. ω is the noise frequency in the input. (c) Comparing
outputs of systems with large SAT and small SAT when giving inputs
without (left) and with noise (right). Low SAT Leads to a Stable
OFF State One commonly used
quantity to measure noise is the standard noise amplification rate
(NAR) defined as the ratio of the coefficient of variation between
the output and the input:where  is the output,  is the
input, ⟨·⟩ represents the mean,
and std(·) denotes the standard deviation. Direct application
of NAR to the OFF state, however, leads to loss of one critical piece
of information for switches: the relative size of the mean output
to the distance between ON and OFF states. To illustrate this notion,
in Figure a we present two systems with similar
NAR. Yet system I is superior because the output stays closer to the
OFF state, as the distance between the ON and the OFF in system I
is larger. This example suggests the need for a measurement that not
only takes into account variations in the output but also considers
its deviation from the OFF state. We therefore first introduce a more
appropriate measurement of noise in this context, defined as the deviation
from the OFF state, normalized by the distance between the steady
state ON and OFF values:Here,  and  are the steady state values
of output corresponding to static inputs at ON and OFF, respectively.
Using this new measurement, system I in Figure a has a smaller NAR than system II, indicating a more
desirable noise property at the OFF state. Consequently, systems with
a low NAR are capable of attenuating local fluctuations
at the OFF state as well as staying away from the ON state. The NAR
defined in eq  will still be used to measure
noise amplification at the ON state and will be denoted by NAR thereafter. Naturally, we ask what the relation between
SAT and NAR is and how SAT affects the noise property
at the OFF state. Intuitively, a system that responds slowly to a
pulse signal and falls back quickly after removal of the signal would
tend to stay close to the OFF state. It is therefore natural to speculate
that a strongly negative SAT ( < ) leads a low NAR. This conjecture is immediately confirmed by numerical simulations
in a single positive feedback module: smaller SAT corresponds to better
noise attenuation at the OFF state (Figure b and the first panel in Figure c). To further
explore the generality of this result, we simulated a double positive
feedback module, a polymyxin B resistance
model in enteric bacteria, and a yeast
cell polarization system (, Section A). In all simulations,
selected parameters were randomly varied following a log uniform distribution
in the 20-fold range of the base parameters in the original models
(Tables S1–4, , Section A). All simulations consistently demonstrate a positive
correlation between the NAR and SAT (Figure c). We also investigated the effect of using different
frequencies and distributions in the input noise. The overall positive
relation between SAT and NAR remains true (, Section B.7). SAT and noise attenuation property at the OFF state. (a) Systems
I and II have similar NAR, but system I stays closer to the OFF state
than system II. (b) Comparison of outputs of systems with large SAT
and small SAT when given inputs without (left) and with (right) noise.
(c) NAR and SAT have a positive relationship in the
single positive feedback module, the double positive feedback module,
the polymyxin B resistance model in enteric bacteria, and the yeast
cell polarization system. Attenuating
Noise at Both ON and OFF With the “design
principles” for the OFF state in the previous section and those
concluded in ref () for the ON state, a natural question arises: Can one find a system
that attenuates noise at both ON and OFF states? At the first thought,
it seems impossible. A system with large SAT  noise at the OFF state but  noise at
the ON state; however, a system with small SAT  noise at the OFF state but  noise at the
ON state (Figure c and Figure b). The dilemma resolves when a system can have different
SATs at the ON and OFF states, which can be captured by the introduction
of the input-associated SATs (iSATs): Here,  is defined
as the response time to a signal changing from  to , and  is defined as the response time
to a signal changing from  to  (Figure a green
bars, and , Section
A). As a result, the SAT in ref () is a special case of when  = 0 and  = 1. Considering that the mean, variance, and frequency of the inputs
at the ON and the OFF states are usually significantly different,
the iSAT of a system should be allowed to vary between the ON and
OFF states. Figure a shows a case where the
input varies in [0, 1] at the ON state (gray lines in Figure a left panel) and [0, 0.2] at the OFF state (gray
lines in Figure a right panel). At the ON
state the new iSAT remains the same as SAT, whereas at the OFF state
it is now defined to be associated with the response time to pulses
ranging from 0 to 0.2 and 0.2 to 0. In this particular case, the iSAT
is positive at the ON state and negative at the OFF state. For convenience,
we hereafter denote the iSAT at the ON state as iSAT and
the iSAT at the OFF state as iSAT. Compared with the
original definition of SAT in ref (), iSAT exhibits a stronger relationship with
sensitivity of the system (introduced in the following section), given
the same noise attenuation level (Figure S4b, ). Now if we examine the relation
between iSAT and the noise amplification
rate for the single positive feedback module, it is not hard to find
a system with a good noise attenuation property at both ON and OFF
states. One such case illustrated in Figure c has an iSAT = 28.8 and iSAT = −10.1. To search for general systems that attenuate noises at both
ON
and OFF states, we systematically explore all three-node circuits,
composed of an input node (I), an output node (O), and an intermediate
node (A) (Figure a). The output and intermediate
nodes can have incoming arrows, outgoing arrows, or no arrow, but
the input node is not allowed to have incoming arrows, that is, the
input is not subject to regulations from the output or the intermediate
node. Each arrow can be either positive (activation) or negative (repression).
Among all 81 possible configurations of the networks captured by this
formulation, 33 of them are capable of producing the desired switching
behaviors, that is, the output is high with a high input and low with
a low input (Figure S2, , Section A.5). Each network structure
can give rise to a range of noise properties
when varying the values of parameters. To identify networks that attenuate
noise at both the ON and OFF states, around 6 × 10 random parameter sets were generated for each network, and the corresponding
iSATs associated to the ON signal and the OFF signal were calculated,
respectively. Here we define the “good iSAT region”
as the top left corner in the iSAT–iSAT plane (above the red dotted lines in Figure a as defined in the , Section A.5). Networks in this region can give rise to large (positive)
iSAT and small (negative) iSAT and are
expected to attenuate noise at both states. We identify five systems
(Figure b) that have parameter sets falling
in this region (Figure a). Interestingly,
all five networks contain the mutual activation motif. This is likely
due to the fact that the positive feedback slows down the temporal
dynamics to provide a longer averaging time beneficial to noise buffering. Next, we confirm that these five mutual activation systems show
an advantage in noise management. The NAR and NAR can be computed by giving a noisy signal to the networks
defined by the 6 × 10 random parameters. The density
plot is shown in Figure b. The same group
of five networks is found to have better noise property at both states. To quantitatively compare the noise properties among different
networks, we define the “low noise region” as the bottom
left corner in the NAR–NAR plane
(under the green dotted lines in Figure b
as defined in the , Section A.5). Points in this region have low noise level at both
ON and the OFF states. In all 33 systems, on average 0.4% of the points
fall in the “low noise region”, while for systems corresponding
to the “good iSAT region”, this average percentage increases
to 77%. Moreover, all points in the “low noise region”
are contributed by the five mutual activation systems. Compared to the simplest two-node
linear network (network 27) that
directly transmits an input signal to the output node, networks with
extra regulation from the intermediate node (e.g., networks 19, 20,
and 23) generally show a wider range of iSATs and hence have a better
chance at noise attenuation. Among them, the ones with the mutual
activation motif (e.g., network 19) are capable of reaching the “good
iSAT region”, which leads to the best noise attenuation at
both ON and OFF states (Figure ). Still,
a trade-off between the NAR and NAR exists
for a majority of the networks: Data lie on the diagonal
region of the NAR–NAR plane, showing
a negative correlation of the noise amplification rates between the
ON and OFF states (Figure b). This implies
that when a system is capable of attenuating noise at the ON state,
it often comes at the cost of large noise amplification at the OFF
state, and vice versa. To further investigate the five mutual activation systems’
noise properties, we sampled a set of random parameters six times
larger than those in Figure . We evaluate
a system’s iSAT property by how close it is to the ideal case
(the star symbol in Figure a). The “good
iSAT region” is further divided into 4 groups (groups 2–5).
Systems with a larger group number are closer to the ideal case and
are defined to have better iSAT property (larger iSAT and smaller iSAT). Group 1 consists of all other points
falling outside the “good iSAT region”. Figure  shows that for mutual activation systems, the better
their iSAT property is, the better chance they have to achieve good
noise attenuation (Figure b). In particular,
independent of the specific mutual activation system chosen, the majority
of the points lying in the second quadrant of the iSAT–iSAT plane (Figure a)
have values of NAR in the “low noise region” for both
ON and OFF states. Finally, we studied the single positive feedback system using
different
types of equations, specifically, mass-action kinetics versus Michaelis–Menten
kinetics, to explore the relationship between SATs and NARs. We find
consistent results among different representations of the same regulatory
system (). In addition,
we plot the relationship in the 33 three-node networks. It is interesting
to observe that while the relationship between SATs and NARs shows
a clear trend, there seems to be more outliers in the OFF state (). It is not surprising
that NARs are likely to depend on other factors, as seen in our analytical
studies of iSAT and NAR (e.g., eqs 19
and 22 in , Sections
B.4 and B.5). Relation
of iSAT and NAR in the single positive feedback module.
(a) Left: iSAT is positive ( < ) with respect
to the stochastic input varying between 0 and 1 (the light gray curve
in the background). Right: iSAT is negative ( > ) with respect to the stochastic input varying
between 0 and 0.2
(the light gray curve). (b) In the single positive feedback module,
iSAT has a negative relation with NAR, and
iSAT has a positive relation with NAR.
The triangles point to desirable parameter sets that give rise to
high iSAT and low iSAT. (c) A single positive
feedback module with small NAR and NAR at
the same time. Left: a noisy input signal ranging uniformly from 0
to 0.1 at the OFF state and 0 to 0.5 at the ON state. Right: the output
corresponding to the positive feedback system with  = 7,  = 1,  = 0.001,  = 0.01, and
τ = 0.003. Three-node networks. (a) All possible three-node networks.
Red
arrows denote positive regulations, and blue ones represent inhibitions.
I, the input; A the intermediate node; O, the output. (b) Five network
structures that result in large iSAT and small iSAT. Temporal and noise properties
for all 33 networks. (a) The density
plot of iSAT vs iSAT. The top left corner
above the red dotted line is the “good iSAT region”.
Only networks 1, 10, 19, 28, and 31 have points in that region. (b)
The density plot of NAR vs NAR. The bottom
left corner under the green dotted line is the ″low noise region″.
Only networks 1, 10, 19, 28, and 31 have points in that region. iSATs and noise properties for four sample networks. (a)
From left
to right: linear cascade, mutual activation, interlinked positive
and negative feedback loop, and mutual inhibition. (b) iSAT vs iSAT. (c) NAR vs NAR.
Panels b and c share the same 5000 randomly chosen data sets. (d)
Typical output from each network. Dashed blue line: concentration
of the output over time with a noise-free input. Solid red line: concentration
of the output over time with a noisy input. iSAT as an indicator of noise properties in the five mutual
activation
systems. (a) The randomly selected parameters used for the simulation
are grouped into five groups (regardless of the choice of the five
systems) according to their distance to the upper left corner (the
spot indicated by the star). (b) The systems with parameters corresponding
to better iSAT property (smaller iSAT and larger iSAT) consistently show larger proportion falling in the “low
noise region”. Sensitivity, iSAT, and Noise Amplification
Rate at the ON State Although it is important to control
noise amplification at both
ON and OFF states, a useful system must be able to respond to the
input signal with sufficient sensitivity. One way to estimate how
sensitively a system responds to an input at the ON state is by evaluating
the sensitivity (or susceptibility) of the output in response to an
infinitesimally small perturbation in the input: () = d(ln )/d(ln ), in which  is evaluated at the ON state in the
input and  is the output. Naturally, the noise amplification
rate and the level of sensitivity of a system in the ON state exhibits
a positive correlation. But how do the
noise amplification rate, iSAT, and the sensitivity relate to each
other? We study these relationships by first analyzing the single
positive feedback module at the ON tate. The analytical estimate of
the simple system suggests an interesting role of iSAT in connecting NAR and the sensitivity, denoted  (, Section B.3): First, we notice
a positive relationship between  and
NAR in eq .
One challenge for noise management in a switching system is simultaneously
attaining low NAR and high , as sensitivity to signal change seems inevitably linked to sensitivity
to noises in the signal. Interestingly, our analysis reveals that
by increasing iSAT, a low noise amplification rate and
large sensitivity can be achieved simultaneously. Direct simulations
of the single positive feedback module as well as the other three
more complex systems, including the double positive feedback module,
the polymyxin B resistance model in enteric bacteria, and the yeast
cell polarization system, support and confirm this analytical relationship
(Figure a). Next, eq  indicates that the NAR and iSAT are negatively correlated with a fixed , which is further confirmed through direct
simulations of the four systems (Figure b).
The result is consistent with the previous findings in ref () based on SATs (Figure
S4a, ). As expected,
from eq , we observe a positive correlation
between the noise amplification rate and sensitivity, as demonstrated
in previous studies. Finally, these results
are further validated by a two-sample  test between
the high iSAT group (highest
quartile) and the low iSAT group (lowest three quartiles).
The mean ratio of NAR and sensitivity in the high iSAT group is significantly larger than that of the low iSAT group, for all four models studied. This demonstrates that
when iSAT is small, the ratio of sensitivity and NAR are small, and when iSAT is large, the ratio
of sensitivity and NAR are large. Interestingly,
at the OFF state, only a weak positive relation
between NAR and sensitivity can be observed for the
single positive feedback module according to our analysis (, Section B.6). However,
the trend is not observed in more complex systems, and our numerical
simulations do not show a consistent monotonic correlation of the
two quantities. By scrutinizing the expression of NAR, one intuitive explanation is that increasing the sensitivity increases
both the denominator and the numerator. Thus, a monotonic relation
between  and NAR should
not be expected. Finally, we would like to comment that the input noise used
here
is monochromatic. When varying the input noise frequency () or replacing the uniformly
distributed noise by the white noise (), the relations among NAR, iSAT, and sensitivity
are conserved in the single positive feedback module. When the input
noise is a superimposition of noises with different frequencies, one
may use Fourier Transform to decompose the input into noises with
frequency ω and amplitude . It is likely that the one
with the smallest frequency has more weight in the overall SAT, as
also indicated by the two-time-scale asymptotic expansion of the solutions
to the single positive feedback system, which has shown that fast
varying noises are filtered out in such case. Direct simulations for iSAT, NAR and sensitivity.
(a) Noise amplification rate versus sensitivity. (b) Noise amplification
rate versus signed activation time. In each panel, results from four
systems are shown (from left to right): single positive feedback module,
double positive feedback module, polymyxin B resistance model in enteric
bacteria, and yeast cell polarization system. All simulations were performed in Mathematica
8.0. Data analysis and visualization
were generated by Matlab
2010b and R 2.15.2. Please see  for more details for the models, simulations, and mathematical analysis..