Synthetic biology is enabling countermeasure development to emerging infectious
diseases to begin before a pathogen is actually available on site in the
laboratory. Once pathogen genomes are made publicly available from an
outbreak, researchers the world over can use gene synthesis to assemble
vaccine candidates and component proteins for
structural/biological studies and antibody development.
The latter process can leverage single-pot repertoires of affinity scaffolds
to isolate binders within days (for a review, see ref ()), which can then be fused to
reporter proteins to enable single-step pathogen recognition. Here, we
wished to apply the single-pot antibody reporter fusion pipeline to severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), which causes
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Our objective was
to develop a basic toolkit to generate and characterize highly specific
immunoreagents that would facilitate recognition of target antigen, infected
cells, and enable single-step high resolution fluorescence microscopy.
Critically, the process needed to be as seamless as possible with guaranteed
compatibility between antibody expression and reporter protein expression
rather than case-by-case optimization and mixing-and-matching. If
successful, the proof-of-principle study would indicate the processes could
be applied to other CoV to develop a broader immunoreagent toolkit for
studying viral biology, viral classification, and pandemic preparedness. Our pipeline begins with the single-pot phage display repertoire
“Nomad”, a semisynthetic assembly of nanobodies (VHH, variable
domains of heavy chain only antibodies; sdAb, single-domain
antibodies). The diversity of the initial 1 ×
10 sdAb gene repertoire had been expanded  by a combination of complementarity determining region
(CDR) shuffling and random mutagenesis to yield a productive 1 ×
10 member library. Cycles of “panning” are
performed over the course of a week where the desired sdAb are enriched from
the vast array of nonbinders by antigen capture, elution, and phage
amplification in . SdAb are legendary in
addressing pathogen crevices, viral canyons, cryptic viral concave, and
planar/convex epitopes. Our previous success in targeting nucleoprotein (NP) of species of the genera
 and  with
Nomad led us to target the functionally equivalent viral genome chaperone
protein of SARS-CoV-2, which is a nucleocapsid (N). The N protein is
multifunctional and is the most abundant viral component in the infected
cell and virus particles and exhibits overall structural conservation
throughout the CoV family, though with varying degrees of amino acid
variation (for a review, see ref ()). Newly synthesized N protein assembles into dimers and then oligomers to
envelope the 26–30 kb positive sense single stranded RNA genome to
form the ribonucleocapsid, which is packaged into virus particles and makes
a highly avid target for antigen sandwich assays. Though infected hosts do
make antibodies against N, the interaction does not
appear to be a cyclical process of surveillance-selection-escape, as occurs
with the external viral spike (S) antigen responsible for receptor binding
and cell membrane fusion. Consequently, N amino acid
diversity fluctuates far less through time and across geographies, making it
a convenient marker for classifying past, contemporary, and (potentially)
future CoV yet to emerge. N protein is present in large amounts in serum
early during CoV infection, and has been used as a biomarker of infection in
SARS, Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (MERS), and COVID-19. Recombinant CoV N
proteins can be produced in both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cells, in the absence of other viral factors, allowing
materials to be made for sdAb selection and affinity/specificity
characterization. Our first reporter protein was Gaussia luciferase (Gluc) initially developed by
Tannous and colleagues, which we had previously fused
to sdAb to enable equilibrium concentration at 50% (EC)
determinations to be made by ELISA by leveraging the high sensitivity and
large dynamic range of the enzyme. Gluc has five disulfide bonds and so requires the oxidizing environment of the
periplasm to fold efficiently, which is convenient for sdAb fusions since
phage display naturally transits antibodies through the periplasmic
compartment to enable their own disulfide bond(s) to form. Our second
reporter was the soybean ascorbate peroxidase derivative APEX2 initially
developed by Lam and colleagues for proximity labeling
in living cells after intracellular expression. Normally cytosolic, we had
substituted a lone surface exposed cysteine for serine to enable the enzyme
to be efficiently produced in the periplasm to allow heme cofactor
incorporation through the  outer membrane. When
fused to sdAb specific for filoviral NP, the system enabled recognition of
filoviral infected cells using fluorescent substrate Amplex UltraRed or
colorimetric substrate 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) and conveniently
enabled Western blotting using DAB. While the catalytic
turnover of APEX2 allows for very rapid and sensitive staining, the
substrate is costly, and the reaction can be difficult to control leading to
diffuse staining that is not optimal for high resolution fluorescence
microscopy. Consequently, we sought fluorescent proteins (FPs) that were amenable to
periplasmic expression to generate inherently fluorescent sdAb fusion
proteins more suited to imaging. It is generally accepted that most
fluorescent proteins are produced at high levels in the reducing environment
of the  cytoplasm. In contrast, all sdAb that
we have encountered ( = >200) are produced at high
levels in the periplasm and, therefore, to engineer a generic system for
high level production of sdAb-FP fusions in  we
must overcome this “compartment conundrum”. The difficulties
in producing large amounts of recombinant antibody green fluorescent protein
(GFP) fusions in the periplasm were first encountered over 20 years
ago. GFP was subsequently improved to balance
rates of chromophore oxidation and beta-barrel formation in a superfolding
version (sfGFP) that is more tolerant of passenger
proteins. However, while low levels of sfGFP have been secreted to enable
bacterial physiology to be explored (for a review, see ref ()), the overexpression and high
level production required for pure immunoreagent development appeared to
languish. Consequently, the field moved toward screening for sdAb that were
soluble as cytosolic GFP fusions, using sdAb that
serendipitously fold well in the cytosol for fusions with mCherry or enhancing cytoplasmic sdAb solubility by providing
helper proteins in trans for fusions with enhanced GFP (eGFP). Though the twin-arginine translocation pathway has been
used for exporting prefolded GFP or mCherry, this route would still rely on a sdAb passenger capable
of being folded in the cytosol or selected to do so. Having explored sfGFP
and mCherry as secreted sdAb fusion partners without too much success, we
found ourselves wondering if other members of the FP palette were more
amenable to overproduction in the periplasm. The periplasmic antibiotic
resistance and protein–protein interaction studies of Meiresonne and
colleagues, where negative impacts of FP export
toxicity on cell physiology were considered, indicated that mNeonGreen and
mScarlet-I may well be good candidates for
 Monomeric (m)
NeonGreen is the brightest green/yellow fluorescent protein so far described
and was engineered from the tetrameric LanYFP (Allele Biotechnology) from
the cephalocordate . mNeonGreen is around 1.5 to 3 times as bright as the
commonly used yellow and green FP’s, has an excitation maximum at 506
nm and emission maximum at 517 nm, and is very photostable. mScarlet was
evolved from a consensus red FP scaffold sequence with a redesigned barrel
outer surface to discourage multimerization, and is around 3.5 times
brighter than mCherry making it the brightest red FP known. mScarlet-I is a faster maturing mutant of parental
mScarlet, though with a reduced quantum yield (0.54 instead of 0.70), and
has an excitation maximum at 569 nm and an emission maximum at 593 nm. Production of Prokaryotic Recombinant N Bait Protein In stark contrast to our previous sdAb selections where we had employed
live vaccinia and filovirus preparations as baits, here we used a
single recombinant CoV antigen before SARS-CoV-2 was available. A
synthetic gene encoding N derived from the original Wuhan isolate of
SARS-CoV-2 deposited in Genbank by Wu and colleagues was expressed using the T7 expression system within
 BL21(DE3). Our usual mild
cytosolic expression induction regime (0.1 mM IPTG for 3 h at 25
°C in glucose free media) caused N protein cultures to stall,
perhaps reflecting the inherent ability of N to bind RNA and interfere
with homeostasis. To obtain sufficient biomass we incubated glucose
containing cultures for 24 h at 25 °C to rely on gentler
expression through gradual derepression  glucose
depletion. The approach was effective at generating 2.7 mg of
relatively pure protein from 6 g wet weight of cells following bead
beating and IMAC (A),
which was more than sufficient for our studies requiring a few hundred
micrograms for phage panning, ELISA screens, and titrations. Although
we attempted to further purify the protein using size exclusion
chromatography (SEC), it appeared in the void volume (data not shown),
suggesting it was multimeric. Recombinant N bait protein, sdAb sequences derived from
panning, and their preliminary binding characteristics.
(A) Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE analysis of IMAC pure
recombinant N protein derived from
 expression. Molecular
weight markers in kDa; 1, lysate pre-IMAC; 2,
flow-through; 3–7, alternate peak fractions; N
predicted mwt. 46.7 kDa. (B) Predicted amino acid
sequences of the two sdAb selected on N highlighting the
complementarity determining regions (CDRs). These Nomad
derived clones have additional EPKTPKPQPAASGAEFAAA
sequence after FR4 encoding the long hinge,
 I and  I
restriction sites. (C) Titration of sdAb-Gluc fusion
proteins over a constant amount of purified NP protein to
determine the EC ± SD shown in the
legend. Data points are the means of two separate
experiments with error bars representing ± SD. (D)
Western blot of HEK293T lysates following transient
expression of recombinant N or control beta-galactosidase
(β-gal) genes in pcDNA 48 h post transfection,
probed with sdAb-APEX2 fusions and developed with DAB.
Molecular weight markers are in kDa. Four rounds of panning of our Nomad sdAb library on passively immobilized
N protein yielded two similar sdAb clones occurring at equivalent
frequency following sequencing of 24 clones (8 from rounds 2–4)
(B). Since each
round of panning occurs through the course of 2 days, we were
obtaining N reactive sdAb within 4 days at round 2 with an additional
3 days required to deconvolute the polyclonal population to monoclonal
sdAb. We are obliged to send out our sequencing, and this is probably
the longest bottleneck in the entire process depending on the speed of
the carrier and how busy the sequencing facilities are at any given
time. While amino acid variation was apparent in framework regions 1
(Q1K, A14T) and 2 (T70S), the absence of variation in the
complementarity determining regions (CDRs) means the two clones are
likely to have equivalent binding characteristics. Characterizing the Interaction between sdAb and N Using Gluc and APEX2
Fusion Proteins By producing fusions of each sdAb with downstream Gluc, we were able to
determine the EC for the interaction between antibody and
antigen to be in the tens of nM range with sdAb WuN3 slightly more
potent than sdAb WuN1 (C). These crude affinity measurements are on par with
previous sdAb isolated from this library and were encouraging enough
to warrant further study of reactivity and specificity. Thus, we
assembled sdAb-APEX2 fusion proteins to probe Western blots of HEK293T
lysates following transient expression of human codon optimized
SARS-CoV-2 N in order to gauge their ability to recognize mammalian
cell derived protein (WuN). Each sdAb-APEX2 fusion recognizes a
species migrating at the position expected for N (predicted molecular
weight of untagged N is 45.6 kDa) that is not present in the negative
control β-galactosidase (β-gal) expressing cells (D). Recognition of
the HEK293T N protein by sdAb originally selected on
 derived N antigen indicates that
binding of sdAb is not dependent on post-translational modifications
specific to eukaryotic cells. Furthermore, recognition of denatured N
protein on a membrane indicates the antibody–antigen
interaction is not overly dependent on conformational information
within the epitope. That the sdAb also show no nonspecific background
binding to the myriad of host cell proteins also present on the
Western blot gave us the initial green light to pursue cell
immunostaining. Both of the sdAb-APEX2 fusions were able to recognize recombinant N
protein within transiently expressing HEK293T cells with no background
signal apparent on control transfected cells when development was with
either Amplex UltraRed or DAB (A). By this time in our study,
SARS-CoV-2 had been made available to US researchers by BEI Resources
based on an isolate from Washington state USA-WA1/2020 to enable
live-virus studies of the sdAb to be pursued. Signal strength was
greatly improved when probing Vero cells 24 h postinfection by
SARS-CoV-2 providing a higher number of cells producing N and, likely,
higher amounts of N per cell in this time frame. SARS-CoV-2 is a fast
replicator and using a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 3, titers in
supernatants climb from 1 × 10 pfu
mL at 4 h to 1 × 10 pfu
mL by 24 h. Since we
are using a much lower MOI (approximately 1 ×
10 to 1 × 10) we
have a mix of infected and uninfected cells within each well 24 h
postinfection. Wells of uninfected Vero cells also showed no capacity
to bind the sdAb-APEX2 proteins, indicating signals correlate to viral
infection. The slightly improved performance of the sdAb WuN3 clone
over the sdAb WuN1 clone in EC, Western blot probing, and
immunostaining led us to just work with the former in most of the
subsequent experiments. As can be seen with a broadly distributed and
highly expressed antigen like N the APEX2 imaging at high
magnification can be a little difficult to interpret in terms of
localization with both DAB and Amplex UltraRed development (B) and prompted us to
search for FP alternatives. Employing sdAb-APEX2 fusions to recognize recombinant or
viral N protein within mammalian cells. (A) APEX2 fusion
proteins of the WuN1 and WuN3 sdAb used as probes at 100
nM for recombinant N protein or β-gal transiently
expressed in HEK293T cells 24 h post transfection, or
SARS-CoV-2 infected or uninfected Vero cells 24 h post
infection. Signal development used either Amplex UltraRed
and fluorescent microscopy or DAB and bright field
(10× magnification). (B) 150× magnification of
the SARS-CoV-2 infected cells developed with fluorescent
or colorimetric substrate. Our initial studies of periplasmic sdAb-FP expression actually employed
antifiloviral sdAb as exemplified by
anti- NP sdAb A
fusion protein purification from the periplasm of a standard 500 mL
shake-flask culture. The productivity potential of sdAb fusions to
mNeonGreen, mScarlet-I, and even a superfolding mTurquoise2 optimized
for the periplasm (sfTq2) is clearly evident in contrast
to sfGFP and mCherry when signaled to the periplasm using the
 signal (A). The urgency of the COVID-19
outbreak led us to put the filoviral studies to one side and to
mobilize the mNeonGreen and mScarlet-I genes with long flexible
linkers downstream of the anti-WuN sdAb in place of the APEX2 gene
(B). The
mNeonGreen and mScarlet-I fusions appear well expressed and monomeric,
albeit at lower levels relative to the APEX2 fusions used as our
benchmark (C). It is
noteworthy that using either  or
 signal mediated secretion indicates these
two FP are quite forgiving in their requirements for export to the
periplasm, thereby increasing the chances of compatibility with the
full-range of slow or fast folding affinity scaffolds. The sdAb-BAP is a poor producer relative to the
other three fusions (as a benchmark, sdAb with just a C-terminal
His tag yield peaks of around the 2000 mAu mark from
a 500 mL culture). Each of the main fusion proteins of interest are
fairly pure protein preparations though the mScarlet-I maybe more
prone to degradation than one would like (D). To our knowledge, this is the
first time sdAb-FP fusions have been overproduced in the periplasmic
compartment at a useful scale and provides an effective route to
milligram amounts of protein (E). If we have 2 mL of 1.75 mg of a 45 kDa sdAb-FP
fusion it provides us with 8000 aliquots of 50 μL staining
reagent at 100 nM, making it very cost-effective for microscopy and
high throughput drug screens of wild-type virus for example. By
overcoming the compartment conundrum and producing high levels of
soluble sdAb-FP fusions we bypass complex and bespoke refolding
regimes or chemical conjugations and provide a facile means to
generically refit clones from periplasmic antibody repertoires with FP
functionality. Identification of fluorescent proteins capable of being
overexpressed in the periplasm as sdAb fusions, their
relative purity, and productivity. (A) Size exclusion
chromatogram of the initial panel of FP fused to an
anti- NP sdAb following
IMAC purification from the periplasmic compartment. sfGFP
fusion (black), mNeonGreen fusion (green),
sfTq2 fusion (cyan), mCherry fusion
(yellow), mScarlet-I (red). (B) Schematic of the
 periplasmic expression
vector cassettes used to generate the anti-WuN sdAb fusion
proteins used in the immunoprobing with the parental APEX2
gene being substituted for the D1D2-mNeonGreen and
D1D2-mScarlet-I genes from the
anti- NP sdAb-FP
fusions. P, tac promoter;
B, pectate lyase signal
sequence; D1D2, M13 gene III linker; His6, polyhistidine
tag; t, terminator. (C) Size exclusion
chromatograms of the sdAbWuN3 fusion proteins following
IMAC purification from the periplasmic compartment.
sdAb-BAP (black), APEX2 fusion (yellow), mNeonGreen fusion
(green), mScarlet-I fusion (red), ovalbumin (OVA, blue),
bovine serum albumin (BSA, pink). (D) Coomassie stained
SDS-PAGE gel of the purified proteins from both sdAbWuN1
and sdAbWuN3 fusion protein expressions. (E) Table of
purified protein yields from one 500 mL expression culture
for each of the main constructs. Calibrating sdAb-FP Immunostaining of Recombinant N We were unsuccessful at detecting strong immunofluorescent signal using
mNeonGreen sdAb probes on HEK293T cells transfected with pcDNA-WuN
without increasing the settings to the extent that background green
became apparent. We therefore employed a handful of homemade
expression vectors to see if we could raise the levels of N expression
to achieve immunofluorescence, and in so doing, afford a simple means
of gauging the relative potency of sdAb-FP 
sdAb-APEX2 based detection. The work of Mariati and colleagues in varying various post-transcriptional regulatory
elements before or after the gene of interest was the foundation for
our panel of constructs (A). We used a sandwich ELISA to first monitor the
presence of N antigen from the soluble HEK293T cell fraction through
capture using sdAb-BAP and tracing using phage displayed sdAb. A
gradation of expression levels from the constructs was apparent with
the main drivers of overexpression being the adenovirus tripartite
leader and intervening sequence (AdTri IVS) or
cytomegalovirus (CMV) intron A leader both
exceeding the mutant woodchuck hepatitis post-transcriptional
regulatory element (HPREzb), though the latter
appeared to have an additive effect when combined with either of the
leaders (B). If we
use 1 × 10 RLU from 25 μL of pcDNA lysate as
our baseline, all but puma3 required 1 to 0.4 μL to generate an
equivalent signal (representing 25–62.5-fold increases), while
puma3 required approximately 5 μL (representing a 5-fold
increase). Western blotting and probing with sdAb-APEX2 confirmed the
gradation of levels (C) as did probing the transiently expressing cells with the
sdAb-mNeonGreen fusion protein (D), clearly showing the relationship
between the abundance of N and the degree of staining.
Immunofluorescence detection on a par with APEX2 was enabled at the
high end of the expression spectrum, requiring increases of 10-fold or
more of target protein. Despite the lower sensitivity of mNeonGreen
relative to APEX2 we were encouraged to pursue probing of virus
infected cells with the sdAb-FP fusions. Correlating expression levels of recombinant N by ELISA and
Western blot with sdAb-mNeonGreen cell staining. (A)
Schematic of the expression cassettes of the vectors used
to elevate recombinant N protein levels for
sdAb-mNeonGreen mediated detection in HEK293T cells.
hCMVie, human cytomegalovirus promoter-enhancer; BGH,
bovine growth hormone polyadenylation signals; AdTri-IVS,
adenovirus tripartite leader with intervening sequence;
CMV intron A, cytomegalovirus intron A; mutant HPREzb,
woodchuck hepatitis virus post-transcriptional regulatory
element. (B) ELISA titration of RIPA lysates from
transient expressions of N protein, or control
β-gal, captured using oriented sdAb as captor and
phage displayed sdAb as tracer. The transfections and
sandwich assay were performed twice and plots are the mean
with error bars representing ± SD. (C) Western
blotting of the RIPA lysates of the pcDNA or
puma1–5 vectors expressing WuN, or β-gal
control, probed with sdAb-APEX2 and developed with
SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate.
Molecular weight markers are indicated in kDa. (D)
Transient transfections of control, parental pcDNA or
puma1–5 vectors probed with 100 nM of the Wu3
sdAb-mNeonGreen fusion protein 24 h post-transfection
(10× magnification). SdAb-FP Immunostaining of Virus Infected Cells The sdAb-FP fusion proteins are specific for virus infected Vero cells
and show no background binding on wells of uninfected cells (A and B). In all of the single and double stained images
(C) the
differentiation between nucleus and cytoplasm appears very clear,
highlighting the advantages of spatially concise registers not reliant
on substrate turnover as with APEX2. There appears to be negligible
staining of the nucleus and nucleoli, suggesting that within the 24 h
time period, SARS-CoV-2 N does not appear to accumulate in this
compartment akin to the situation with SARS-CoV. In
contrast, several other CoV N accumulate in the nucleoli, which is
thought to divert biosynthetic resources from the dividing nucleus to
the cytoplasm, which is the main locale for CoV virus replication. Employing the sdAb-FP fusion proteins to probe SARS-CoV-2
infected cells. Immunoprobing Vero cells 24 h
postinfection with SARS-CoV-2 or uninfected Vero cells
with (A) 100 nM sdAb-mNeonGreen or (B) 100 nM
sdAb-mScarlet-I or (C) a mix of both at 100 nM each. First
panels represent Hoechst staining, middle are the
individual channels, and last is the merge (150×
magnification). CoV Specificity and Cross-Reactivity In order to gauge the usefulness of these immunoreagents as tools in a
diagnostic scenario we must define whether they are specific to
SARS-CoV-2 or if they have reactivities to endemic CoV, which may
confound accurate identification as has been noted previously for
SARS-CoV. Until 2003 only two
endemic human CoV (HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-229E) were known, both isolated
in the 1960s. Both viruses are normally associated with
seasonal mild “cold-like” diseases of healthy
immunocompetent individuals, though in infants, the elderly, and
people with underlying health conditions the infections can be more
severe. In 2003 the emergence of SARS-CoV in Guangdong, China reignited interest in CoV family. SARS-CoV spread
globally with over 8000 cases and a 10% case fatality rate, though
rigorous contact tracing followed by home quarantine extinguished the
outbreak. Phylogenetic studies revealed the virus originated in bats,
though probably spilled over to humans from palm civets and raccoon
dogs serving as intermediate hosts in exotic meat markets in
China. The SARS-CoV outbreak motivated several searches for CoV in animal
species different from those already known to harbor major veterinary
threats including pigs and fowl. Additionally, in 2004, HCoV-NL63 was
isolated from a 7-month old child with bronchitis and conjunctivitis
in Holland and HCoV-HKU1 was then isolated from a
patient in Hong Kong suffering from pneumonia.
The origin of HCoV-NL63 is thought to be bats while HCoV-HKU1 is
thought to be rodents, but both intermediate hosts are unknown. A decade later MERS-CoV emerged in humans and is also thought to originate in bats, though
spills over from dromedary camels. The virus still circulates in these
countries since camels are a mainstay of travel and food, and the
virus has infected over a 1000 people with a fatality rate of around
35% with disease being especially severe in elderly males with
comorbidities. Most recently, in late 2019, SARS-CoV-2 emerged within
China to cause the current global pandemic
with, at the time of writing, 77 530 799 cases including
1 724 904 million deaths according to the World Health
Organization COVID-19 Dashboard. While the precise origin and ancestry
of the virus is still under study, its global
distribution suggests a trajectory toward becoming the fifth endemic
HCoV. To begin exploring the epitope of the sdAb and whether this is shared or
unique among CoV we overexpressed the N protein of each of the
reference virus sequences from human codon optimized genes in HEK293T
cells to serve as viral surrogates. Here we used a 72 h time-point to
enable accumulation of recombinant proteins to very high levels to
maximize the chances of detecting cross-reactivities. Each species of
N was well represented as judged by Coomassie stained bands around the
40–50 kDa molecular weight range and visualization of the
transfection control β-gal monomer at 116 kDa (A) and provides us with a
direct means of confirming overexpression without the use of tags
which may alter the biology of N. HCoV-OC43 N appears to have two
overexpressed products in the expected range, while HKU1 appears to
have a full-length and an additional shorter/degradation product.
Western blotting using the sdAb-APEX-2 fusion protein revealed very
strong signal for the SARS-CoV-2 N but only a weak signal for the
SARS-CoV N, despite the excessive amounts of recombinant N being
present (B). No
cross-reactivity was apparent to the collection of other recombinant
CoV N. At the 48 h time-point (data not shown) with slightly less N
proteins present, no reactivity was observable on the SARS-CoV lane,
yet very strong signal was still present on the SARS-CoV-2 sample.
Immunostaining of cells 24 h post-transfection with the more sensitive
sdAb-APEX2 fusion revealed strong staining of the SARS-CoV-2 N as
expected and weaker staining of SARS-CoV N (C) which was mirrored by the less
sensitive sdAb-mNeonGreen probing of the cells 72 h post-transfection
(D). In both
immunostaining regimes, no reactivity was observed to the other CoV N
or negative control β-gal transfected cells. Collectively, the
data suggest that the sdAb is highly specific for SARS-CoV-2 N with
very low cross-reactivity to SARS-CoV N and undetectable
cross-reactivity with the other major CoV N, making the APEX2 and FP
fusions useful tools in being able to distinguish the pandemic
SARS-CoV-2 from other CoV. With 40 amino acid differences between
SARS-CoV-2 (420 aa) and SARS-CoV (423 aa) fairly evenly distributed
throughout the protein we were surprised at the ability of a nonimmune
sdAb to be so discriminating. Future domain mapping and structural
studies should enable us to define the epitope and predict the
likelihood of “epitope-erosion” through viral evolution
as we have done previously for () and () Assessing the cross-reactivity of the anti-WuN sdAb with
non-SARS-CoV-2 N. (A) Coomassie blue stained SDS-PAGE gel
of whole cell lysates of HEK293T cells harvested 72 h post
transfection with puma5 vectors expressing each of the N
genes derived from the reference CoV sequence plus the
original Wuhan SARS-CoV-2 N. Predicted molecular weights
are HCoV-229E N, 43.4 kDa; HCoV-OC43 N, 49.5 kDa; SARS-CoV
N, 46.0 kDa; HCoV-NL63 N, 42.3 kDa; MERS-CoV N, 45.1 kDa;
HCoV-HKU1, 49.1 kDa; SARS-CoV-2, 45.6 kDa. Molecular
weight markers are indicated in kDa. (B) Western blot of
the same lysate samples probed with 100 nM sdAb-APEX2
followed by chemiluminescent development. (C)
Immunostaining HEK293T cells 24 h post transfection with
the puma5 N vectors with 100 nM sdAb-APEX2 followed by
development with Amplex UltraRed. (D) Immunostaining 72 h
post transfection with 100 nM sdAb-mNeonGreen. The paucity of publicly available and free immunoreagents to CoV is hampering
research advances,, BEI Resources currently have a handful of sera listed
to date, 50 μL available once a year. While others in the field may
use privately held conventional anti-CoV N antibodies for diagnostics and
virus hunting, sdAb single-pot repertoires offer a
recombinant alternative that bypasses lengthy, costly, and unethical animal immunizations and are not dependent on
cryopreservation of hybridomas, which is increasingly expensive and can
fail. Milligram amounts of our sdAb-reporter fusions can be made in
 for relatively little expense, in
contrast to monoclonal antibodies that require mammalian cell culture for
high yields, immediately decreasing the financial bar to engage in CoV
immunodetection. Single-step immunoprobing also bypasses the expense
involved in purchasing labeled secondary antibodies and accelerates the
imaging process further. With sdAb sequences immortalized  in Genbank for all to use, unlike most IgG generated
by pharma, we further broaden technology access to all. As tools for studying viral biology and with optimization of DAB staining, the
sdAb-APEX2 conjugates should combine the best of APEX2’s proximity
labeling abilities with higher resolution than a much larger IgG
probe and should bypass artifacts that might
arise using  expressed gene fusions. Selection
pressures on viral replication rates typically lead to viral genomes and
their encoded proteins being quite compact, multifunctional and limited in
how tolerant they are of fusions to reporters without compromising their
ability to function correctly. Meanwhile, the sdAb-FP fusions offer a
noncatalytic alternative to APEX2 that may enable lucrative opportunities to
be realized using single molecule super-resolution microscopy techniques
being advanced for pinpoint localization of the target antigen. The
judicious choice of two monomeric FP scaffolds to act as downstream
substitutes for APEX2 provides a straightforward and generic avenue for
others in the field to fuse their recombinant antibodies of interest to
mNeonGreen and mScarlet-I and interrogate other biological processes. It is
noteworthy that mNeonGreen and mScarlet-I also make an ideal couple for
Förster energy resonance transfer (FRET), which
should enable suitably paired recombinant antibody protein fusions to be
developed into  FRET probes and  wash-less optical biosensors for rapid antigen
detection. Our proof-of-principle success in being able to smoothly generate and
characterize SARS-CoV-2 N specific molecular probes should be applicable to
other CoV to expand the repertoire of tools available for studying this
important family of viruses that continues to pose epidemic and pandemic
threats. Recombinant DNA methods were according to established procedures and
employed commercially available reagents; Phusion High-Fidelity DNA
Polymerase (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA); restriction enzymes and
β-agarase (New England BioLabs, Beverly, MA); T4 DNA ligase, CIP
and T4 PNK (Roche, Nutley, NJ); GTG low melting temperature agarose
for in gel cloning, (Lonza, Walkersville, MD); oligonucleotides
(Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA). Assemblies involving
cloning and PCR amplification were sequenced through the inserts and
junctions to verify the desired construct. Cloning was typically
carried out in XL1-Blue cells unless otherwise stated. Full details of
cloning, oligonucleotides, maps, and sequences of resulting constructs
are available on request. Cytoplasmic Production of N Protein in The N gene from the SARS-CoV-2 Wuhan reference sequence (Genbank
NC_045512.2) was synthesized as an  codon
optimized gBlocks (IDT, Coralville, IA) with a C-terminal
SGH tag. The gene was cloned into
pE, a homemade high copy pUC based T7
expression vector with symmetrical lacO  I and
d III, and sequenced. The plasmid was
mobilized to BL21(DE3) + pRARE and grown at 30 °C overnight in 50
mL starter cultures of TB with 2% glucose, 200 μg
mL ampicillin, and 30 μg
mL chloramphenicol until saturation.
Cultures were poured into 450 mL TB with 2% glucose (no antibiotics)
and grown with vigorous aeration in 2500 mL Bellco baffled flasks for
24 h at 25 °C. Cultures were centrifuged and the pellets drained
of excess media and stored at −80 °C until ready for bead
beating (BioSpec Products, Bartlesville, OK). Once thawed, the pellets
were resuspended in 20 mL 1× immobilized metal affinity
chromatography (IMAC) buffer (20 mM M NaHPO,
0.5 M NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 0.1% Tween-20, pH 7.5) plus a cOmplete
EDTA free protease inhibitor tablet (Roche) and added to a 15 mL
chamber filled halfway with 0.1 mm glass beads. The chamber was topped
off with 1× IMAC buffer to remove any air bubbles and the
cell/bead mixture was blended on ice within a 4 °C fridge for a
total of 12 min with 6 cycles of 2 min on and 2 min off, cooling on
ice in between. Once contents settled, the cell debris was transferred
to a 50 mL conical tube and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 15 min at 4
°C (Beckman Allegra 6R, swing out). The supernatant was decanted
into a new 50 mL tube and centrifuged at 9500 rpm for 15 min at 4
°C (Sorvall RC 6+, F13 FiberLite rotor). The supernatant was
again decanted and centrifuged. The supernatant was filtered through a
32 mm diameter 0.8/0.2 μm filter (Pall, Port Washington, NY) and
applied to a 1 mL HisTrapHP column equilibrated in 1× IMAC
buffer. Protein was eluted with a 0–500 mM imidazole gradient
in 1× IMAC buffer. Protein was analyzed by SDS-PAGE to assess
purity. Fractions were pooled, made to 15% glycerol, quantified by UV
adsorption, and aliquoted for storage at −80 °C. Each well of an 8 well high binding ELISA strip was coated with 100
μL of 1 μg mL N protein in phosphate
buffered saline (PBS) overnight at 4 °C. Wells were washed three
times to brimming with PBS and blocked for 1 h with 2% Carnation
nonfat dried milk in PBS (MPBS). Phagemids representing 1000 clones of
each member of our Nomad semisynthetic library
were applied in eight aliquots of 100 μL MBPS for 1 h with
shaking and then left static for 1 h. Wells were then washed with PBS
containing 0.1% Tween-20 (PBST) followed by PBS; washings were 10, 20,
40, 80 with each buffer for each for rounds 1–4, respectively.
Phagemids were eluted with 100 μL 100 mM triethylamine per well
for 10 min followed by pooling and neutralization with 400 μL 1
M Tris-HCl pH 7.5. 600 μL of the neutralized eluate was added to
10 mL of mid exponential phase XL1-Blue (midexponential phase cells
were grown from cryopreserved aliquots for 1 h at 37 °C) and
incubated at 37 °C for 30 min before titrating an aliquot while
the rest was gently pelleted and plated on 15 cm diameter dishes of
2× YT plus 2% glucose, 200 μg mL
ampicillin and 30 μg mL tetracycline.
Overnight growth on plates at 37 °C was followed by scraping
large plates for glycerol stocking and liquid culture (2× YT plus
2% glucose with ampicillin and tetracycline) in baffled flasks at 37
°C for M13K07 superinfection, selection with 70 μg
mL kanamycin, induction with addition of
IPTG to 1 mM, and overnight growth at 30 °C. Aliquots of the
cultures were clarified by microfuge and kept at −80 °C
for polyclonal ELISA while 800 μL was mixed with 200 μL of
10% MPBS and used for the next panning round. Polyclonal ELISA was
used to monitor antigen specific enrichment of clones and monoclonal
ELISA was used to deconvolute positive phage. DNA sequencing was then
used to identify unique clones. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00566/suppl_file/sb0c00566_si_001.pdf The anti-N sdAb genes, were mobilized to pecan126 to
create the biotinylated sdAb for use as captor and the phage displayed
sdAb to use as tracer. SdAb were mobilized to pecan 287 (a tac
promoter version of the lac based pecan35) to
create the sdAb-Gluc fusions, and to pecan278 to
create the sdAb-APEX2 fusions. A sdAb fusion vector for another job
(pecan326) bearing the A signal sequence and
anti- NP sdAb A with a downstream
PCR amplified fragment encoding the long flexible linker between
domains 1 and 2 of M13 gene III served as an intermediate to receive
PCR fragments encoding sfGFP
( I and  I sites removed
by silent codon mutagenesis) and mCherry (Genbank AY678264,
 I and  I removed), or
gBlocks encoding mNeonGreen (Genbank KC295282.1, 
I removed), mScarlet-I (Genbank KY021424.1,  I
site removed), or sfmTurquoise2 (Addgene sequence
#117960). Genes were inserted  I and
d III and all encoded a C-terminal
GSH tag. The mNeonGreen and mScarlet-I
genes were subsequently transferred to the anti-WuN sdAb construct
pecan278 along with D1D2, replacing the APEX2 gene I and d III to create pecan367
(expressing sdAb-mNeonGreen) and pecan373 (expressing
sdAb-mScarlet-I). Sequences of the major components used in this study
are presented in the . Periplasmic Production of sdAb, sdAb-Gluc, sdAb-APEX2, sdAb-FP
Proteins Plasmids were mobilized into  Tuner + pRARE
for recombinant protein production and were grown in 50 mL starter
cultures of terrific broth (TB) plus 2% glucose at 30 °C
overnight with 200 μg mL ampicillin and 30
μg mL chloramphenicol in 250 mL Bellco
baffled flasks. For APEX2 fusions, a stock solution of hemin (Sigma,
St. Louis, MO) was prepared by dissolving 32.5 mg in 500 μL of
1.4 M ammonium acetate water (Sigma) and vortexing which was then
added to 450 mL of glucose free TB (no antibiotics) while swirling in
2500 mL Bellco baffled flasks. The saturated overnight cultures were
poured in to the large flasks (to yield 1 mM final concentration of
hemin) and shaken for 3 h at 25 °C. Expression was induced by
addition of IPTG to 1 mM for 3 h at 25 °C, the cells pelleted,
drained, and weighed. Cells were osmotically shocked by resuspension in 14 mL ice-cold 0.75 M sucrose
in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, addition of 1.4 mL of 1 mg
mL hen egg lysozyme (Sigma), followed by
dropwise addition of 28 mL of 1 mM EDTA pH 7.5 and swirling on ice for
15 min. Two mL of 0.5 M MgCl was added, swirling continued
for 15 min and cells pelleted. The 45 mL supernatant (osmotic
shockate) was mixed with 5 mL of 10× IMAC buffer (0.2 M
NaHPO, 5 M NaCl, 0.2 M imidazole, 1%
Tween-20, pH 7.5), followed by 0.5 mL of High Performance Ni Sepharose
(GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA) and the suspension gently mixed on ice
for 1 h. Resin was pelleted at 3000 rpm for 5 min (Beckman Allegra 6R
swing out rotor) and washed twice with 50 mL of 1× IMAC solution
before elution with 2 mL 0.5 M imidazole in 1× IMAC buffer, pH
7.4 in Poly-Prep columns (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Proteins were
concentrated in Amicon 10 kDa ultrafiltration devices (Millipore,
Billerica, MA) to 200 μL for separation by SEC on a Superdex 200
Increase 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare) operating in PBS.
Preparations were made to 50% glycerol and aliquoted for long-term
storage at −80 °C. Proteins were quantified by UV
adsorption and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie blue staining for
impurities. sdAb-Gluc Titrations to Determine EC Duplicate wells of ELISA plates were coated overnight at 4 °C with
100 μL of 1 μg mL N protein in PBS or
100 μL of 1 μg mL bovine serum albumin
(BSA) control antigen. Plates were washed three times with PBS and
then blocked by filling to brimming with MPBS for 1 h. 100 μL of
sdAb-Gluc dilutions in MBPS were applied to duplicate wells for 1 h.
Wells were washed to brimming three times with PBST and two times with
PBS. Signals were developed with injection of coelenterazine
(NanoLight Technology, Pinetop, AZ) in lucky buffer (10 mM Tris, 1 mM
EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) and emissions collected using a luminometer
(Turner BioSystems, Sunnyvale, CA) with a 2 s integration. The
experiment was performed 2 times and curves are the plots of two mean
RLU of sdAb-Gluc on N minus the corresponding mean of control
sdAb-Gluc on the BSA coat with error bars representing ± SD. The
EC value was calculated for curves that plateaued
using the equation [RLU + (RLU –
RLU)/2]. The corresponding 
values were calculated using one observed point greater and one less
than the  EC using the trend function
in Excel and the two values averaged and presented ± SD nM. Mammalian Expression Vectors for Recombinant N A human codon optimized version of the Wuhan SARS-CoV-2 N gene was
obtained as a gBlocks and cloned into pcDNASfiNco- I. For elevated N levels, the gene was
mobilized to a series of pcDNASfiNco- derivatives varying in their
post-transcriptional control elements; puma1, adenovirus tripartite
leader plus murine immunoglobulin leader sequences; puma2, cytomegalovirus intron A; puma3,
woodchuck hepatitis virus post-transcriptional regulatory element
minus the X-protein open reading frame (HPREzb); puma4, puma1 with
HPREzb; puma5, puma2 with HPREzb. Genes
encoding human codon optimized versions of N from other CoV were
obtained as plasmid clones from IDT and were mobilized to puma5
 I. Genbank reference genomes used to
source the parental N genes were HCoV-229E, NC_002645.1; HCoV-OC43,
NC_006213.1; SARS-CoV Tor, NC_004718.3; HCoV-NL63, NC_005831.2;
HCoV-HKU1, NC_006577.2; MERS-CoV, NC_019843.3. Production of N in Mammalian Cells Lysates were generated by PEI transfections of plasmid DNA. Human
embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA) were grown in
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) with 4.5 g
L glucose, -glutamine, sodium
pyruvate (Corning Cellgro), 5% fetal bovine serum (Corning, Corning,
NY), and penicillin/streptomycin (complete medium) at 37 °C and
10% CO with humidity. Cells were seeded in complete medium
16–18 h prior to transfection. Lysates for Western blotting were initially generated by transfection of
pcDNA WuN plasmid or a β-gal control plasmid (also employed for
staining to monitor transfection efficiency). Cells were seeded at 5
× 10 per 10 cm diameter plate in 25 mL complete
media. 105 μL DNA (approximately 10 μg) was combined with
41 μL PEI in 2.5 mL serum free DMEM and equilibrated for 15 min
before being added to the cells. At 48 h post transfection, cells were
washed gently with 10 mL cold Tris buffered saline (TBS) twice, then 4
mL of ice-cold radio immunoprecipitation buffer (RIPA; 10 mM
Tris–HCl pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40) containing
protease inhibitors was added and left at 4 °C for 30 min. The
soluble fraction was separated from the insoluble fraction by
microcentrifugation (5415D microcentrifuge, Eppendorf, Hauppauge, NY,
USA) at 15 000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C and the supernatant
collected. Glycerol was added to a final concentration of 15%,
aliquoted, and stored at −80 °C. Samples were heated at
100 °C for 5 min before 20 μL was loaded on to SDS-PAGE
Laemmli gels. Gels were semidry transferred to Immobilon P, and the
membrane blocked in MPBS for 1 h prior to probing with 100 nM of the
sdAb-APEX2 fusions for 1 h. Following washing three times with PBST
for 5 min each and twice with PBS for 5 min each, membranes were
developed with DAB and washed in water used to stop the reaction. To provide lysates representing the soluble fraction for the WuN sandwich
ELISA, cells were seeded at 7.5 × 10 cells per well
in a 6-well plate in 3 mL of complete medium. 12.5 μL DNA
(approximately 1.5 μg) was combined with 5 μL PEI in 300
μL serum free DMEM, equilibrated for 15 min prior to being added
to the cells. At 48 h post transfection, cells were washed gently with
2 mL cold TBS twice, then 500 μL of ice-cold RIPA buffer and
processed as above. Ten μL of the sample was also subjected to
SDS-PAGE and Western blotting using SuperSignal West Pico
Chemiluminescent Substrate development and image capture using a
ChemiDoc (BioRad). To provide lysates of the repertoire of CoV N, each well of a transiently
transfected 6-well plate as above was lysed in 500 μL of Laemmli
sample buffer with reducing agent and briefly sonicated 72 h post
transfection. All samples were stored at −20 °C before
further processing. Samples were heated at 100 °C for 5 min
before 20 μL was loaded on to SDS-PAGE Laemmli gels for either
Coomassie Blue staining or Western blotting. 100 μL of neutravidin at 1 μg mL in PBS
was used to coat duplicate wells of Costar white high binding ELISA
plates overnight at 4 °C. After washing 3× with PBS to
brimming, wells were filled to brimming with Bioplex buffer (PBS, 2%
w/v BSA and 0.05% Tween-20) for an hour. Block was replaced with 100
μL of 100 nM biotinylated sdAb from pecan126 preparations in
Bioplex buffer for 10 min with gentle shaking. Wells were washed
3× with PBST, 2× with PBS, blocked with 400 μL MPBS.
The MPBS block was removed, and dilutions of HEK293T cells transiently
expressing N and lysed in RIPA buffer were added to the wells in MBPS
to 100 μL and plates shaken for 10 min. Following aspiration and
washing 3× with PBST and 2× with PBS, 1 μL of phage
displayed sdAb preparation (from 40 mL scale culture precipitated to 1
mL) in 100 μL MPBS was applied and the plates shaken for 10 min.
After washing as above, 100 μL of 1/2500 dilution of anti-M13
HRP (GE Healthcare) in MPBS was added and plates shaken for 10 min.
Following washing, signals were developed with SuperSignal ELISA Pico
chemiluminescent substrate (Thermo-Fisher) with 2 s integration using
the luminometer, and the duplicates averaged. The assay was performed
once more, using a different set of transfections on a different
occasion to create a graph representing the average of the two plots
with maximum and minimum bars representing ± SD. Immunoprobing Cells Expressing Recombinant N Wells of 8 chamber μ-slides (ibidi, Fitchburg, WI) were coated for
10 min with 200 μL of a 1/10th dilution in water of 0.1%
poly--lysine (Millipore Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and then
washed 3 times with PBS. Eighteen h prior to transfection, cells were
seeded at 7.5 × 10 in 300 μL medium per
chamber. Miniprep DNA (approximately 125 ng in 1.25 μL) and 500
ng linear polyethylenimine (PEI, 1 mg mL,
approximately 0.5 μL) were mixed in 15 μL serum free DMEM
to make a final volume of 30 μL, and allowed to equilibrate for
20 min at room temperature and then added to cells. After 24 (or 72 h
for the CoV N repertoire), slides were washed with warm serum free
DMEM twice. Slides were fixed with 10% buffered formalin for 1 h at 4
°C. Slides were washed three times with PBS before permeabilizing
with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 10 min. Slides were washed 3 times
with PBS and blocked with 2% BSA, 0.05% Tween-20 in PBS for 1 h. Block
was removed and then cells were probed with 100 nM APEX fusion
proteins in 200 μL of 2% BSA, 0.05% Tween-20 in PBS for 15 min.
Cells were then washed 3 times with PBST, then twice with PBS and
developed with metal enhanced DAB tablet solution (Sigma) for 1 min
before washing with PBS to stop the reaction. For fluorescent APEX2
staining, cells were probed with 100 nM of sdAb-APEX fusions and
development was with 200 μL of PBS containing 50 μM Amplex
UltraRed and 10 mM HO for 10 min.
Counterstaining was with Hoechst for 10 min followed by 2 PBS washes.
Slides were viewed using an Eclipse Ti confocal microscope (Nikon)
with NIS Elements Imaging Software and ImageJ within Fiji was used to
process images. For the fluorescent protein sdAb fusions, probing was
performed as above at 100 nM. Immunoprobing Virus Infected Cells Vero-E6 cells (ATCC) were seeded at approximately 5 ×
10 in 100 μL complete DMEM per well in ibidi
96 well cell culture plates to be confluent 24 h later. Medium was
replaced with 150 μL fresh complete DMEM containing 80 pfu
SARS-CoV-2 USA-WA1/2020 (BEI Resources, Manasas, VA; p6 stock in Tx
Biomed strain collection) within the BSL-4 laboratory. The plate was
left at 37 °C with 5% CO and humidity for 24 h,
immersed in 10% buffered formalin for 18 h at 4 °C, and removed
from the laboratory. Probing and visualization was performed as for
the recombinant N immunoprobing experiments after removing the
fixative and washing several times with PBS..