Synthetic
biology approaches
are making significant advances in both the understanding of biological
systems and the development of biological engineering. A key feature
offered by synthetic biology is the ability to establish designer
regulatory circuits for the control of gene expression, which can
generate predictable and reliable outputs in terms of protein or metabolite
production. One way to do this is through the use of synthetic promoters/transcription
factors, for example, integration of the
binding site of designer transcription activator-like effectors (TALEs)
that can be activated by custom-designed TALEs. Another
more direct method, which does not require trans-acting factors, is
RNA-based. Riboswitches are one such example; these are regions in
the mRNA that modulate expression in response to a small molecule.
Upon ligand binding to the aptamer region, the riboswitch undergoes
a conformational change, which affects the second functional unit,
the expression platform. In prokaryotes there are over 30 naturally
occurring classes of riboswitch, responding to a range of cofactors,
amino acids, metal ions and other small metabolites. Many of these,
together with computationally designed synthetic riboswitches, or
molecularly evolved RNA components have been used for synthetic
biology approaches in bacteria, including to allow selection of  strains that overproduce metabolites, to serve as sensors of intracellular metabolites, and to uncover novel aspects of biosynthetic
pathways. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf In eukaryotes, all riboswitches
identified so far respond to thiamine
pyrophosphate (TPP). The TPP riboswitch aptamer is one of the best
characterized, with several 3D structures known including those from  and . Two such riboswitches are found in introns of the  and  genes of the green alga  (hereafter Chlamydomonas). In cells grown without thiamine, the introns are spliced
to produce mRNAs encoding functional enzymes. On thiamine supplementation,
cellular TPP levels rise, and binding of TPP to the riboswitches results
in alternative splicing. For the THI4 mRNA, shown schematically in a, retention of the
first intron in the 5′UTR introduces an 81 nt upstream open
reading frame (uORF; blue box), which interferes with translation
of THI4. Alternative splicing of the THIC transcript results in retention
of an intron with an in-frame stop codon. Thiamine (structure , ) is the product of
a branched biosynthesis pathway, where condensation of a pyrimidine
(structure , ) and
a thiazole (structure , ) moiety makes thiamine monophosphate, which is ultimately phosphorylated
to the active cofactor TPP. THI4 and THIC catalyze the first committed
steps in the thiazole and pyrimidine branches respectively, so the
riboswitches enable tight feedback inhibition of each branch of thiamine
biosynthesis. Moreover, in addition to TPP, the Chlamydomonas  riboswitch () responds to the thiazole precursor, 5-hydroxyethyl-4-methylthiazole
(HET, structure ), and  to the
pyrimidine precursor 4-amino-5-hydroxymethyl-2-methylpyrimidine (HMP;
structure ), providing a further level of refinement to the
regulation of cellular thiamine homeostasis. Chlamydomonas is increasingly being used as a chassis for metabolic
engineering and for synthetic biology because of its ease of genetic
manipulation, the availability of a comprehensive
genome-wide mutant library, a standardized
modular cloning (MoClo) kit, and amenability
to the production of high value compounds. Here we dissect the different functional components of Chlamydomonas
TPP riboswitches, including functionally important residues and ligand
specificity, to characterize its modular parts . Through rational application of this knowledge we generated a novel
collection of riboswitches that respond to specific ligands in a dose-dependent
manner, allowing transgene expression to be tuned. The possibility
to control expression of metabolic enzymes to avoid toxicity or pathway
bottlenecks thus provides the means for sophisticated metabolic engineering
strategies. The Chlamydomonas  riboswitch can regulate
transgene expression . (a) Schematic of the  gene showing exon-intron structures as boxes and
lines, respectively. 5′UTR and 3′UTR regions are shown
as black filled boxes, white boxes are coding regions, and gray boxes
show exons generated upon alternative splicing. When no ligand is
present, the introns are completely spliced between the authentic
splice sites (red dotted line), producing the short THI4 transcript,
and translation is initiated from the black colored start codon which
results in a functional protein (white tear drop). If the levels of
TPP in the cell rise, the riboswitch aptamer within the first intron
binds this and results in alternative splicing between the cryptic
splice sites (gray dotted lines), retention of the gray exon(s), and
ultimately translation of the 81 nt upstream open reading frame (uORF,
blue box), which is translated instead of the native enzyme-encoding  (its protein product is represented by blue tear
drops). (b) The  reporter cassette was made by making the
following assembly from 5′ to 3′ HSP70-RBCS2 promoter, 22 nt RBCS2 5′UTR,  riboswitch,  (green box) and the carbonic
anhydrase 1 (CA1) terminator. Lines carrying
this construct are hereafter referred to as . (c–f)
Viability of three independent  transgenic lines (numerated
1–3) was determined through spot tests on solid media containing
0 to 100 μg/mL of zeocin (concentration indicated at the bottom
of panels). (c) In control plates with no supplements, the lines were
resistant to all concentrations of zeocin. (d) Addition of 10 μM
thiamine to the media resulted in the sensitivity of all lines to
even the lowest concentration of zeocin (10 μg/mL). (e) In the
presence of 10 μM HET,  lines are sensitive to >10 μg/mL
zeocin. (f)  riboswitch does not respond to
HMP; thus, in the presence of 10 μM
HMP  lines showed resistance to all concentrations of zeocin. Images
taken 7 days after plating. * = stop codon. Genetic Characterization of the  Riboswitch To examine in detail the mechanism underlying -mediated gene regulation, a reporter
construct was
generated in which the phleomycin resistance gene  fused to the green fluorescent protein (), which confers resistance to the antibiotic zeocin, was placed under the control of the  5′UTR containing the riboswitch (b, construct pPM1–044).
Given that zeocin resistance is a direct reflection of the level of
the Ble-GFP protein, the use of this resistance marker in this setup
is ideal for testing of riboswitch functionality . The construct was introduced into the Chlamydomonas strain UVM4 and transformants were selected on zeocin. To
test the riboswitch function, three independent transgenic lines were
spotted on solid media supplemented with increasing concentrations
of zeocin. In the absence of any supplementation (c, left-hand panel), the lines
were resistant to 100 μg/mL zeocin (the upper limit tested).
In contrast, inclusion in the medium of thiamine, which is phosphorylated
to TPP on uptake into the cell, resulted
in zeocin-susceptibility of the  lines, demonstrated by
a reduction in growth, even at the lowest concentration of 10 μg/mL
zeocin (d).
We screened 40 lines containing the reporter construct, and this response
was seen in all lines (data not shown). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf The endogenous  gene, responsible for the biosynthesis of the thiazole
precursor HET, is responsive to this intermediate, but not to HMP, so we asked whether the reporter construct  showed the same responses. Inclusion in the media of 10 μM
HET (which, like thiamine, is phosphorylated by the cell on uptake)
revealed the sensitivity of the lines to zeocin above 30 μg/mL
(e). In contrast,
addition of 10 μM HMP (again phosphorylated on uptake) had little
or no effect (f). The response of the native  to thiamine and HET was assessed at the transcript
level. Expression of the functional transcript, formed after splicing
to remove the first intron (a), was tested in one of the lines grown for 7 days
in 10 μM of each of the compounds. As expected, significant repression of the CrTHI4 short transcript (CrTHI4s)
was found in strains cultivated in media supplemented with thiamine
and to a lesser extent with HET, but not with HMP (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf To investigate the  aptamer further, a detailed mutagenesis
study was conducted.
One of the responsive  reporter lines was treated with UV
mutagenesis, and colonies resistant to 10 μg/mL zeocin were
selected to discard lines with mutated and impaired promoter,  reporter or 3′UTR. These mutagenized lines were
then tested on thiamine and zeocin to identify mutants that had lost
responsiveness to thiamine, and so were still zeocin resistant. Sequence
analysis of the riboswitch in these lines found three with alterations
(UV13, UV14, and UV15; ). These
were all deletions of some or all of the aptamer and thus would result
in disruption of metabolite-aptamer interaction. In particular, the
effect of small 3 nt and 10 nt deletions in the UV13 and UV14 mutants
respectively highlights the strict requirement to maintain nucleotides
involved in ligand binding (denoted by triangles) and/or base-pairing. More targeted mutations were introduced in the  to alter specific nucleotides rather
than deletions. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to remove the start
codon in the uORF (a, construct ). After transformation
into UVM4 using selection on zeocin, three independent transgenic
lines were spot tested as before on media containing zeocin, with
and without thiamine or HET (b). None of the lines responded to either compound,
demonstrating that the uORF was essential for the function of the
riboswitch. A more random approach of error-prone PCR of the reporter
construct resulted in several different variants, denoted EPa (). Spot-tests showed
that disruption of 1 out of 9 base pairs in the P1 stem () had little effect on the riboswitch response to thiamine or HET.
This indicates the flexibility of the P1 stem with respect to riboswitch
function, as was also demonstrated in  and  riboswitches. In , which has four mutations (A730U, G643A,
C614U, U617C), base pairing in the P3 stem is affected and the sequence
of the uORF is altered, although the length and reading frame are
maintained. However,  did not show impaired
riboswitch function either. Thus, the sequence of the uORF is unlikely
to be involved directly in the ligand-binding nor in the inhibition
of expression of the downstream reporter gene. In contrast, an extra
complementary base pair in the P5 stem () abolished
completely the riboswitch response to either thiamine or HET. The
extra base pair is likely to affect the interaction with the β-phosphate
group of TPP, as shown in the  riboswitch, as well as reduce the flexibility of the junction
between the P4 and P5 stems. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf Disruption to riboswitch function was also observed
for , which carries a single mutation in the
conserved
region CUGAGA (U606C). This mutant still responded to thiamine (b). However, uniquely
the mutated riboswitch was no longer responsive to HET. The CUGAGA
region is highly conserved in all TPP riboswitches and an integral part of the J2/3 bulge that has been shown
to serve as the pyrimidine sensing region of the riboswitch. Interestingly, the U606C mutation in the  line affects the stop codon of the uORF in the riboswitch
yet retains responsiveness to thiamine. The most likely reason for
this outcome is the utilization of a downstream stop codon (TGA at
−513; ), located in frame
with the uORF. This scenario would result in an uORF of 58 amino acids
extending out of the aptamer, which again suggests that the length
of the uORF is not critical, and that its location need not be restricted
to the aptamer. Detailed molecular characterization of the  riboswitch. Mutagenesis of  reporter
line allowed identification
of aptamer residues responsible for the regulatory response of this
riboswitch to its ligands. (a) Secondary structure of the  aptamer (predicted from the crystal structures of
the TPP-binding aptamers of  and (,)). Colored triangles
indicate residues involved in binding of the a and b phosphate group
of TPP (light and dark red triangles), the pyrimidine group (purple
triangles), and 3D folding of two sensor helices (blue triangles). Black boxes show nucleotide substitutions generated by error-prone
amplification () site-directed mutagenesis of
the , mutation
sites are indicated with  identifiers. (b) Spot
tests show the response of 3 independent lines with these variants
grown on plates with 50 μg/mL zeocin only (No ligand) or supplemented
with 10 μM Thi or HET. Lines tested carry the nonmutagenized  reporter construct, the  variants
(three independent transformants per construct) or the  construct that carries a mutated start codon (green arrow A-684U),
which removes the native uORF. The images were taken 7 days post inoculation. Developing Plug-and-Play Riboswitch Devices http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf The experiments
above demonstrate that the  uORF is essential for riboswitch regulation of the downstream
gene, but its sequence composition and length are amenable to manipulation
without impacting its responsiveness to thiamine. Moreover, given
that the position of the uORF is not conserved among known TPP riboswitches
that operate  this mechanism, we reasoned that the aptamer and uORF components of the
riboswitch could be physically separated. This would be an important
step in establishing a modular riboswitch design. We therefore introduced
a new start codon at position −529 bp in the  construct,
to move the uORF from the aptamer to the expression platform (a). Transgenic lines
containing this  construct were spot tested as before
on media containing zeocin ().
In the absence of any ligand the lines showed zeocin-resistance, while
inclusion of thiamine or HET in the media resulted in reduced or no
growth; HMP had no effect. This result confirmed recovery of the riboswitch
response to ligands as a direct result of the reintroduction of the
new uORF. The modified  riboswitch allowed
us to test its flexibility further through aptamer
swap experiments, replacing the  aptamer with aptamers derived from other TPP riboswitches.
Since splicing components are crucial for riboswitch function, we
selected the well characterized aptamer domains of the Chlamydomonas () and , which contain similar alternative
AG splice sites to that found in the  aptamer. These were substituted for the aptamer
in  (b). The relationship
to the splice sites was maintained, although it should be noted that
the predicted 9 bp P1 stem of the  aptamer (a) was reduced to 7 bp in the chimeric  and 3 bp in . A further modified riboswitch, , was generated
in which the  mutation was introduced into . The constructs
with the riboswitch variants were transformed into
Chlamydomonas, and 96 independent zeocin-resistant colonies per construct
were selected. These were inoculated into microtiter plates containing
liquid TAP media with zeocin (10 μg/mL). This allowed a more
quantitative measure of riboswitch activity in response to different
ligands than the spot test method. c shows the plates at 7 days post inoculation,
and growth was quantified by measurement of optical density at 730
nm (d). In
the presence of thiamine and zeocin, growth of the majority of transformants
for each construct was inhibited compared to zeocin alone, indicating
that the modified riboswitches were functional. However, it is noteworthy
that in zeocin-only media, the number of transformants carrying  and  aptamers that were resistant
to the antibiotic was lower than lines carrying the  or the  aptamers (c), and the level of resistance was also
less, with a median OD of ∼0.75 for lines carrying  _ and  aptamers  0.9–1 for lines carrying  and  aptamers respectively
(-values ≤ 0.05) (d). This might reflect inefficiency of splicing
in the chimeric constructs. In testing the effect of the thiamine
biosynthesis intermediates,  was responsive to HMP but not HET, whereas neither  nor  responded to the intermediates (d; in pairwise analyses
between zeocin-only and zeocin with HET or HMP, -values ≥0.05). In , the
response of the endogenous  gene to HET or HMP
is unknown, but the behavior of the chimeric  and  reflects the selectivity of each of these
aptamers. To capture the dynamics of the responses, a more detailed
analysis
over a 10-day time course was conducted with ∼50 independent
zeocin-resistant transformants per construct (e). In thiamine (green symbols), lines with
aptamers from Chlamydomonas responded after 2 days, a lag that is
likely due to the time to switch off the expression of the  gene and/or turnover of pre-existing Ble-GFP protein.
The response of the  variant appears further delayed to day 3 and is less pronounced.
The effect of HET (blue symbols) on  is clearly less than that of thiamine,
and indeed is reminiscent of the thiamine/ behavior. The slight effect of HET
on  seen
in d, is more
clearly shown in the time-course where there is a reduction in growth
from day 2. HMP (red symbols) is just as effective as thiamine in
switching off  but has no effect on any of the other aptamers. Design and characterization of plug and play riboswitches. Mutational
analysis and development of a chimeric riboswitch expression platform
(a) Schematic of the  5′UTR with highlighted
mutations to test the impact of altered positioning of the uORF (blue
box) within the  expression platform. Locations
of uORF and splice sites are numbered according to the start codon
of the  reporter gene at position 1. Riboswitch
aptamer is shown as a gray box and  5′UTR
as black boxes. Mutations integral to the design of the chimeric riboswitches
are shown above the boxes and include UUG (mutated native start codon
A-684U), new uORF AUG (−532), and new uORF stop codon (−412).
In the absence of thiamine, the splice site GU and AG are employed,
while in presence of thiamine, the gu/ag alternative splice sites
are utilized. (b) Secondary RNA structures are those predicted for
aptamers used in the different synthetic riboswitches, including the , , and  aptamers. Black dots represent conserved nucleotides in all aptamers
and the purple circle in the  aptamer indicates
the specific point mutation. Following transformation of UVM4 with
the four different riboswitch-reporter variants, 96 zeocin resistant
colonies were inoculated into four microtiter plates containing liquid
media with zeocin (10 μg/mL). (c) After 3 rounds of weekly subculturing,
response of transformants carrying the riboswitch chimeras was tested
in liquid media supplemented with zeocin (10 μg/mL) and 10 μM
of thiamine, HET or HMP. Microtiter plates were scanned 7 days postinoculation.
(d) To quantify response of the different lines to the different ligands,
growth of cells was determined by measuring OD 7 days
post inoculation. After filtering empty wells (that contained unstable
transformants which died during the weekly subcultures), plate reading
data was used to generate box and whisker plots that summarize the
growth behavior of the transformants in different conditions. , in which a new
41 amino acid uORF (blue box) was introduced outside of the aptamer
and within the expression platform region, resulted in responsive  strains to both THI and HET. , , and  lines only responded to thiamine. Letters above error bars indicate
statistical groupings provided by Tukey’s test. (e) To determine
response of transformants to ligands over time, growth of cells was
also determined by measuring OD daily for 10 days post
inoculation. Error bars indicate standard error of the mean for >50
biological replicates. Recognition
and Responsiveness of Native and Synthetic Riboswitch
Devices to Natural Ligand Analogues http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf To allow more predictability
for the behavior of different ligands and riboswitch variants, we
established a procedure to determine the ligand concentration required
for 50% response (Effective Dose 50, ED50), and the maximum repression
(MaxR) score, the reduction in growth of ligand-treated relative to
control samples. Cells carrying each of the riboswitch variants were
inoculated into microtiter plates containing growth media and different
concentrations of the ligands at a known cell density (5 × 10 cells/mL), which was measured again after 5 days. By this
approach, the ED50 of the native  for thiamine was found to be 15.5 nM, and 22.7
nM for HET (; ), whereas, as expected,
no response was seen for HMP. MaxR for  was calculated to be 0.75 for thiamine
and 0.41 for HET. The ED50 and MaxR for the other riboswitch variants
with the natural ligands confirmed the previous qualitative observations
(). Of note
is that  showed
the greatest MaxR of any riboswitch (0.98), and this was coupled with
tighter binding for thiamine than the native . The ED50 for  and  was 20 times and 10 times higher than the  aptamer, respectively. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf Previous
studies that probed TPP riboswitch-ligand interactions
concluded that these riboswitches have evolved to bind different ligands
with varying affinities and specificities. To determine the selectivity of the riboswitch
variants, we tested their response to five chemical analogues shown
in : azide HMP (compound ), 2- hydroxymethylpyrimidine (2HXMP, compound ), triazole analogue (compound ), 5-methylthiazole
(compound ), and 4,5-dimethylthiazole (compound ). These analogues share certain chemical features with the
natural ligands, but do not participate in the pathway. Prior to testing
the riboswitch-reporter lines, we asked whether these analogues would
induce TPP-like changes in the expression of the functional THI4s
transcript () in untransformed
Chlamydomonas cells. Supplementation of the media with triazole analogue
(compound ) and azide-HMP (compound )
resulted in the repression of CrTHI4s transcript levels, comparable
to thiamine, whereas 2HXMP (compound ), 5-methylthiazole
(compound ), and 4,5-dimethylthiazole (compound ) had no effect (). When
lines containing any of the five riboswitch variants were screened
for response to the analogues, none responded to these latter three
compounds (data not shown). However, the triazole analogue (compound ) repressed the  and , with an ED50 value of 5.5 μM and 2.2 μM, and MaxR scores
of 1 and 0.8, respectively (). Although the ED50 values are ∼400 times higher
than for thiamine, the MaxR scores highlight the ability of this analogue
to elicit a strong response by  aptamers. ED50 values for the  aptamers could not be assessed since the values
were outside the 10 μM upper threshold set for this analysis.
For azide-HMP (compound ) a response was seen for all
the riboswitches except  ().
ED50s ranged from 0.8 to 5 μM (), values that are 70–150 times the
ED50 of these riboswitches with thiamine, respectively. As shown by
the MaxR scores, the ability of azide-HMP to achieve complete response
is similar to that of thiamine. Response of Different Riboswitch- Reporter
Variants to Ligands http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf Maximum repression
(MaxR) was
determined for different riboswitch lines with different ligands.
The OD of the compound treatments was normalized to
the no-compound treatment for each line, compound and plate. These
data were fitted to a 4-parameter logistic equation, and from that
model the maximum repression was determined as 1 – lower asymptote
of the model. This corresponds to the maximum predicted reduction
in growth of the compound treated line relative to the no-compound
treated line. Concentrations of ligands (nM) needed for half maximal
growth repression (Effective Dose 50 or ED50) were calculated as described
in the methods. Briefly, growth of the respective lines treated with
different concentrations of ligands was measured by OD and normalized to a no-treatment control. For each compound the
data were fitted to a four-parameter log-logistic model (and shown
in ) and presented
with 95% confidence intervals ( = 3). Riboswitch-treatment
combinations that resulted in an ED50 greater than 6000 nM were labelled
as non-responsive () as not enough data points
were recorded above 10 000 nM to have confidence in this estimate;
treatment combinations that were not examined for this table, but
which have been tested and shown elsewhere () are labelled as not determined (). Exploiting the Riboswitches
to Regulate Transgenes To begin to explore the versatility
of the different riboswitches
for synthetic biology purposes, we introduced two riboswitch-regulated
transgenes into the same cell, first using fluorescent protein reporters.  was used to regulate
production of a nuclear localized Ble-GFP fusion protein, and  was adopted to
regulate Venus fluorescent protein targeted to the chloroplast (cpVenus).
The cassette encoding both  and  (a) was transformed
into Chlamydomonas. b shows the result from one transgenic line expressing both
reporters. In the absence of ligands, both GFP fluorescence in the
nucleus and Venus fluorescence in the chloroplast were apparent (top
row). The GFP and Venus signals were both repressed when the cells
were grown with 10 μM thiamine (middle row), but only GFP was
repressed by HET (bottom row). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf Reciprocal regulation was further tested by introducing a cassette
encoding  regulating
expression of Venus, this time targeted to the cytosol, and Ble-GFP
regulated by  (). A Chlamydomonas transformant
carrying both reporter genes showed expected Venus fluorescence in
the cytosol and GFP fluorescence in the nucleus (, top row, with no-ligand). The weak fluorescence
signal for GFP, which we observed with multiple transformants, is
likely the result of the reduced transgene expression with the  aptamer, also seen in growth assays described earlier
(d). When grown
in media containing thiamine, both Venus and GFP signals were repressed,
an expected outcome that indicates complete response of both aptamers
to this ligand (, second row,
+Thi). Nuclear-localized GFP was detectable in the transformant cultured
in media with no-ligand or with HET (, third row, +HET), showing that  did not respond to HET. In addition, HET had little
or no effect on regulated Venus. This result is consistent
with our earlier observations that this riboswitch is less responsive
to HET than thiamine (c,d and ). In contrast, when cells were grown in HMP, there was no detectable
GFP regulated by the  aptamer demonstrating
that the specificity of the aptamer was retained (, bottom row, +HMP). The results in this section
indicate that the combinations of the four riboswitch parts and different
ligands can enable a gradient of gene regulation capability. To demonstrate the utility of riboswitch parts as modular devices
that can be incorporated in metabolic pathway engineering strategies,
we used the  to control the heterologous production of the bicyclic diterpene,
casbene. This molecule is the first committed intermediate necessary
for production of medicinal diterpenoids such as jolkinol-C and ingenol-3-angelate. Casbene synthase (CBS) cyclizes the prenylated intermediate geranylgeranyl
pyrophosphate (GGPP) to produce casbene. A previous study showed that
heterologous expression of  CBS in
Chlamydomonas leads to production of casbene, which is released from the cells and can be captured in a dodecane
overlay. For our experiment, the  gene () was codon-
and intron-optimized as previously described for enhanced expression
in Chlamydomonas. A construct was assembled
in which the chloroplast targeted JcCBS protein was fused at C-terminal
with GS linker peptide and a Venus fluorescent protein (a). For riboswitch regulation,
the  was cloned
between the promoter and chloroplast target peptide region of the
cassette. This cassette was transformed into the Chlamydomonas nuclear
genome followed by antibiotic selection, and transformants that expressed
the Venus fluorescent protein were identified through fluorescence
analysis in microtiter plates. A representative
Venus-expressing transformant was cultured in TAP media with a 10%
n-dodecane overlay. Nine days postinoculation, the overlay was mixed
1:1 with hexane and analyzed using gas chromatography mass spectrometry
(GC-MS). Casbene captured by the n-dodecane overlay was detected at
the expected retention time, thereby confirming that the casbene synthase
enzyme fused to Venus fluorescent protein was functional (, black line). To
determine whether the  could regulate casbene production, the casbene producing transformant
was cultivated in TAP media supplemented with 10 μM of thiamine.
GC-MS analysis of the dodecane overlay from 9-days old cultures showed
no detectable casbene (b, green line), thus confirming the capacity of the  to fully suppress
CBS gene expression when exogenous thiamine is added to the growth
media. The tight regulation of a heterologously expressed biosynthesis
enzyme by one of the riboswitch variants described in this work, serves
to highlight the utility of riboswitches in design and implementation
of a nuanced regulatory framework, which can be important for metabolic
engineering. Simultaneous regulation of differentially
subcellular-targeted
proteins by two different riboswitch variants. (a) Schematic of construct
containing a nucleus-targeted Ble-GFP fusion regulated by  and a chloroplast-targeted
Venus fluorescent protein (cpVenus) regulated by  used to transform Chlamydomonas. Both
reporter genes contain the RBCS2 intron 1 (i1, gray box). Chloroplast
targeting of cpVenus was achieved by addition of the PSAD chloroplast
target peptide immediately after the start codon (shown as blue box).
(b) Confocal microscopy images of a Chlamydomonas transformant encoding
the above construct, grown in liquid TAP media only (Control) or TAP
media supplemented with 10 μM thiamine or 10 μM HET.  = 7 days post inoculation. Scale bar represents 50 μm
and the insets are 13.5 μm wide. Riboswitch regulation of casbene production. Casbene production
was achieved by introducing the casbene synthase expression cassette
into the nuclear genome of the Chlamydomonas UVM4 strain. (a) Schematic
of the expression cassette shows the contributing parts assembled
in the following order, HSP70/RBCS2 promoter, 22 nt RBCS2 5′UTR, , PSAD chloroplast
target peptide (cTP shown as blue box), codon optimized  () containing multiple copies
of the Chlamydomonas RBCS2 intron 1 (i1) fused with a GS linker peptide
(orange box) to Venus containing RBCS2 intron 2 (i2), the 3′
UTR was derived from CA1. (b) Casbene production in a Chlamydomonas
transformant that expressed the casbene synthase transgene was assessed
using Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS). A representative
transformant was cultured in TAP media with a 10% n-dodecane overlay.
Nine days postinoculation, the overlay was analyzed by GC-MS. Casbene
captured by the -dodecane overlay was detected at
the expected retention time (black trace), thereby confirming that
the casbene synthase enzyme fused to Venus fluorescent protein was
functional. The GC-MS ion chromatogram (/ 121) shows metabolites carrying a mass-to-charge ratio
(/) of 121 ± 0.5. Internal
standard β-caryophyllene was detected at 12.32 min retention
time (RT), while casbene was detected at 23.16 min RT. In agreement
with previous reports, a selection of oxidized casbene molecules was
also detectable between RT 25.6 and 26.7 RT. The detection of casbene and its oxidized derivatives demonstrates
capacity of this transformant to produce casbene. When this transformant
was cultured in media containing 10 μM thiamine (green trace),
casbene was not detected, a result that highlighted the utility of
the riboswitch for regulation of transgene expression. Here we have dissected a complex eukaryotic
genetic element that
is the Chlamydomonas  TPP riboswitch and demonstrated
its versatility in regulation of transgenes. Our analyses captured
attributes of the riboswitch that enable its modularity, namely, that
both the aptamer and the expression platform were able to tolerate
specific modifications, which in turn allowed their initial overlap
to be disentangled (). This knowledge allowed the generation of a new riboswitch
platform that is adaptable for aptamer-swap experiments (a) and use of a high-throughput
method for quantitative assessment of the riboswitch/ligand combinations
revealed the dynamic response potential for the riboswitch variants
to different ligands (). These data provide insight into molecular aspects of riboswitch
regulation including base-parings that impact ligand specificities.
Of note is that this  analysis approach has
the advantage of moving beyond characterization of riboswitches in
isolation, instead analyzing their performance within the complexity
of the cellular metabolic milieu. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf The modularity of riboswitches
provides synthetic biology with
a unique “plug-and-play” quality at the level of secondary
structures and functional units. Furthermore,
the ratio of ligand to riboswitch can dictate the level of regulation,
providing the potential for tunable progression from ON to OFF. We
verified the utility of these regulatory elements as part of multigene
cassettes, whereby two different riboswitch-reporters were shown to
be amenable to independent regulation within the same cell. Given
the unique sensitivity of each riboswitch to different ligands, this
experimental design enabled different chemical inputs (, thiamine, HET or HMP) to achieve predictable output signals (, differential regulation of the two fluorescent proteins  and ). These results highlight the potential
of the different riboswitches and how their ligand-response characteristics
can be used as part of synthetic gene circuit designs. It is noteworthy
that although the TPP riboswitches described here function as OFF
switches, they have the potential to be incorporated into a double-switch
series or repressor-of-repressor platform ultimately to achieve ON
status. In terms of the wider applications
of TPP riboswitches, we propose
their importance as tools for metabolic engineering and commercial
applications. This is because thiamine, unlike many often-used chemical
modifiers, is a naturally occurring vitamin that is nontoxic. The
low concentration (nM to μM) of thiamine, HET and HMP required
to regulate expression, combined with their relatively low-cost commercial
availability and the ability to achieve near total repression (MaxR
of CrTHI4_4N for thiamine is 0.98, ) make these compounds extremely attractive
for large-scale low-cost continuous or semicontinuous commercial processes.
As we look to develop microalgae further as industrial biotechnology
platforms, tools such as the riboswitches described in this work take
on a greater significance. This is because heterologously expressed
proteins or compounds can cause toxicity and lead to undesirable allocation
of metabolic substrates or reducing power when the cells are growing
rapidly. In this study we showed the ease by which the TPP riboswitch
can be incorporated into the design and engineering of a Chlamydomonas
strain that heterologously expresses the medically important diterpenoid,
casbene ().
This is the first time that a riboswitch has been used to regulate
the biosynthesis of any terpenoid in any species. This result highlights
an important application for riboswitches in Chlamydomonas and potentially
other eukaryotes. By adopting the different riboswitch-ligand combinations
described here, metabolic engineers can set out to overcome key challenges
that face reconstitution of complex terpenoid biosynthesis pathways
in heterologous hosts, allowing optimization of the expression of
different pathway steps and balancing pull-push effects on the cell
redox potential that ultimately determine terpenoid yields. Insights from this study will allow the extension of the collection
of RNA switches from a wide range of bacterial riboswitch aptamers
or computational synthetic aptamers. Moreover, as we improve our understanding
of different riboswitches in algae and higher plants (this study and
ref ()), we will
shed light on how riboswitches have evolved in eukaryotes and their
important presence in the modern protein-based systems. Although our
current understanding of RNA regulatory systems is limited to TPP
riboswitches, yet to be identified RNA regulatory systems and RNA-ligand
interactions will likely shape our view of the evolution of these
ancient RNA regulators. Unless otherwise specified
all chemicals used in this study were
sourced from Sigma-Aldrich. Chlamydomonas Strains and Cultivation http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_002.xlsx Chlamydomonas
strain UVM4 was used for all experiments
in this work. Unless otherwise noted, strains were cultivated in Tris
acetate phosphate (TAP) medium in liquid
culture or on agar plates (1.5% w/v), with 100–250 μmol
photons m s at 25 °C.
All transformants were maintained on TAP plates with respective antibiotics
(10 mg l paromomycin, 20 mg l hygromycin, and/or 5, 10, or 50 mg l zeocin
[Invivogen]), all liquid cultivations were performed in shake flasks
or microtiter plates using TAP. For response assays thiamine (Melford
Laboratories Ltd.), 4-methyl-5-(2-hydroxyethyl) thiazole (HET), 4-amino-5-hydroxymethyl-2-methylpyrimidine
(HMP, Fluorochem UK) and their analogues (shown in ) were added to TAP media at the indicated
concentrations. Chlamydomonas Transformation and Screening
by Fluorescence Plate
Reader Transformation by electroporation was carried out
as previously described with the following
modifications. A TAP culture of 1–5 × 10 cells/mL
was concentrated 100 times in TAP containing 40 mM sucrose and 250
μL was incubated with 1 μg of linearized DNA for 10 min
on ice in a 0.4 cm gapped cuvette (BioRad) prior to electroporation
(BioRad Gene Pulser Xcell). The cells recovered in TAP containing
40 mM sucrose for 16 h in a shaking incubator (less than 10 μmol
photon m s at 100 rpm) prior
to plating on TAP-agar plates with the appropriate antibiotics. Screening
for robust expression of fluorescent protein fusion was conducted
using the ClarioStar fluorescence plate reader (BMG Labtech) as previously
described. Briefly, Venus fluorescence
readings were obtained using the filters for excitation 515/10 nm
and emission 550/10 nm. TAP medium was used as a blank. Fluorescence
signals were normalized to chlorophyll fluorescence (excitation 440/9
nm, emission 680/20 nm). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_002.xlsx All  sequence designs and analysis were performed with
SnapGene software
(GSL Biotech). All PCR reactions were performed using the Q5 DNA polymerase
(New England Biolabs [NEB]) following the manufacturer’s instructions
for use with GC-rich DNA and using the GC enhancer solution. Primers
were produced by Sigma-Aldrich, while synthesized parts were obtained
from Integrated DNA Technologies, with the exception of codon-optimized
CBS that was synthesized by GenScript Corporation (USA). ,  parts were amplified from in-house plasmid templates generated and
provided by the Smith laboratory (University of Cambridge) and assembled
by Gibson assembly using the isothermal
method, at 50 °C for 1 h, each part having been amplified with
respective primers shown in . Error prone mutagenesis constructs were generated as detailed
under the heading “Error Prone Mutagenesis” using MEGAWHOP
cloning. All other constructs were assembled
by Golden Gate (GG) cloning according to the MoClo system. PCR products were purified with
the Monarch PCR & DNA Clean up kit (NEB) and cloned into corresponding
vectors by GG cloning using either BsaI (NEB) or BpiI (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) depending on the level of the destination MoClo vectors,
and T4 Ligase (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All DNA parts used in this
study are described in Supplemental Tables S1 to S3. Level 0 GG parts
coding for  (),  (),  (), and  () were synthesized.
Parts sourced from the Chlamydomonas MoClo Kit are indicated in . Level 0 GG parts, as well as Level 1 and Level
2 assembled plasmids, were transformed into  (NEB 5-alpha competent cells) by heat shock, then transformants
were plated on LB agar plates with selective additions as required,
using the following concentrations: spectinomycin and ampicillin (50
μg/mL), carbenicillin (100 μg/mL), X-gal (40 μg/mL).
Plasmids were isolated with the Monarch Plasmid preparation kit (NEB).
GG modules, Gibson and MEGAWHOP-derived plasmids were confirmed by
sequencing (Source BioSciences UK), while all other plasmids were
verified by differential restriction. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_002.xlsx The amino acid sequences
of the  casbene synthase (JcCBS, NCBI
Reference Sequence: NP_001292945.1) was codon optimized for expression
from the Chlamydomonas nuclear genome and synthesized by GenScript
Corporation (USA). To enhance transgene expression of large codon
optimized constructs from the nuclear genome of Chlamydomonas,  was designed to contain multiple copies of the first
intron of the Chlamydomonas ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase
(RuBisCO) small subunit 2 (RBCS2i1, NCBI: X04472.1). The PSAD chloroplast target peptide was cloned at the N-terminus
of the synthesized  sequence, while a GS linker
and Venus fluorescent protein were added to the C-terminus of the , thereby allowing fluorescence plate reader-based
screening for protein abundance in transformants. The fully assembled
Level 1 and Level 2 constructs carrying the  transgene are listed in  as  and , respectively. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf PCR-based
error prone MnCl mutagenesis was used to target the 171
bp aptamer of the  riboswitch as previously
described. Three parts of the  riboswitch were
amplified separately with at least 25 bp flanking ends that were homologous
to the adjoining parts () using the template plasmid promRBCS2::THI4 5′-UTR-Ble. Primers used are listed in  and assembly conditions are as previously
described. The EP1 and EP3 regions were
amplified by normal PCR reactions while the PCR reactions of EP2 containing
the aptamer region were supplemented with increasing concentrations
of MnCl so as to increase the possibility of generating
mutations in the PCR products. As each plasmid would contain different
mutations, 25  plasmids were extracted
to identify those having mutations in the  riboswitch
aptamer. Random Mutagenesis Using UV Light Different concentrations
of cells in exponential phase were plated on TAP agar plates supplemented
with appropriate selection (metabolites and/or antibiotics). Petri
dishes were exposed under the UV light in a flow hood for exactly
60 s at 25 °C at a distance of 38 cm from the UV lamp emitting
radiation at 253.7 nm. Plates were wrapped in aluminum foil immediately
to minimize light-induced cellular repair mechanisms and incubated
at 25 °C for 2 weeks. The number of visible colonies was counted
with the desired dose of less than 1% survival. Some 16 colonies were
picked and restreaked on 50 mg L zeocin and 10
μM thiamine supplemented media to determine the impact of UV-induced
mutagenesis on responsiveness of the riboswitch. Determination
of the Riboswitch Response to Different Ligands To quantify
the response to different ligands of lines containing
the Ble-GFP-reporter under control of riboswitch variants growth in
zeocin was used as a proxy. Cells were inoculated in 96-well microtiter
plates in a total volume of 200 μL and incubated under constant
light (125 μmol photon m s) at 25 °C. After 2 days the cultures were resuspended, and
after a further 2 days the optical density at 730 nm was recorded
using a FLUOstar OPTIMA plate reader (BMG Labtech). Plates were shaken
for 6–10 s at 600 rpm before measurement. Blanks that
were anomalous, for example if they contained algae resulting from
pipetting inaccuracies, were excluded from subsequent analysis. Samples
that were not treated with thiamine or related compounds were included
on every plate and used as positive controls to ensure that the strain
was growing as expected. If any no-compound samples for a given strain
were growing in an incorrect manner, all data for the affected strain
on the affected plate were excluded from the subsequent analysis.
For each 96-well plate, the mean optical density of the blanks for
that plate was subtracted from the optical density of the samples.
For all compound treatments on a plate, the optical density was divided
by the mean optical density of each no-compound treated strain, providing
a value of the growth relative to no-treatment. This allowed for more
accurate comparisons between plates that may have experienced slightly
different environmental conditions. Strain and treatment combinations
were set up in technical triplicate.
The mean of technical triplicates was calculated and used for modeling.
Models of the data were made, fitting to a 4-parameter logistic equation
previously described. Different metrics
were derived from the models: maximum predicted repression (MaxR)
and Effective Dose 50 (ED50). The maximum repression was defined as
1 – lower asymptote of logistic equation. This corresponds
to the maximum predicted reduction in growth of the compound treated
strain relative to the no-compound treated strain, expressed as a
percentage. The ED50 was defined as the concentration of ligand that
results in half maximal repression. Any strain-treatment combinations
that resulted in an ED50 greater
than 6000 nM were labeled as NR (nonresponsive) as not enough data
points were recorded above 10 000 nM to have confidence in
this estimate. In ,  and  when treated with HMP were also recorded as NR
due to observations outside this analysis. All analysis was performed
in R. Algal growth data were recorded
at 730 nm over time. Statistical analysis was performed at  = 7, first by performing an ANOVA to determine whether
there were differences between strain and treatment combinations.
As this was significant, Tukey’s test was performed to determine
which combinations were different from one another. qPCR relative
expression data were assessed for significant difference to the No
Ligand treatment. ANOVA was first performed to determine if there
were any significant treatment comparisons. If so, Dunnett’s
test was performed using the multcomp package to identify treatments that differed significantly from the No Ligand
treatment. A -value of <0.05 was considered statistically
significant. Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_002.xlsx Chlamydomonas transformants
carrying the  and  constructs () were
grown for 7 days in TAP media without supplementation, or in the presence
of 10 μM thiamine or 10 μM HET, before visualization in
a confocal laser scanning microscope (TCS SP8, Leica Microsystems,
Germany). The images were taken in the sequential mode enabled by
the Leica LAS software. The first image was acquired with excitation
from a white light source at 476 nm and emission detection between
485 and 518 nm for the GFP channel, and between 650 and 720 nm for
the chlorophyll channel. The second image was acquired with excitation
at 516 nm and emission detection between 526 and 592 nm for the Venus
channel. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00082/suppl_file/sb0c00082_si_001.pdf Total cellular RNA was extracted
from 1.0 × 10 Chlamydomonas cells using the RNeasy
plant mini kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Contaminating genomic DNA was removed by treating RNA samples with
TURBO DNase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. RNA quality and concentration were measured using a
Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific) spectrometer at 260 nm. Structural
integrity of the RNA was checked with nondenaturing agarose gel and
ethidium bromide staining. Reverse transcription was initiated with
an oligo dT primer with 1 μg total RNA as template
and the reverse-transcriptase SuperScript III (Thermo Fisher Scientific),
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting
cDNAs were diluted 10-fold before use. Each reaction contained cDNAs
corresponding to 100 ng total RNA, 0.25 μM each of forward and
reverse primers, 2× SYBR Green JumpStart  ReadyMix with Mg (Sigma-Aldrich), in a total volume
of 10 μL. The following program was used: 95 °C for 5 min,
followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 55 °C for 60 s,
in a Rotor-Gene Q real-time PCR machine (Qiagen) with fluorescence
measurement after each 65 °C step; a melting curve analysis was
performed between 65 and 95 °C to confirm specific amplification.
Transcript abundances were calculated using the ΔΔCT method,
in relation to the housekeeping genes . Primer
sequences are listed in . Metabolite Analysis Using GC-MS The capacity of Chlamydomonas
transformants carrying the  expression
cassette to produce casbene was assessed by cultivation of individual
strains in 50 mL Nunc flasks (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a 10%
dodecane overlay, with or without 10 μM thiamine. Nine days
post inoculation, the dodecane overlay was separated from the culture,
clarified by centrifugation and mixed 1:1 with hexane containing 10
μg/mL of the internal standard α-caryophyllene. One microliter
of this mixture was injected and analyzed by GC-MS as previously described. Caryophyllene and casbene were determined with
the mass range (/) of 120.5–121.5..