Large chromosomal rearrangements
and deletions have been observed in both natural and laboratory bacterial
evolution studies and shown to have profound impacts on bacterial physiology,
such as improved bioproduct production, increased strain fitness, or changed
tolerance to stress. However, such desired
genotypes can only be produced in the lab by time-consuming and laborious
directed evolution experiments. This is because bacterial genome rearrangement
and deletion events only occur when a spontaneous but stochastic DNA
break emerges between direct-repeat sequences. Efficient methods to target this process for large-scale genome
manipulations would be beneficial to biotechnology. Current genome
rearrangement strategies often rely on the insertion of exogenous
recombinase sites into the bacterial genome to facilitate remodeling. The use of site-specific recombinases provide efficient tools for  DNA manipulation, however, targeting recombination
in a programmable and controllable fashion would broaden and simplify
implementations of genome engineering for more applications. Recent advances in using the clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeats (CRISPR) and CRISPR associated (Cas) systems for
precise genome editing have paved the way of using it for large scale genome modifications.
CRISPR functions as a prokaryotic and archaeal immune system protecting
cells from foreign nucleic acids. CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs)
direct degradation of target DNAs through simple Watson–Crick
base pairing to recruit Cas9 nuclease to introduce double stranded
DNA breaks (DSBs) to foreign nucleic acids. These systems
have minimal sequence targeting constraints, requiring only a small
proto-spacer adjacent motif (PAM) sequence, which makes it possible to program CRISPR to target almost any sequence.
CRISPR induced chromosomal DSBs are highly lethal to many bacteria and lead to rapid target DNA degradation. This has been exploited to select for desired mutations and also enabled genome engineering methods in bacteria that are
capable of DSB repair. However, current genomic DNA
manipulations in  largely employ site-specific recombinases, which can facilitate
recombination between defined recombinase sites. These methods have
enabled large-scale manipulations of the bacterial genome including
deletion, inversion, and
insertion of DNA. Employing CRISPR-Cas systems to
target recombination between arbitrary sequences would complement
these approaches to increase the versatility of rationally designed
genome manipulations. Type II CRISPR systems containing  Cas9 nuclease have been shown to
enable user designated single-stranded DNA cleavage (nicking). This
is accomplished through mutation of the RuvCI or HNH nuclease domains. Methods employing nicking versions of Cas9 have
been utilized in eukaryotic organisms to direct homologous recombination
(HR) and reduce off-target mutations. As genomic DSBs are highly lethal to many bacterial
species, we sought to investigate the potential application of nicking
CRISPR systems to induce recombination on the bacterial chromosome. Here, we demonstrate that nicking versions of Cas9 are nonlethal
when targeting the wild type bacterial genome. Short guide RNAs (sgRNAs) can be programmed to direct single-stranded
DNA breaks (SSBs) resulting in host cell recombination. We functionally
validate this with nicking mutant Cas9 using a fluorescent
reporter system. We show that dual-targeting sgRNAs to genomic repeat
sequences leads to recombination across 36 to 97 Kilobases. The easily
implementable and modular nature of our of CRISPR plasmid system enables
multiplex targeting. Multitargeted CRISPR-nickase systems can remodel
the  genome resulting in 133 Kb of deleted
DNA, leading to changes of multiple phenotypes. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf To experimentally
assess the lethality of CRISPR-directed SSBs
in wild type , we constructed a two-plasmid
system (): one plasmid
expresses Cas9 and another expresses an sgRNA against a genome integrated
green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene (a). Multiple mutant versions of Cas9, including
Cas9, Cas9, and a Cas9 double mutant, were tested. The D10A
mutation abrogates function of the RuvCI nuclease domain, generating
a Cas9 capable of only nicking the DNA strand complementary to the
sgRNA. On the other hand, the H840A mutation removes function of the
HNH nuclease domain resulting in a Cas9 that cleaves only the noncomplementary
strand to the sgRNA (a). Combination of both D10A
and H840A leaves Cas9 catalytically dead (dCas9). Therefore, dCas9 can only bind to target DNA without any
cleavage of the chromosome. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf We transformed GFP targeting sgRNA, sg(C1), into  K12 coexpressing the aforementioned Cas9 variants
and compared resulting
colonies to a control nontargeting sgRNA, sg(−). As can be
seen in b,
sgRNA targeting GFP showed no viable colony forming units when wildtype
Cas9 (Cas9) was expressed, while nicking or catalytically
inactive variants of Cas9 do not affect viability. This suggests that
CRISPR induced DSBs are lethal to  cells while
CRISPR induced SSBs have no severe impact on viability. It is also
demonstrated that such impacts are not cleavage position dependent
(). Although
it has been reported that HR could be an inconvenience
in building synthetic gene circuits with repetitive parts, a precise nick between repeat sequences could hypothetically induce
rationally designed HR to achieve targeted genome deletion. To explore the potential of using CRISPR generated
nicking to induce targeted HR, we constructed a genome integrated
synthetic dual-reporter system (a) to query gene deletion and viability. In this system,
GFP was designed to be flanked by two 129 base pair direct repeats
(R). We systematically targeted nicking sites between direct repeats
to both strands of GFP with Cas9 and Cas9. The fluorescent population distributions of sgRNA(T1) Cas9 indicate that GFP is phenotypically lost in 86% of the
cells (b, red).
This target site is ∼110bp away from the left repeat. It is
interesting to see that the percentage of GFP negative cells quickly
decreases as the target site is moved further away from the left repeat
(c, blue triangles).
However, Cas9 nicks result in less recombination (c). This suggests
a strong strand and position dependency of single-nick induced local-homologous
recombination. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf To verify HR as the cause of GFP signal loss, individual
colonies
were obtained from transformations for further analysis. Fluorescence
microscope images show that, when targeted by sgRNA(T1) and Cas9, cells have normal morphology and red fluorescent protein
(RFP) expression while GFP fluorescence is undetectable (d, bottom), (for
microscopy controls see ). This ruled out cell death as the cause of diminished GFP signal.
Gel-electrophoresis results also verified a GFP knockout due to HR
(e). Sanger
sequencing of the PCR products further confirmed that recombination
indeed occurred between the two direct repeats, yielding the same
GFP deletion product (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf Finally, without the presence of two direct repeats on each
end
of GFP, neither Cas9 nor Cas9 can induce
targeted GFP fluorescence abolishment (). Furthermore, DSBs targeted between homologous sequences
do not effectively lead to target deletion (). Taken together, our results show that chromosomally
targeted Cas9 can induce targeted SSBs and enable recombination
between homologous sequences. To investigate how CRISPR-directed
SSBs can be applied to delete
large sections of genome in , we designed
sgRNAs to target insertion sequences (IS) in direct repeat orientations
and tested for genome deletion. Widespread distributions of transposable
DNAs, such as IS elements, have been implicated to be responsible
for large genomic changes, and also provide a
rich source of repetitive sequences to apply our method. We identified
a region with two 1.2 Kb IS5 elements 35 Kb apart. The DNA flanked
by IS5 elements contains 33 genes in total, including the Histidine
(His) biosynthesis operon (a). The His operon provides us a convenient screenable
marker for deletions. Cells containing the His operon are histidine
prototrophs. When deleted,  are converted
to histidine auxotrophs (unable to grow without provision of the amino
acid). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf To employ single-stranded lesions to direct recombination
across
the Histidine biosynthetic region, we systematically targeted a series
of 10 sgRNAs (sgA-J) in the vicinity of the two IS5 sequences. These
included targets directly adjacent to the repeats (R) on both strands
along with multiple target sites within the 36.8 Kb region (a,b). We transformed
K12  expressing nicking Cas9 with plasmids expressing individual and paired sgRNA combinations
and cultured in pooled transformations and determined paired nicking
did not lead to a substantial reduction in viability (). We employed a PCR based
approach to monitor recombination between repeats. Interestingly,
the recombined site was undetectable in single targeting versions,
unlike what’s shown above for GFP deletion. This indicates
individual single-strand breaks are insufficient to direct HR across
large regions (c). Interestingly, when employing paired sgRNA, formation of the
deletion product was detectable for multiple combinations (c). We isolated individual
colonies from pooled transformations and subjected them to random
screening for histidine auxotrophy. We determined sgRNAs targeting
adjacent to each other, sg(A:B), and across the repetitive sequences,
sg(B:I), had prominently undergone recombination (d). Our results show that sgRNAs
generating a 5′ overhang across the repeat sequence, sg(B:I),
and sgRNAs targeting in close proximity to each other, sg(A:B), have
roughly 17 ± 1.6% and 11 ± 3.2% (± standard devation,
3 biological replicates) success rate of 36 Kb deletion, respectively
(b,d). Other
paired-nicking transformations and sgRNA pair H:G were screened and
confirm histidine operon deletions were rare (). Finally, we confirmed that
histidine auxotrophs consistently harbor the expected deletion by
using multiple primer sets querying the presence of starting and recombined
junctions (e). These results show that dual-targeted nicking systems can effectively
induce recombination across 36 Kb with efficiencies approaching 20%
of a bacterial population. The high efficacy of sg(B:I) provided
us with design principles
for further implementation of nicking-directed recombination systems.
sgRNAs should be targeted adjacent to both ends of a repetitive sequence
with Cas9 cut sites within close proximity (approximately
22 nucleotides) of the homology. The left sgRNA targets the + strand
and the right guide targets the – DNA strand. This results
in a 5′ overhang cleavage orientation (see b, 5′ OH). Interestingly,
the requisite for a 5′ cut orientation is consistent with previously
reported application of double nicking systems in mammalian cells. To further explore the potential of our
method to direct multiplexed
large-scale genomic recombination, we identified a 97-kilobase genomic
region with the tryptophan biosynthesis operon (TRP) and the pyrF
gene flanked by identical 1.2 Kb IS5 repeats (a). This region enables screening for deletion
by testing for tryptophan auxotrophy along with selection of deletion
using 5-fluoroorotic acid (5-FOA). We
created strain KSB1 with duplicate copies of essential genes found
within the 97 Kb section of genome integrated into separate loci.
This alleviated the essentiality of the region and enabled nickase-directed
remodeling. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf To multiplex target the 97 Kb
genomic region along with the 36
Kb region tested, we applied principles of dual sgRNA design from
above experiments. sgRNAs K and L were designed and coupled to the
previously employed guides B and I. This generated a four-target CRISPR
system, sg(B:I:K:L), which should direct multiplex remodeling of the  genome (a). We validated the necessity of cooperative nicking
to induce homologous recombination and determined that four-targeted
nicking did not substantially reduce transformation efficiency (). In pooled transformations
of the multitargeted CRISPR device, we detected recombination at both
His and Trp regions (b). This indicated that HR at both sites was simultaneously
occurring within the population of cells. To quantify the 97 Kb deletion
we combined results for 5-FOA and TRP markers. 1.4 ± 0.8% of
cells exhibit 5-FOA resistance where 47% of the 5-FOA resistant colonies
exhibited clear tryptophan auxotrophy (). Combining results for both markers, we estimated
deletion efficiency to be 7 ± 4 deletions per 1000 cells. After
initial 5-FOA/TRP screens we further tested for histidine deletion.
Using stepwise screening (see  for
details) we reliably obtained 36, 97 Kb single and 133 Kb dual-deletions
from sg(B:I:K:L) transformations (c), indicating successful deletion of 133
Kb of  genome using our approach. These results
verify the dual-targeted sgRNA design for directed recombination.
Likewise, the results exemplify the potential of multiplex CRISPR-guided
nicking systems to remove large genomic regions. Here we demonstrate
the ability for CRISPR targeted nicking systems
to direct recombination across both small and large genomic regions.
Furthermore, we systematically characterized various sgRNA target
locations, choice of nicking Cas9, and overhang orientations to identify
the optimal combination for efficient large-scale genome deletion.
Targeting paired nicking across repeat elements in a 5′ overhang
orientation with nick sites located within 40 bp of the homology sequence
results in directed recombination. This enables a 3% reduction of
the  genome with only one plasmid transformation.
Although the genome reductions reported here utilize repeat sequences
to define the domain of remodeling, it is feasible to generate deletions
of arbitrary position or to target genome integration by incorporation
of plasmid based homologous sequences. Genome
rearrangements are an important part of bacterial evolution,
which can facilitate large-scale organismal changes beneficial to
biotechnology. Using engineered SSBs, we enable recombination in
bacterial cells resulting in multiplex genome rearrangements reaching
133 Kb in total, about 3% of the  genome.
In , genome reductions of such scale have
been generated through multiple years of evolution and can be engineered through recombineering based methods. Our system can recapitulate this scale of reduction
through a single plasmid transformation. More importantly, the removal
of these genome segments is targeted and its execution is controlled.
It is conceivable that this method could assist in rationally designed
and multitargeted removal of pathways competing with the production
of industrially useful chemicals and factors deleterious to growth.
Collectively, our method provides a new tool for design and engineering
of bacterial genomes. Our results also provide
a framework for methods that can change
the landscape of bacterial genomes. Currently, genome-remodeling strategies
in many bacteria often utilize site-specific recombinases. These methods can direct high-efficiency recombination between recombinase
sites. The current efficiency of CRISPR-nickase targeted deletion
is relatively low, especially compared to efficiencies of site-specific
recombinases, however these concerns may be addressed with improved
sgRNA combinations and expression vectors. Nicking CRISPR systems,
however, can be targeted with high versatility and leverage HR, which
can utilize arbitrary sequences as substrates. Nicking CRISPR systems
are also desirable to synthetic biology applications. For instance, systems employing retron mediated reverse transcription
have enabled genome directed rewriting and memory storage, coupling CRISPR-nickase systems to the output
of inducible promoters could enable remodeling of the genome in response
to environmental inputs. In summary, we present a strategy to
overcome the cytotoxicity
of genome targeting DSBs to make a platform for accurate large-scale
bacterial genome manipulations. RNA-programmed SSBs enable recombination
resulting in bacterial genome deletion. With the growing availability
of full genome sequencing, it is foreseeable that laboratories could
identify an organism’s repetitive sequences  to predictably and combinatorialy direct large-scale remodeling
to test strain characteristics for a myriad of basic science and engineering
applications. Further extension of this method would enable researchers
to target genome integration of synthetic gene pathways; likewise, we envision this method working synergistically
with preexisting genome engineering technologies. CRISPR-directed SSBs are not lethal to K12 . (a) A schematic representation of sgRNA guided
Cas9s targeting
a chromosomally integrated GFP reporter. The sgRNA guide sequence
is visualized adjacent to its target sequence. The protospacer adjacent
motif (PAM) sequence is highlighted in red. Arrows denote where DNA
cleavage occurs by two Cas9 mutants, respectively. Cas9 cleaves the target DNA strand of the sgRNA and Cas9 cleaves the nontarget strand. (b) Transformation efficiencies of
sg(C1) (gray) or untargeted sg(−) (white) in K12  containing Cas9, Cas, Cas9 or dCas9. Error bars represent ± standard deviation
( = 3). Nick-induced recombination leads to single gene chromosomal
deletion.
(a) A diagram of chromosomally integrated dual-fluorescent reporter
with internal homologous DNA sequences (R), shown as dark and light
gray boxes. sgRNA-guided Cas9 nicking enzyme generates an SSB, illustrated
by the scissor. CRISPR induced deletions of GFP results in the joining
of two repeats, shown as a gray box with both dark and light shades.
Primers (P1 and P4) flank the dual fluorescence
reporter. (b) Flow cytometry screening of pooled sgRNA transformations
for homologous recombination. Histograms show population fluorescence
distributions for controls sg(−) (green), cells containing
RFP with no GFP (gray), and sg(T1) coexpressed with Cas9 (red). Vertical dashed line represents threshold for GFP expression.
86% of sg(T1) cells fall to the left of the line, indicating the loss
of GFP expression. (c) Percent of flow cytometry estimated GFP deletion
for various sgRNAs targeting the noncoding strand using Cas9 (blue) and Cas9 (orange). Nicking sites within GFP
are represented by blue and orange triangles and black squares representing
sgRNA target sites. Cut positions are defined as bp from the left
repeat (d) Fluorescence microscopy interrogation of dual-fluorescent
reporter expression for sg(−) and sg(T1) transformants in  expressing Cas9. GFP expression is
undetectable in sg(T1) while RFP expression is similar in both sg(−)
and sg(T1). Phase contrast images show cells have normal morphology
and RFP expression. (e) Gel-electrophoresis of amplicons using primers
P1 and P4 from transformants for sg(T1) and
sg(−). The primers generate a 4.6 kilobase (Kb) amplicon for
the initial RFP:GFP site, and following HR the primers generate a
3.6 Kb amplicon. Six out 6 sg(T1) transformants amplify at sizes of
approximately 3.6 kilobases, while a sg(−) control template
results in banding at 4.6 Kb. Nickase directed deletion of a 36 kilobase genomic region. (a)
Top half is a schematic representation of a 36.8 Kb genomic region
with two IS5 direct-repeats (gray, R) on the K12 MG1655 chromosome.
Colored boxes serve as visual aids to mark relative positions and
sizes of various genomic regions. A series of 10 sgRNAs were designed
to target various locations (black squares, sg(A–J)). The position
of black squares indicate which strand is targeted by the sgRNA with
I, A and H targeting the + strand, and J and B-G targeting the -.
The distances between sgRNA targets are shown in panel C. Primers
flanking each repeat (P1–P4) are used
for PCR based genotyping of chromosomal deletions. The His-biosynthetic
operon (His-Operon) (orange) located between the IS5 elements serves
as a screenable marker for cells harboring deletions. Bottom half
represents results of CRISPR induced deletion of genomic region between
two repeats (shown gray box with mixed shades). (b) A schematic representation
of multitargeting nicking systems around the left IS5, with 3′
Overhang (OH) and 5′ OH cut orientations highlighted. Bp apart
is the base pair distance between cut sites. Blue triangles indicate
cut sites for respective guides. (c) PCR screening and gel electrophoresis
of pooled transformations to detect formation of recombined site (red,
gray yellow icon) using primers P1 and P4
(d) Histidine auxotrophy screening of individual isolated transformants
expressing Cas9 with sg(B:I) and sg(A:B). Differential
growth on M9 minimal medium containing synthetic complete amino acids
(M9SC) or M9 without histidine (M9-H) suggests deletions of the targeted
region when no colonies are formed in M9-H. Colony positions on M9SC
correspond to those on M9-H. Success rates are denoted as the number
of colonies unable to grow in M9-H over the total number of colonies
(e) PCR genotyping of 6 sg(B:I) histidine auxtrophs and a control
sg(−) transformant using 3 different primer combinations confirming
formation of the recombined site (bottom row). Multiplex targeted genome remodeling achieves 133 Kb deletion.
(a) A schematic view of two separate genomic regions surrounded by
direct repeat sequences. Definitions of illustrations are the same
as in . The
middle disjoint beige box represents 670 Kb distance between these
two regions. The left region is 97 kilobases and contains the tryptophan
biosynthesis operon (TRP) and the pyrF gene (labeled bright blue boxes).
Recombination between these repeats results in deletion of 97 Kb (Δ97
Kb) and tryptophan auxotrophy. The remodeled site (purple, gray and
green) brings primers P1 and P4 in into close
proximity. sgRNAs K and L target the sequences directly adjacent to
the left repeat to this region. In parallel, guides B and I target
a separate region containing His (orange box). The position of black
squares indicate which strand is targeted by the sgRNA with K and
I targeting the + strand and L and B targeting the – strand
(see  also).
Deletion of this region results in a loss of 36 Kb (Δ36 Kb)
and histidine auxotrophy. The remodeled sequence (red, gray and yellow)
results in close proximity of P1 and P4. (b)
PCR monitoring of HR in Cas9 expressing cells. Primers
P1 and P4 detect deletion of 97 Kb (purple,
gray and green icon, resulting in a 1.5 Kb amplicon). P1 and P4 detect recombination across 36 Kb (red, gray
and yellow icon, resulting in a 1.8 Kb amplicon). Different sgRNA
targets are indicated beneath the gel photo. sg(−) is a guide
sequence not matching the bacterial genome. Amplification indicates
occurrence of recombination. (c) Resulting phenotypes of isolated  containing different remodeling combinations. Cells
isolated containing different deletions replica plated on M9 synthetic
complete medium (M9SC), M9 lacking histidine (M9-H), and M9 without
tryptophan (M9-T). Vertical columns correspond to different deletions.
sg(−) with no genomic deletion (Δ0) serves as the control.
sg(B:I:K:L) expressing cells can harbor 36 (Δ36), 97 (Δ97)
or combined 133 kilobase (Δ133) deletions. Δ36, Δ97
and Δ133 are auxotrophic histidine, tryptophan and both, respectively. Molecular cloning was conducted using  NEB-10-Beta (New England Biolabs, NEB). Maintenance
and cloning of vectors containing an R6Kγ origin of replication
was conducted in a Pir+  strain. Fluorescent
reporter experiments were conducted in K12 MG1655 (ΔLacI ΔAraC)
HK022 (J04450 and/or I13522) (Registry of Standard Biological Parts).
Initial 36 kilobase deletion experiments were conducted in K12 MG1655
Δ(LacI) Δ(AraC). Experiments involving the 97 kilobase
deletion were conducted in strain “KSB1”, which is K12
MG1655 (American Type Culture Collection, ATCC, #700926) HK022(topA,cysB,ribA,fabI),
186(lapAB). Integrations into HK022  and 186  sites are described in  section. LB Miller Medium (Sigma-Aldrich, Sigma) was supplemented
with appropriate antibiotics for plasmid maintenance: Ampicillin (100
μg/mL) and/or Kanamycin (30 μg/mL). Experiments involving
fluorescent microscopy visualization of genome-integrated reporters
used M9 minimal Medium containing 0.2% glycerol. Screening for histidine
and tryptophan auxotrophs was done on M9 minimal Medium 0.4% glucose,
1.5% agar, 2 mg/mL Uracil with synthetic complete (SC) (., Leucine deficient supplement (Clonetech, #630414) + 200 mg/L Leucine
(Sigma, #L8000), without histidine (-H) or without tryptophan (-T)
amino acid supplement (Clonetech, #630415, #630414 respectively).
5-Fluoroorotic Acid (5-FOA, Gold Biotechnology, #F-230-5) media was
made by supplementing 5-FOA to a final concentration of 600 mg/L and
boiling to dissolve in LB agar miller medium. All cell culture was
conducted at 37 °C in either a stationary incubator for Petri
dishes, or 250 rpm shaker for liquid media unless noted otherwise. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf Genome integration of reporters
and other genes were conducted using methods described previously. Plasmids pOSIP-KH and pOSIP-KO were used to
integrate into HK022 and 186  sites, respectively.
Fluorescent reporters (BioBrick #) parts RFP (J04450) and GFP (I13522)
were cloned into the RI and I sites of pOSIP-KH. The strain used for 97 Kb remodeling experiments
was derived from ATCC, #700926. Integration vectors containing essential
genes were created by stepwise cloning of topA:cysB,
ribA, and fabI into pOSIP-KH using primers 18 through 23 with corresponding
restriction sites indicated in  and lapAB in pOSIP-KO. The lapAB cassette was ligated and
integrated in one step. Purified PCR products of primers 24 and 25
were digest with HI and SpeI and ligated into
pOSIP-KO. Vectors were integrated by transforming ≤10 ng of
plasmid into destination strains. Integrations were confirmed at HK022  with primers 7 and 8, and 186  with
26 and 27. R6Kγ vectors were propagated as plasmids at 30 °C
and integrated at 37 °C. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf pCas9 was
obtained from Addgene (plasmid #44520). pCas9 expresses  wild type
Cas9 from a pLTetO promoter. The plasmid contains a high copy ColE1
origin of replication (∼100 copies), the TetR repressor protein
and an ampicillin resistance marker (). Cas9 D10A and H840A mutations were generated by
PCR amplifying 10 pg of pCas9 using primer pairs 3,4
and 5,6 respectively (). PCR reactions were purified using GenElute PCR Cleanup Kit (Sigma,
#NA1020) following the manufacturer’s protocol. DNA was digested
with SapI and self-ligated with <40 ng of DNA in 20 μL reactions
containing T4 DNA ligase (NEB). Design, Cloning and Multiplexing
of sgRNAs http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf Short guide
RNAs (sgRNAs) were designed by identifying the “NGG”
Protospacer Adjacent Motif (PAM) on the noncomplementary strand of
the DNA target. 20–21 nucleotides were used as the guide region.
sgRNAs contained an Adenine on the 5′ end, since A nucleotides
function as effective transcriptional start site. sgRNA guides were
synthesized as a pair of 25 nmole oligonucleotides (Integrated DNA
Technologies, IDT) in a format shown in . 5′ phosphates were added to oligonucleotides
by incubating 1ug of top/bottom oligonucleotides in 50 μL reactions
containing 1X T4 DNA Ligase Buffer and 10 units of T4 Polynucleotide
Kinase (NEB, #M0201) at 37 °C overnight. Oligonucleotides were
duplexed by heating the kinase reactions to 90 °C on an aluminum
heating block for 5 min followed by slowly returning the reaction
to room temperature (25 °C) over approximately 1 h. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf The
sgRNA plasmid vector (pSG4K5) (), derived from pSB4K5 (Registry of Standard Biological
Parts) expresses sgRNAs from a constitutive J23119 promoter. To clone
new sgRNAs, pSG4K5 was digested with SapI and dephosphorylated using
Antarctic Phosphatase (NEB, #M0289) using the manufacture’s
protocol. 40 ng of SapI digested and dephosphorylated pSG4K5 was ligated
to an equimolar amount of sgRNA duplex in 20 μL reactions containing
T4 DNA ligase (NEB, #M0202). Multiplex sgRNA plasmids were constructed
by PCR amplifying 10
pg of template plasmid with primers 1 and 2. PCR products were prepared
by purifying with GenElute PCR Cleanup Kit, followed by digestion
of 500 ng with EcorI and SpeI (NEB). Reactions were heat inactivated
at 80 °C for 20 min followed by slowly returning to room temperature.
pSG4K5 plasmids containing other guide sequences were digested with
BsaI and deposphorylated using Antarctic Phosphatase. 40 ng of BsaI
digested and dephosphorylated pSG4K5 was ligated to an equimolar amount
of sgRNA expression cassette in 20 μL reactions containing T4
DNA ligase. All strains
were made chemically
competent using the Z-competent  Tranformation
Kit (Zymo Research, #T3002) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
For transformation of sgRNA expressing pSG4K5, 10 ng of DNA was incubated
with 50 μL of competent cell solution for 30 min on ice. Samples
were heat shocked for 30 s in a 42 °C water bath. Samples were
then kept on ice for 3 min. 300 μL of prewarmed LB media was
added and cells were shaken at 37 °C for 1 h. Following outgrowth,
100 to 300 μL of sample was plated on LB agar containing ampicillin
and kanamycin. Plates were incubated overnight. In the case
of pooled transformations, following outgrowth for 1 h, 100 μL
of the transformation was added to 5 mL of prewarmed LB liquid medium
containing ampicillin and kanamycin. Samples were cultured for 12–14
h. For fluorescent reporter recombination experiments, samples were
analyzed by flow cytometry. For histidine and tryptophan remodeling
experiments samples were streak plated or serial diluted onto LB agar
plates and/or 5-FOA medium containing appropriate antibiotics. All flow cytometry was conducted on
an Accuri C6 Flow Cytometer (BD Biosciences, CA). Samples were gated
by consistent forward scatter (FSC) and side scatter (SSC) and 10 000
events within the FSC/SSC gate were collected. A 488 nm laser excitation
and a 530 ± 15 nm emission filter was used for GFP fluorescence
determination. Flow cytometry files were analyzed in MatLab (The MathWorks). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf Colonies picked from sgRNA
transformations were cultured for roughly 48 h in M9 minimal media
0.2% glycerol. Cells were spun down at 5000 g for 2 min and washed
with 1X Phosphate Buffer Solution (PBS). Two μL of concentrated
cell solution was placed on glass microscope slides and visualized
on a Nikon Ti-Eclipse inverted microscope with and LED-based Lumencor
SOLA SE Light Engine with appropriate filter sets. GFP was visualized
with an excitation at 472 nm and emission at 520/35 nm using a Semrock
band-pass filter. RFP was visualized with excitation at 562 nm and
emission at 641/75 nm. For exposure times and experimental controls
see . Constant exposure
times, LUT and image gain adjustments were applied to all microscopy
data. Remodeling of 36 Kilobase Histidine Genomic Region http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf The 36 kilobase region corresponds to NCBI U00096.3 Positions: 2066159–2102943.
sgRNA expression plasmids targeting the IS5-histidine operon region
were transformed as described above into K12  expressing Cas9. Pooled transformations were cultured
in 5 mL liquid medium containing ampicillin and kanamycin for 12–14
h. To isolate individual histidine deletions, 5 μL of cells
were streak plated or serial diluted onto LB agar medium containing
ampicillin and kanamycin. Plates were cultured overnight. Individual
colonies were randomly selected and replica plated on M9SC and M9–H
media. Deletion efficiency is the number of histidine auxotrophs over
the total number of screened colonies. Genomic DNA was prepared from
2 mL of pooled transformation and used for PCR genotyping with primers
P1-P4 ( #10–13). Remodeling of 97 Kilobase Tryptophan Genomic
Region http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf The 97 kilobase region corresponds to NCBI U00096.3
Positions: 1299494–1397238.
sgRNA expression plasmids targeting the IS5-tryptophan operon region
were transformed as described above into strain KSB1 expressing Cas9. Pooled transformations were grown for 12–14 h
in liquid medium and plated in serial dilutions on LB agar and LB
5-FOA media with ampicillin and kanamycin. Individual 5-FOA resistant
colonies were counted and selected at ≥24 h of growth, as colonies
tended to grow slowly on 5-FOA plates, furthermore 97 Kb deletions
exhibited a slow growth phenotype on LB medium. Selected colonies
were replica plated on M9SC and M9-T plates. Deletion efficiency was
determined by multiplying the fraction of 5-FOA resistant colonies
by the fraction of tryptophan operon deletions (). Genomic DNA was prepared from
2 mL of pooled transformation and used for PCR genotyping with primers
P1-P4 ( #14–17). To Isolate 133 kilobase, 36 and 97
Kb dual-deletions, we conducted multiple step screening to isolate
each deletion. Tryptophan deletions were picked and regrown overnight
in 5 mL LB medium with antibiotics. Individual colonies were isolated
through serial dilutions and replica plated on M9SC and M9-H medium.
We also obtained dual-deletions through histidine deletion screening
followed by regrowing overnight then 5-FOA and tryptophan screening. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00132/suppl_file/sb5b00132_si_001.pdf PCR was conducted on a Bio-Rad C1000
thermocycler with Dual 48/48 Fast Reaction Modules (Bio-Radiations,
BioRad). Genomic DNA of cells was prepared with the GenElute Bacterial
Genomic DNA Kit (Sigma, #NA2110). Genomic DNA preparations were diluted
100-fold and 1 μL of genomic template was used in 20 μL
PCR reactions. PCR reactions contained Phusion DNA Polymerase (NEB,
#E0553) and corresponding primers (). Annealing temperatures and extension times were
calculated using the manufacturer’s protocol. PCR products
were visualized  1% agarose gel-electrophoresis..