In humans, 95% of serotonin
(5-HT) is found in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, where release and reception of 5-HT transmits information
from the gut lumen to gut nerve cells and smooth muscles. Of the seven
5-HT receptor families, 5-HTR is broadly expressed in
the gut: on nitrergic neurons that control smooth muscle relaxation,
cholinergic and nitrergic neurons that control muscle contraction
and relaxation, enterocytes that control chemical transport, and enteroendocrine
cells that control the secretion of gastrointestinal hormones. Specifically, 5-HTR is highly expressed in the jejunum,
ileum, and colon. 5-HTR has
been implicated in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), which affects 15%
of the world population. Agonists of 5-HTR are used for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome with
constipation (IBS-C), relieving constipation, abdominal pain, and
bloating. One of the major challenges in identifying novel 5-HTR agonists is the dearth of 5-HTR high-throughput assays to
rapidly
assess large libraries of chemicals. The two-day culture time required
to test cell motility using colon cells, which naturally express 5-HTR, would be time-prohibitive for a primary screening tool.
Commercial G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR)-based assays, such as
SelectScreen (Thermo Fisher) and gpcrMAX (Eurofins) lack
screens for any member of the 5-HTR family. To our knowledge,
only one large-scale 5-HTR screen has been performed to
date, against 976 ToxCast chemicals using guinea pig brain tissue
and radio-labeled ligand displacement. Previously, we engineered a fluorescence-based 5-HTR assay in yeast by linking expression of human 5-HTR on the yeast surface to green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression. The fluorescent reporter, however, posed some
practical limitations. Fluorescent readout requires a 4 h chemical
incubation step for robust GFP expression, and a high-throughput flow
cytometer for signal readout, thus limiting the assay throughput to
one 96-well plate per hour. Additionally, the GFP-based 5-HTR assay has only a 3-fold dynamic range and one order of magnitude
linear range after activation with serotonin. Here, we developed
a luciferase-based 5-HTR assay
with an overall assay time of 2.5 h, enabling the use of a luminescent
plate reader, and achieving a screening throughput of one compound
per second. Next, we used the assay to screen 1206 compounds coming
from two commercial chemical libraries, a natural products library
and an anti-infection library, and discovered five previously unidentified
5-HTR ligands. We validated three of the five ligands,
hordenine, halofuginone, and revaprazan, as 5-HTR agonists
in mammalian cells as they increase motility or wound healing in human
colon epithelial cells. (A). This work has three significant outcomes. First, the same compound
discovery workflow can be used, in the future, to screen pharmaceutical
libraries for the identification of novel 5-HTR agonists
for the treatment of IBS-C. Second, the increased assay signal provided
by the luciferase reporter, when compared to the GFP reporter, should
enable the generation of other high-throughput GPCR-based assays by
simply swapping the receptor from the cell surface. Third, as antibiofilm
(hordenine) and antiparasitic (halofuginone) agents affect colon cell
motility and/or wound healing, antimicrobials may interact not only
with the gut microbiota, but also with the human host leading to potential
changes in gut movement and secretion. Finally, with a 5-HTR high-throughput assay in hand, we can now screen gut microbiota
metabolites to further understand the link between host and gut microbiome. Luciferase-based 5-HTR assay development.
(A) Workflow
for the identification and validation of HTR agonists.
(B) Luciferase-based 5-HTR assay: human 5-HTR was expressed on the cell surface of a yeast engineered to link
receptor activation to reporter to luciferase gene expression  the yeast mating pathway. (C) 5-HTR-assay
optimization at a pH = 7 and 100 mg/L serotonin. Luciferase-Based
5-HTR Assay Development We replaced the GFP
reporter from our GFP-based 5-HTR assay with NanoLuc luciferase, which
we optimized for yeast expression (B). As the pH of
the GI tract hovers between 5.7 and 7.4, we optimized the assay at
a pH of 7. The 5-HTR assay is composed of two steps,
(i) ligand incubation leading to luciferase expression, and (ii) luciferase
substrate incubation leading to luminescence. By co-optimizing both
incubation steps using serotonin, we concluded that a 2 h ligand incubation
followed by a 30 min luciferase substrate incubation results in the
fastest overall assay conditions (2.5 h) with the highest signal increase
after activation (38-fold) (C). Of note, multiple 96-well plates can be incubated
simultaneously, as reading the plate for luminescence takes 2 min. Luciferase-Based 5-HTR Assay Validation We
demonstrate that the assay detects three known 5-HTR agonists
for the treatment of IBS-C: tegaserod, prucalopride, and
mosapride, and four other agonists used to treat gastroesophageal
reflux (cisapride), depression (RS67333), anxiety (zacopride), and nausea (metoclopramide) (A–H). To verify that the agonists
led to cell luminescence due to 5-HTR activation and
not  an alternative mechanism, we performed dose
response curves with the agonists using a control strain carrying
the luciferase reporter plasmid and a blank plasmid in lieu of 5-HTR. On the basis of ECs, the potency of the agonists
toward 5-HTR are tegaserod (0.3 nM) > RS67333 (11.0
nM)
> prucalopride (41.0 nM) > cisapride (69.9 nM) > serotonin
(155.0
nM) > mosapride (256.4nM) > zacopride (616.0 nM) > metoclopramide
(7.4 μM). These results agree with previous studies that identified
tegaserod and RS67333 to be more potent than serotonin, and zacopride and metoclopramide to be less potent. Taken together, the luciferase-based HTR assay is capable
of identifying drugs with ECs ranging from the low nM
to the μM level. Validation of the 5-HTR assay. 5-HTR assay
dose response curves with known 5-HTR agonists: (A) cisapride,
(B) metoclopramide, (C) mosapride, (D) prucalopride, (E) RS-67333,
(F) serotonin, (G) tegaserod, (H) zacopride. Data was collected in
triplicate. Shown are means ± s.d. 5-HTR Assay High-Throughput Screening Validation http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00310/suppl_file/sb9b00310_si_001.pdf We validated the assay for 96-well plate high-throughput screening
using a 3-day plate uniformity experiment (). The assay had an average  factor of 0.74 and an average coefficient of variation
of 7.7%, meeting the two statistical parameters for high-throughput
assay acceptance, , a  factor
of >0.5 and a CV < 10%. Identifying Novel 5-HTR Ligands http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00310/suppl_file/sb9b00310_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00310/suppl_file/sb9b00310_si_001.pdf GPCRs
expressed in the GI tract tend to bind gut microbial metabolites.
For example, GPR41, GPR43, and GPR109 bind microbiota produced short
chain fatty acids. We hypothesize that 5-HTR may bind microbial
natural products. To explore the range of biological compounds that
5-HTR may bind, we used the assay to screen a commercial
803-member chemical natural products library. First, to understand
the chemical diversity of the library, we broke down each library
member into 23 chemical descriptors to perform a principal component
analysis (A, ). The principal components (PC axes)
reflect the common and unique variances of the chemical descriptors
with the top three PCs accounting for 64% of the cumulative variances,
with PC1, PC2, and PC3 capturing 45%, 11%, and 8% of the total variance,
respectively. On the basis of their PC scores, chemicals can be separated
into eight chemical spaces (CS) (). All chemical spaces are populated by compounds in the natural
products library, indicating its chemical diversity. CS3, composed
of small heteroaromatics with O-containing functionality, is the highest
populated CS, containing 22% of all chemicals in the library. The
least populated CSs are CS5 and CS7, each containing 6% of all the
chemicals tested. In the future, the chemical diversity of the library
could be improved by introducing more compounds with chiral centers
and cyclic rings. The screening of the natural products
library resulted in 12 hits:
serotonin, tryptamine, 3-indolebutyric acid, -5-hydroxytryptophan
(-5-HTP), -5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), hordenine,
genistin, neomangiferin, baohuoside I, baicalein, halofuginone, and
nalidixic acid (B). Previously, tryptamine and 5-HTP have been shown to bind 5-HTR, and
baicalein has been shown to bind 5-HTR. Hordenine, nalidixic acid, halofuginone, 3-indolebutyric
acid, genistin neomangiferin, and baohuoside I have not been previously
shown to bind 5-HTR. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00310/suppl_file/sb9b00310_si_001.pdf To confirm the natural products library hits, we ran dose response
curves using the 5-HTR assay strain, and a control strain
carrying the luciferase reporter and a blank plasmid in lieu of 5-HTR. We confirmed tryptamine and 5-HTP to be ligands of 5-HTR. We could not confirm 3-indolebutyric acid, nalidixic acid,
baicalein, genistin, baohuoside I, and neomangiferin as ligands of
5-HTR (). We find,
for the first time, that hordenine (EC 102.4 μM)
and halofuginone (EC 1.2 μM) are HTR ligands (C). Except for -5-HTP, all natural products hits, , hordenine, tryptamine, serotonin, and halofuginone,
belong to CS8. 5-HTR assay identifies natural products as
novel ligands.
(A) Principal component analysis of natural products library with
5-HTR screening hits highlighted. (B) 803-member natural
product library screening results. The compounds were screened using
the 5-HTR assay in singlets. -scores
were normalized to the serotonin positive control, which was set to
1 (dotted line). (C) Dose response curves of the 4 validated natural
product hits. Data was collected in triplicate. Shown are means ±
s.d. High-Throughput Screening of a 403-Member
Anti-infection Library Hordenine has antibiofilm activity
against , and halofuginone
is used for the treatment and prophylaxis of cryptosporidiosis in
ruminants. Intrigued by the fact that
antimicrobial agents activate 5-HTR, we explored whether
other antimicrobials activate 5-HTR. To do this, we screened
a commercial 403-member anti-infection library at two chemical concentrations:
(i) 10 μM, the same concentration used to screen the natural
products library, and (ii) 1 μM due to potential toxicity effects
of the anti-infection compounds on yeast. On the basis of -scores, the 10 μM screen resulted in four hits:
proflavine, ethidium bromide, ethacridine, and hordenine, while the
1 μM screen also resulted in four hits: isepamicin, osalmid,
revaprazan, and borneol (A). We attribute the absence of 1 μM hits in
the 10 μM screen to toxicity issues, given that the 5-HTR assay is in cells. Neither proflavine, ethacridine, nor
revaprazan have been previously shown to activate any serotonin receptor. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00310/suppl_file/sb9b00310_si_001.pdf To confirm the anti-infection
library hits, we ran dose response
curves using the 5-HTR assay strain, and a control strain
carrying the luciferase reporter and a blank plasmid in lieu of 5-HTR. We confirmed proflavine (EC 6 μM), ethacridine
(EC 2.9 μM), and revaprazan (EC 270
nM) as HTR ligands (B). We noticed a sharp decline in receptor
activation at high compound concentrations. A toxicity assessment
of these compounds shows they are toxic at high concentrations (C). We could not
confirm ethidium bromide, isepamicin, osalmid, or borneol as 5-HTR ligands (). Screening of a 403 member anti-infective library. (A)
Anti-infective
compound screening results at 10 μM (top) and 1 μM (bottom).
The compounds were screened using the 5-HTR assay in
singlets. -scores were normalized to the serotonin
positive control, which was set to 1 (dotted line). (B) Dose response
curves of the 3 validated anti-infective hits. (C) Toxicity results
after yeast was incubated for 2.5 h with varying concentration of
the anti-infective hits. Data was collected in triplicate. Shown are
means ± s.d. Validating
5-HTR Ligands  Wound
Healing and Motility Assays in Colon Epithelial Cells To
assess the biological relevance of the five 5-HTR identified
ligands, we tested their ability to activate 5-HTR in
mammalian cells by inducing cell motility and wound healing in human
colon epithelial cells (Caco-2). Caco-2 cells endogenously express
5-HTR and activation of 5-HTR using the agonist tegaserod leads to increased cell motility,
wound healing, and cell proliferation. Tegaserod (Zelmac) is used for the treatment of IBS-C. To test cell
motility, we used culture inserts to create a cell free zone to avoid
cell death and damage. Revaprazan and
hordenine significantly ( < 0.01) increase cell
motility (A,B).
Wound healing was tested by creating a scratch in the cell monolayer
using a pipet tip. This more closely mimics  wound healing by creating cell damage, such as increasing reactive
oxygen species at the wound boundary. Incubation of Caco-2 cells with hordenine, halofuginone, and revaprazan
resulted in a statistically significant increase in wound healing
( < 0.05) when compared to the buffer control
(C,D). Proflavine
and ethacridine did not result in a significant increase in either
colon cell motility or wound healing. Taken together, revaprazan and
hordenine results in both increased cell motility and wound healing,
while halofuginone results only in increased wound healing. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00310/suppl_file/sb9b00310_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00310/suppl_file/sb9b00310_si_001.pdf Antimicrobials
enhanced colon epithelial cell motility and wound
healing. (A) Representative photomicrographs of the colon cell (Caco-2)
migration assay after 48 h with phosphate buffer control (PBS), tegaserod
(5-HTR agonist, 1 μM), serotonin (1 μM),
and the five 5-HTR ligands (10 μM). For all photomicrographs
for migration after 24 and 48 h, see . (B) Quantification of the colon cell migration assay after 48 h.
The cell migration elicited by revaprazan and hordenine is similar
to that observed by serotonin and tegaserod, and it is statistically
significantly different than the PBS control ( <
0.01). (C) Representative photomicrographs of the Caco-2 wound healing
scratch assay after 48 h with control (PBS), tegaserod (1 μM),
serotonin (10 μM), and the 5 identified 5-HTR ligands
(10 μM). For all photomicrographs of the wound healing scratch
assay after 24 and 48 h, see .
(D) Quantification of the colon cell wound healing scratch assay.
The wound healing elicited by revaprazan, halofuginone, and hordenine
is statistically significantly different than the PBS control ( < 0.05). Relevance of the Newly
Identified 5-HTR Agonists
in the Gut Hordenine is present in malted barley and beer
(strong beer: 5.16 mg/L; Pilsner: 2.7 mg/L). Assuming all hordenine consumed reaches the colon, a pint of Pilsner
beer would need to be ingested to reach concentrations that were observed
to increase colon cell motility and wound healing. Other sources of
hordenine are athletic performance and weight loss supplements. Halofuginone is used for the treatment
and prophylaxis of cryptosporidiosis in ruminants with a maximum residue limit of 10–30 μg in
bovine muscle, fat, kidney, and liver. Chickens treated with halofuginone can expect to lay eggs with up
to 60 μg/kg halofuginone. One may
only need to eat half a jumbo egg to reach the levels seen to increase
colon cell wound healing, assuming all halofuginone reaches the colon. Revaprazan is a proton pump inhibitor that reduces gastric acid
secretion and reduces inflammation caused by . At a daily dose of 200
mg/day and assuming it all reaches the colon, the concentration of
revaprazan in the gut would be 983.6 μM, which is more than
3000 times higher than the EC of 270 nM. We have developed a rapid and robust luciferase-based 5-HTR assay in yeast with a 38-fold dynamic range and a limit
of detection in the nM level for serotonin. We applied this assay
to screen more than 1000 chemicals and identified five new 5-HTR ligands. Three of these ligands, hordenine, halofuginone,
and revaprazan, activate 5-HTR in mammalian cells, eliciting
colon cell motility and/or wound healing. The 5-HTR assay
can now be used to screen large pharmaceutical libraries to identify
5-HTR agonists for the treatment of IBS-C. The increased
sensitivity of the 5-HTR luciferase assay over our previous
GFP-based assay should enable the generation of assays for other 5-HTRs,
including 5-HTR, the pharmaceutical target of antidepressant
drugs. A current limitation of
the luciferase-based 5-HTR assay is the relative high
background in the no receptor control.
In the absence of receptor, there is free floating G, which does not need to be dissociated to activate the kinase cascade
leading to increased gene expression. Sequestering G by expression of
the yeast endogenous GPCR (Ste2) may reduce basal luciferase levels
in the control strain. Additionally, mixtures of heterologous GPCR/Ste2
in the sensor strains could achieve lower basal expression, but the
system would have to be tuned. The identification of antimicrobials
binding 5-HTR is
of profound impact to understanding conditions mediated by serotonin
receptors. As shown in this work, antimicrobials may not only interact
with the gut microbiota, but also with the human host leading to potential
changes in gut movement and secretion. Changes in bowel movements
and gastrointestinal hormone secretion may at least be partially caused
by activation of serotonin receptors. Thus, our findings have implications
for the treatment of IBS-C, which can be treated using antibiotics, and more generally to conditions related to
serotonin receptor activation, such as depression. Finally, although
antimicrobials have not been extensively considered as activating
GPCRs, the availability of this high-throughput GPCR assay will enable
the analysis of other GPCRs for their binding of antimicrobials. Luciferase-Based
5-HTR Assay Construction NanoLuc was codon optimized
for , commercially synthesized
and cloned into pKM586 between  and  to generate pRS415-Leu2-pFIG1-NanoLuc
(pEY15). pEY15 was sequenced
verified using primer EY248. To construct the 5-HTR assay,
pEY15, and pESC-His3-pTEF1-HTR4 (pTMC18) were cotransformed into the PPY140 (W303 , ) to generate PPY1808. To construct the controls strain lacking 5-HTR, PPY140 was cotransformed with pEY15 and an empty vector
(PPY111) to generate PPY1809. An overnight
culture of PPY1808
was used to inoculate 20 mL of synthetic complete medium with 2% glucose
lacking histidine and leucine (SD(HL) to an OD = 0.06. After 18 h at 15 °C (150 rpm), PPY1808 was
centrifuged (3500 rpm, 10 min), and resuspended to an OD = 1. In a white flat bottom 96-well plate, 190 μL of pH =
7 SD(HL), 8 μL of PPY1808, and 2 μL
of serotonin (final concentrations 0–4.3 mM) were added. After
the chemical incubation step (2 h, plates covered with Breathe Easy
Sealing Membrane, 30 °C, 250 rpm), 20 μL of 1:100 mixture
of NanoLuc substrate to NanoLuc buffer was added for the luciferase substrate incubation step well (30 min,
plates covered with Breathe Easy Sealing Membrane, 30 °C, 250
rpm). Luminescence was read immediately after luciferase substrate
incubation in a Biotek Synergy 2 plate reader using default settings.
For the time course assay, the cells were incubated at medium shaking
speed in a Biotek Synergy 2. Screening of Known 5-HTR4
Agonists The same protocol
for serotonin detection was followed. Instead of 2 μL of serotonin
the same volume of RS67333, zacopride, and metoclopramide in water
or cisapride, mosapride, tegaserod, and prucalopride in DMSO were
used to reach a final concentrations between 0 and 10 000 nM.
Dose response curves were fitted using the dose–response equation
in Origin Pro 2016. ECs were derived from this function
by Origin. High-Throughput Chemical Compound Screening High-Throughput
Assay Validation A three-day assay
validation was performed according to Iversen, () The same serotonin detection protocol
was followed. High signal wells have 5 μM of serotonin, mid
signal wells have 60 nM of serotonin, and low signal wells have 0
nM of serotonin. Data were analyzed in the Excel template provided
by Iversen, () using
activation assay settings with statistics calculated for single replicate
screens. The
same protocol used
for serotonin detection was followed. Instead of 2 μL of serotonin,
and 2 μL of chemical in DMSO or water from the natural product
library (Selleck Chemicals L1400, 803 chemicals) or the anti-infection
compound library (Selleck Chemicals L3100, 403 chemicals) was used
to a final concentration of 10 μM (and 1 μM in the case
of the anti-infection library). Each plate contained three negative
control wells with DMSO or water and three positive controls with
serotonin (5 μM) in DMSO. Natural product hits were identified
using a -score as calculated below. The -scores were normalized to the serotonin positive control
in each 96-well plates. Simplified molecular-input line-entry
system (SMILES) for 801 of the 803 chemicals in the natural product
library (lanolin and tea polyphenols are mixtures) were retrieved
from Selleck Chemicals and PubChem to obtain data on 23 chemical descriptors
with 8 descriptors representing chemical functional groups, and 15
descriptors according to Wenderski, () The SMILES were inputted into Instant JChem
(ChemAxon). PCA was run using
Solo software (Eigenvector
Research). Evaluation of the three PCs was conducted using Solo based
on Eigenvalues. The three PC scores data from Solo were used to create
3-D scatterplots in MATLAB. The scatterplots were divided into eight
distinct chemical spaces based on their 3-D coordinates. http://dev.mri.cnrs.fr/projects/imagej-macros/wiki/Wound_Healing_Tool http://dev.mri.cnrs.fr/projects/imagej-macros/wiki/Wound_Healing_Tool Caco-2 cells (ATCC HTB-37)
were grown at 37 °C with 5% CO in Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with high glucose, sodium pyruvate and
GlutaMAX or -glutamine (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. Media was changed every
2–3 days. Once 70–80% confluence was reached in T25
flasks, cells were detached using 0.05% trypsin–EDTA and diluted
to a final volume of 15 mL with growth media. Cells were seeded into
a 48 well plate and allowed to grow until they reached 90–100%
confluence. Wounds were made with a P200 pipet tip and cells were
washed with PBS. Cells were incubated in fresh growth media with either
PBS, 10 μM of chemical hit or 1 μM of serotonin or tegaserod.
Images were taken on a Leica inverted microscope at 0, 24, and 48
h. ImageJ MRI Wound Healing Tool  was used to measure wound size. Caco-2 cells were maintained as
stated above. Ibidi culture inserts were placed in a 24 well plate,
and 70 μL of cells ((1–2) × 10 cells/mL)
were placed in both insert wells. Cells were grown overnight to allow
for attachment. Inserts were removed with sterile tweezers. Cells
were washed twice with PBS then incubated with either PBS, 10 μM
of chemical hit or serotonin, or 1 μM of tegaserod. Images were
taken on a Leica inverted microscope at 0, 24, and 48 h. ImageJ MRI
Wound Healing Tool was used to measure the cell free zone..