Synthetic
biology provides new
technologies for gene expression control as well as genome editing
and has advanced the engineering of mammalian designer cells for biomedicine
and biotechnology. For example, human
cells are equipped with engineered receptors to detect and respond
to disease states according to a predefined logic to increase the
precision of cell-based therapy. In addition, gene circuits
with increasing computational capacity are designed that
have the ability of cell–cell communication and simultaneous
processing of multiple input signals. For
the transition from proof-of-concept experiments to real-world applications
there is a need for genome engineering technologies that ensure long-term,
reliable stability, expression, and functionality of complex, multicomponent
synthetic systems in mammalian cells. Current methods for the generation of stable cell lines are based
on random integration vectors, viral vectors, transposable
elements, or targeted integration using
genome-editing technologies such as zinc finger nucleases, TALEN,
or CRISPR/Cas9. Recently, it has been
shown that targeted integration results in reduced heterogeneity of
transgene expression levels compared to random integration in CHO
cells. While the generation of
stable cell lines, which express a single
transgene is a standard procedure, the integration of multicomponent
systems and their long-term functionality remains challenging. Many
of the existing technologies require sequential assembly of gene expression
cassettes to large, multigene DNA plasmids, which are difficult to
propagate in bacteria and often contain repetitive sequences making
them unstable in bacterial hosts. Moreover, in order to reach high
integration efficiencies, these large plasmids are integrated with
site-specific recombinases, which first require the generation of
an engineered host cell line harboring landing pads within the genome
before the DNA payload can be implemented. Another approach
is based on baculovirus-mediated transduction of large DNA payloads
into mammalian cells, which enables multigene delivery with high efficiencies
but lacks long-term expression and functionality due to its transient
nature. Multiple transgenes can also be
integrated sequentially using multiple antibiotic resistance markers,
which is, however, a time-consuming procedure because it includes
multiple cycles of cell selection, cells expansion, and genome analysis. Here, we present a novel technology that
allows multiplexed integration
of DNA plasmids based on designed multipartite transcription factors
(TFs) that control the expression of a single selection marker. The
different parts of the TF are distributed among different plasmids
that are transfected into mammalian cells. Only cells that have stably
integrated all payloads are able to reconstitute a functional TF and
thus produce the selection marker. Design of Multipartite
Transcription Factors Inspired
by the modular principles of the original yeast two-hybrid system, we sought to assemble multiple protein–protein
interaction (PPI) modules into multipartite transcription factors
(TFs) (a).
The cohesin-dockerin interaction from  (Ct) was utilized for the design of engineered, bipartite TFs consisting
of the DNA-binding domain Gal4 fused to the cohesin domain (Gal4-Coh(Ct))
and the viral transactivation domain VP16 fused to the dockerin domain
(VP16-Doc(Ct)). When both parts
are mutually expressed the cohesin-dockerin proteins dimerize and
reconstitute a functional TF that drives the expression of a P-driven engineered secreted-alkaline phosphatase (SEAP)
gene expression cassette harboring an sTRSV ribozyme in the 3′UTR
to reduce leakiness (a). We searched for other protein–protein interactions
to expand the set of functional bipartite TFs (b). Three other PPIs showed no leakiness
in the absence of one of the interaction partners, and at the same
time showed a significant induction of SEAP when both parts were expressed
in the same cell to reconstitute a functional TF (c,d). These included (i) cohesin-dockerin
proteins from  (Coh(Ac)/Doc(Ac)), (ii) antiparallel leucine zipper (Zip/Zip) domains from an engineered,
bipartite TF used for gene control in  and (iii) the SunTag system (scFv(G4)/G4) based on a single chain variable fragment of an antibody that specifically
binds a yeast-derived 19 amino acid peptide. We observed no crosstalk
between the different parts of the protein–protein interactions,
which is required for their further assembly to multipartite TFs (e). We used the three best-performing PPIs to engineer
tripartite TFs
by integrating adaptor modules that bridge the DNA-binding domain
Gal4 and the viral transactivation domain VP16 (a). Five out of six TF designs resulted in
functional transcription factors that were able to induce SEAP expression
with different strengths. The best-performing design was based on
the Gal4-Coh(Ct) bridged to the VP16-scFv(G4) by the adaptor module
Doc(Ct)-G4. The integration of a second adaptor molecule
resulted in tetrapartite TFs, which we assembled from the three dimerizing
systems Coh(Ct)/Doc(Ct), Zip/Zip and
scFv(G4)/G4 in different architectures (b). Three out of six TF designs resulted
in functional transcription factors that were able to induce SEAP
expression. The strongest induction was measured for the design variant,
which consists of Gal4-Zip bridged by the adaptors
Zip-G4 and scFv(G4)-Coh(Ct) to VP16-Doc(Ct). Since the
individual parts of the TFs are encoded on individual plasmids, the
multipartite TFs execute a Boolean  logic function,
which requires the mutual expression of all parts for efficient SEAP
reporter induction (a,b). Design of multipartite
transcription factors. (a) Assembly of multipartite
transcription factors based on protein–protein interaction
systems (indicated with X/Y) and the DNA-binding domain Gal4 as well
as the viral transactivation domain VP16. Gal4 binds to its cognate
response element (UAS) and drives the expression of an mCherry-P2A-SEAP
reporter gene with an ribozyme (HHR) in the 3′UTR to reduce
leakiness. (b) Assembly of bipartite transcription factors based on
protein–protein interaction (PPI) systems (interaction partners
are indicated with X/Y) and the DNA-binding domain Gal4 as well as
the viral transactivation domain VP16. Performance of the bipartite
transcription factors in HEK293T cells based on different protein–protein
interaction measured by SEAP reporter activity in cell culture supernatant
48 h after transfection. (c) Cartoons representing protein–protein
interaction systems. (d) Performance of the bipartite transcription
factors based on each of the four protein–protein interaction
measured by SEAP reporter activity in cell culture medium 48 h after
transfection into HEK293T cells. (e) Specificity of the protein–protein
interactions measured by SEAP reporter gene induction. Error bars
represent the means ± s.d. of  = 3 replicates. Performance of multipartite transcription factors with
orthogonal
protein–protein interaction domains. (a) Performance of different
variants of tripartite transcription factors based on two protein–protein
interactions measured by SEAP reporter gene induction. (b) Performance
of different variants of tetrapartite transcription factors based
on two protein–protein interactions measured by SEAP reporter
gene induction. SEAP reporter assay was performed 48 h after transfection.
Error bars represent the means ± s.d. of  =
3 replicates. Multiplexed Logic Genome
Engineering Using Transposable Elements With a set of multipartite
TFs engineered and validated in mammalian
cells, we implemented the individual parts into piggyBac transposon plasmids (P-driven expression
cassettes) for the development of a multiplexed logic genome integration
control (LOGIC) platform. To compare LOGIC with a conventional stable
cell line selection method, we cloned four different transposon plasmids
encoding a P-driven Puromycin resistance gene (Puromycin
N-acetyl transferase (PAC)) as selection marker followed by a T2A
cleavage site and four different fluorescent proteins, mTagBFP2, mVenus,
mCherry, and iRFP720 (a). Cotransfection of each plasmid with a transposase in hMSC-TERT
cells and selection for 5 days with Puromycin resulted in >98%
fluorescence-positive
polyclonal cell populations for each fluorescent protein measured
by flow cytometry (b). To engineer the LOGIC, we replaced the DNA-binding domain
Gal4 with VanR, because we were not able to generate transposon-based
hMSC-TERT stable cell lines that constitutively express Gal4-VP16
indicating potential interference of Gal4 with endogenous cellular
processes in the hMSC-TERT cell line (c,d). Cotransfection of two fluorescent
protein-encoding plasmids resulted
in a polyclonal cell population of which only 44% expressed both fluorescent
proteins after a 7-day selection period (a,b). In contrast, the engineered two-plasmid
LOGIC system (2-LOGIC), which consists of a P-driven
VanR-VP16_T2A_mTagBFP2 and a P-driven Puromycin_T2A_Citrine
gene expression cassette resulted in a higher percentage (>90%)
of
the double-positive fluorescent polyclonal cell population (b). This validated
the LOGIC principle, which generates mutual dependencies of the production
of the selection marker PAC by distributing parts of the transcription
factor and the PAC gene expression cassette onto different plasmids.
We further increased the complexity to build a 3-plasmid integration
system (3-LOGIC). Conventional selection of three plasmids each encoding
for a fluorescent protein and the PAC resistance gene resulted in
only 22% triple-fluorescent positive cells (c,d). However, when using a 3-LOGIC system
based on the bipartite VanR-Coh(Ct)/VP16-Doc(Ct) TF resulted in stringent
selection. More than 80% of the cells in the polyclonal population
were triple-fluorescent quantified by the expression of the three
fluorescent proteins Citrine, mTagBFP2, and mCherry using flow cytometry
(d). Thus,
LOGIC selection systems enable efficient and rapid selection of desired
multicomponent polyclonal mammalian cell populations with a single
antibiotic selection marker. Transposon-based conventional selection
for multiplexed plasmid
integration in mammalian cells. (a) Transposon donor plasmids encoding
for four different fluorescent proteins and a Puromycin resistance
marker. (b) Experimental outline of the generation of hMSC-TERT stable
cell lines. Transposon-based generation of stable cell lines harboring
P-driven gene expression cassettes that produce a PAC-T2A-fluorescent
protein transcript (the fluorescent proteins mTagBFP2, mCitrine, mCherry,
and iRFP720 are encoded on pSA-TP26, pSA-TP25, pSA-TP24, and pSA-TP29,
respectively). Cells were selected with 6 μg/mL Puromycin for
7 days and analyzed using flow cytometry. (c) The 7-day selection
of a polyclonal hMSC-TERT stable cell population generated with two
transposon-based plasmids where only one plasmid encodes for a PAC
selection marker; 0.7% of the polyclonal population contains both
fluorescent proteins showing that Gal4-VP16-mTagBFP2 could not be
stably propagated in the cells. (d) The 7-day selection of a hMSC-TERT
polyclonal stable cell population generated with two transposon-based
plasmids where only one plasmid encodes for a PAC selection marker;
40% of the polyclonal population contains both fluorescent proteins
showing that VanR-VP16-T2A-mTagBFP2 has been stably integrated into
the cells. Transposon-based LOGIC for multiplexed plasmid
integration in mammalian
cells. (a) 2-LOGIC based on the distribution of the transcription
factor VanR-VP16 and the corresponding inducible PAC resistance gene
expression cassette on two different transposon donor plasmids each
encoding also for a specific fluorescent protein. (b) Comparison of
7-day selection of polyclonal stable cell populations generated with
either the conventional method (both plasmids encode for PAC resistance
marker) or 2-LOGIC with Citrine and mTagBFP2 as DNA payload. (c) 3-LOGIC
based on the distribution of the transcription factor VanR-Coh(Ct),
transactivation domain VP16-Doc(Ct), and the corresponding inducible
PAC resistance gene expression cassette on three different transposon
donor plasmids each encoding also for a specific fluorescent protein.
(d) Comparison of 7-day selection of polyclonal stable cell populations
generated with either the conventional method (three plasmids encode
for PAC resistance marker) or 3-LOGIC with Citrine, mCherry, and mTagBFP2
as DNA payload. Protein–protein
interactions are valuable tools in synthetic
biology and have been used for the design of bipartite transcription
factors enabling cancer cell detection and design
of small molecule-programmable logic gates. We
demonstrate that multiple protein–protein interactions can
be assembled into higher-order transcription factors that control
gene expression in mammalian cells. Removal of one of the parts results
in impaired TFs and thus no target gene expression. In the future,
other protein–protein interactions could be implemented to
design new sets of multipartite TFs. We found that some TF architectures
were not functional and assume that either the protein structure or
expression levels of some adaptor modules were disturbed. Thus, further
modifications in linker sequences or addition of stabilizing domains
could lead to improved versions of multipartite transcription factors.
We have recently shown that Gal4 and VanR as well as TetR and TtgR
DNA-binding domains can be assembled to functional, bipartite transcription
factors with similar performance. Swapping
DNA-binding domains could therefore be standard practice to tune the
performance of multipartite transcription factors and/or adapt it
for a particular cell type. Since these multipartite TFs strictly
require all parts for functionality,
the system resembles  Boolean logics. By distributing
the TF’s parts on different plasmids and controlling the expression
of a resistance marker, we developed a technology for multiplexed
genomic manipulations in mammalian cells. While we used an antibiotic
resistance gene for the selection of cell populations, it may also
be possible to place a fluorescent protein or a cell surface marker
under the control of multipartite TFs enabling FACS or magnetic cell
enrichment of desired cell populations. In contrast to previous efforts
to develop one-step methods for manipulations of multiple genomic
regions, our work is based on the principle of genetic circuit design
and biocomputation. Recently, miRNA patterns have been exploited for
the detection of specific cell populations, such as cancer cells or differentiated cell types, and may complement the LOGIC technology for additional
logic control options. In addition, other logic circuit design strategies
based on RNA elements or recombinases could also be adapted for LOGIC. To fully unleash the potential
of mammalian synthetic biology in
biomedicine and biotechnology, multiplexed and precise genome editing
will become key to deliver designer cells that consist of synthetic
systems and tailored genomes. Recently, CRISPR/Cas9-facilitated genetrapping
has been used to insert a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) into the
TCRα genomic locus, which resulted in simultaneous knockout
of the endogenous TCRα and targeted insertion of the CAR driven
by the endogenous promoter in primary T cells. In theory, LOGIC could be used to introduce additional
genomic manipulations, for example, knockout of immunoinhibitory receptors,
such as PD-L1 or CTL4A, to produce the next generation of engineered
autologous T cells, which require extensive genome engineering in
a one-step procedure. Especially in primary cells in which the expansion
of cell numbers is limited, LOGIC may prove to be a valuable technology
for the generation of engineered cells enabling simultaneous DNA insertions
and manipulation of endogenous genes. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00413/suppl_file/sb0c00413_si_001.pdf Comprehensive design and construction
details for all expression vectors are provided in . Mammalian Cell Culture
and Transfection http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00413/suppl_file/sb0c00413_si_001.pdf Human embryonic
kidney cells (HEK293/17, ATCC: 11268) or hMSC-TERT
cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Life Technologies, cat. no.
31966-021) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum (FCS, Sigma-Aldrich,
lot no. 022M3395) in antibiotic-free conditions at 37 °C in a
humidified atmosphere containing 7.5% CO. Cell viability
and number were quantified using an electric field multichannel cell
counting device (Casy Cell Counter and Analyzer Model TT, Roche Diagnostics
GmBH). For experiments, 2.4 × 10 cells were seeded
into a multiwell plate 1 day before transfection in DMEM. After 16
h, plasmid DNA was mixed with polyethylene imine (PEI, MW 40 000,
stock solution: 1 mg/mL in ddHO, Polysciences, cat. no.
24765-2) in a 1:6 ratio (w/w) and incubated in FCS-free DMEM for 30
min at 22 °C before it was added dropwise to the cells. After
7 h, the transfection medium was replaced with FCS-supplemented DMEM.
Transfection mixture recipes can be found in . Generation of Stable Cell Lines At 48 h after transient
transfection, the cells were trypsinized and centrifuged. One quarter
of the cells were reseeded in a multiwell plate of the same layout
in DMEM containing indicated Puromycin concentrations. Part of the
cells were used for flow cytometry analysis. Puromycin-containing
medium was replaced every day for indicated days with fresh selection
medium. After selection, cells were trypsinized and used for flow
cytometry analysis. If indicated, polyclonal cell populations were
further cultivated in DMEM without Puromycin. For the generation of
monoclonal cell lines by limiting dilution, cell concentration was
adjusted to 0.7 cells/100 μL and seeded into 96-well plates.
Resulting colonies of cells were trypsinized, analyzed by flow cytometry
and further cultivated in DMEM. Cell populations were analyzed with
a LSRII Fortessa flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson) equipped for mTagBFP2
(405 nm laser, 445/15 emission filter), mCitrine (488 nm laser, 505
nm long-pass filter and 530/11 emission filter), mCherry (561 nm laser,
600 nm long-pass filter and 610/20 emission filter), and iRFP720 (640
nm laser, 760/50 emission filter) detection and set to exclude cell
debris and cell doublets. A total of 10 000 single cells were
recorded per sample and were analyzed with FlowJo software (version
no. 10; FlowJo LLC, Oregon, USA). The production of human placental
secreted alkaline phosphatase was quantified in cell culture supernatants
(Schlatter et al., 2002) as described before. In brief, absorbance
of 4-nitrophenol at 405 nm was monitored for 30 min using an Infinite
M200 PRO multiwell plate reader (Tecan Group Ltd., Männedorf,
Switzerland). No statistical methods
were used to predetermine
sample size..