Metabolic
engineering requires
the optimization of native and heterologous pathways in order to maximize
the yield of the desired chemical product, prevent the buildup of
toxic intermediates, and maintain cell viability. A common strategy
is finely tuning the expression of each cellular component using titratable
systems. These systems rely on exogenous inducer molecules
to tune the expression levels of regulated genes; by varying the concentration
of the inducer, the expression levels of the gene can be manipulated
without additional genetic modifications to the host organism. A number
of titratable systems are available that were derived from or inspired
by natural processes—including nutrient utilization pathways, riboswitches, antibiotic resistance cassettes, quorum sensing, and light sensing. Metabolic engineering has been more frequently adopting nonmodel
organisms that already possess desired pathways or have adapted to
environments that parallel production conditions. Achieving titratable control in these organisms is more
challenging because of limited genetic tools as well as growth conditions
that perturb the stability and function of the inducers or regulators.
However, these organisms often encode multiple sugar utilization pathways
that can serve as ready-made titratable systems. Sugar utilization pathways are generally composed of transporters
that import the sugar into the cytoplasm, catabolic enzymes that shunt
the sugar into central metabolism, and regulators that activate the
expression of the transporters and the enzymes when bound to the sugar
(Figure A). Furthermore, pathways often respond
to their individual sugar, offering orthogonal systems for the coordinated
optimization of gene expression. The drawback of co-opting natural
utilization pathways is their
potential to exhibit undesirable behaviors. While an ideal titratable
response should be uniform and linear (Figure B), sugar utilization pathways have been shown to exhibit bimodal,
sharp responses that prevent fine-tuning of expression levels in all
cells of the population. These responses can be attributed to positive feedback within the
pathway, which emerges from the sugar inducing the transporters that
import more sugar into the cell. The pathways also possess
negative feedback from induction of the catabolic enzymes that break
down the sugar. While negative feedback
would be expected to counterbalance positive feedback, sugar catabolism also degrades the inducing sugar. With all of these
contributing factors, a fundamental question is how to modify a given
pathway to achieve a desirable titratable response. A powerful
model has been the -arabinose utilization
pathway in . This pathway encodes
one high-affinity transporter (encoded within the  operon) and one low affinity transporter (encoded by the  gene), is well characterized, and has been regularly
used for inducible control. This pathway has also been shown to exhibit
a bimodal response, complicating its use as a titratable system. Accordingly, previous efforts sought to eliminate
bimodality through the overexpression of one transporter along with
multiple alterations to the pathway. Khlebnikov and co-workers demonstrated
that heterologously expressing the low-affinity transporter AraE could
remove bimodality, which required disrupting both endogenous transporters. Separately, Morgan-Kiss and co-workers demonstrated that heterologously
expressing a substrate-relaxed mutant of the lactose transporter could
eliminate bimodality in a strain lacking the -arabinose
transporters and catabolic enzymes. As
a result, the consensus is that overexpressing a transporter and stripping
away almost all native components of the pathway should be performed
to achieve titratable control. While these studies laid the groundwork
for generating utilization pathways with titratable responses, they
called for extensive genetic manipulations (i.e., plasmid-based expression
of a transporter, disruption of multiple genetic loci) that may be
difficult to achieve in nonmodel organisms and may not reflect ideal
configurations for titratable control. In addition, a systematic analysis
of all pathway alterations remains to be performed, which could reveal
other configurations that require fewer modifications or generate
a more desirable titratable response. Here, we systematically
evaluated how natural utilization pathways
can be altered to achieve titratable control. Mathematical modeling
and experimental probing of the -arabinose utilization pathway
revealed distinct trade-offs when altering the pathway: (i) constitutively
expressing the low affinity-transporter yielded the most linear response
but required additional modifications to eliminate bimodality, (ii)
constitutively expressing one transporter and deleting the other transporter
had both positive and negative effects on the response properties
specific to the selected transporter, and (iii) sugar catabolism linearized
the response and reduced the extent of bimodality at the cost of elevated
sugar concentrations to induce the pathway. Within these trade-offs,
one of the most desirable responses came from a single alteration:
constitutively expressing the high-affinity transporter. Furthermore,
maintaining sugar catabolism improved the linearity of the response
at higher cell densities, perceivably due to negative feedback through
depletion of the exogenous sugar. Similar trends were observed for
the -xylose utilization pathway, suggesting broad applicability
of our findings. These insights demonstrate that there is no perfect
set of typical alterations when co-opting sugar utilization pathways,
wherein the optimal configuration will depend on the specific demands
placed on the titratable system. Co-opting sugar utilization pathways for
titratable control of
gene expression. (A) Components of inducible sugar utilization pathways.
High affinity (T) and low-affinity (T) transporters
import the sugar into the cell, while catabolic enzymes (E) shunt
the sugar into central metabolism. Transcription regulators (R) up-regulate
the expression of the transporters and the enzymes, but only in the
presence of the sugar. (B) Desirable properties for a titratable response.
These properties include a uniform response at all inducer concentrations,
a large dynamic range (high δ), low inducer concentrations to
induce the pathway (low EC), and strong linearity (low
η). We considered four metrics to assess the desirability of the response
(Figure B): the extent of bimodality (the
number of peaks in the fluorescence distribution), the dynamic range
of the response (δ, measured as the ratio of expression levels
at full and no induction), the inducer concentration to achieve half-maximal
induction (EC), and the steepness of the response curve
(η, measured as a Hill coefficient). An ideal titratable system
would exhibit uniform expression across the cell population at all
inducer concentrations, a large dynamic range, a low inducer concentration
to achieve half-maximal induction, and a low Hill coefficient reflecting
the steepness of the response curve. We used these metrics as the
basis to evaluate the predicted or measured behaviors of sugar utilization. Simple
Mathematical Model of Sugar Utilization We built
a simple mathematical model of sugar utilization to qualitatively
explore how different alterations to the pathway influence the response
properties (see ).
This model was composed of two transporters that import sugar into
the cell, one enzyme that breaks down the sugar, and one regulator
that binds the sugar and subsequently activates the expression of
the transporters and the enzyme. This general configuration captures
the -arabinose utilization pathway and many other pathways
found in microorganisms. Parameter values were selected for one high-affinity/low-capacity
transporter and one low-affinity/high-capacity transporter at biologically
relevant expression strengths and activities to yield a bistable response
(Figure , see ). This configuration parallels the -arabinose
utilization pathway and creates an undesired behavior for titratable
control. Simple mathematical model predicts trade-offs when altering the
pathway structure. (A) The model assumes a base pathway comprising
a high-affinity/low-capacity transporter (T) and a low-affinity/high-capacity
transporter (T) that import extracellular sugar (S) into the cell, a catabolic enzyme (E) that degrades the
sugar, and a constitutively expressed regulator that upregulates the
expression of the transporters and the enzymes when bound to the sugar.
The steady-state expression levels of the enzyme are reported as a
function of extracellular sugar concentration. Note that all variables
were nondimensionalized as part of the model derivation. Dashed lines
indicate bifurcation regions. To alter the pathway, T was
constitutively expressed (C,D) and the activity of T was
further eliminated (E,F), T was constitutively expressed
(G,H) and the activity of T was further eliminated (I,J),
and the activity of the catabolic enzymes was eliminated (B,D,F,H,J).
Three strengths of constitutive expression were selected for T and T (low, light blue; medium, blue; high, dark
blue). See  for
more details. Experimentally Probing -arabinose Utilization to Explore
Model Predictions We concurrently altered and assessed the -arabinose utilization pathway in  K-12.
This pathway was attractive because of its extensive characterization, its widespread use as a titratable system, and its bimodal response that prevents titratable
control. The pathway
comprises three enzymes (encoded by ) that
shunt -arabinose into the pentose phosphate pathway, a low-affinity
transporter (encoded by ), a high-affinity transporter
(encoded by ), and a dual transcription regulator
(encoded by ) that upregulates the expression
of all other pathway components when bound to -arabinose
(). A third -arabinose-responsive
gene () encodes a putative transporter, although
this gene appears to contribute negligibly to the pathway response and thus was not considered in our analyses. To measure the
response to -arabinose, we equipped the wild type (WT) strain
of  MG1655 with a low-copy plasmid encoding
the  promoter upstream of the green fluorescent
protein (GFP) gene. The associated strain
was then grown for 6 h in a defined medium supplemented with different
concentrations of -arabinose to mid log phase (ABS ∼ 0.4) and subjected to flow cytometry analysis (). The incubation time was selected
such that longer incubation times would yield similar fluorescence
distributions (). Figure  displays representative response curves while Table  reports the calculated response metrics. The response
curves are depicted as dot plots to capture the extent of bimodality
within each fluorescence distribution (the relative size of each dot)
and the fluorescence of each subpopulation (vertical location of each
dot). Following this approach, the WT strain yielded a bimodal response
across a wide range of -arabinose concentrations (Figure A, Table ) similar to previous
observations. Probing alterations to the -arabinose
utilization pathway
in . The wild type pathway (A) was subjected
to different alterations:  was constitutively
expressed (P-) (C,D) and  was further deleted (Δ)
(E,F),  was constitutively expressed (P-) (G,H) and  was further
deleted (Δ) (I,J), and  was deleted (Δ) (B,D,F,H,J). Each designated
strain was back-diluted into M9 minimal medium supplemented with the
indicated concentration of -arabinose and grown for 6 h
to ABS ∼ 0.4 prior to flow cytometry analysis.
For unimodal distributions, the resulting mean fluorescence is plotted.
For bimodal distributions, two dots are plotted to represent the mean
fluorescence and the relative number of cells in the induced (black)
and uninduced (white) subpopulations (see  for more details on the flow cytometry analysis). The diameter
of each dot is directly proportional to the fraction of cells in that
subpopulation. Gray boxes indicate the limit of detection due to autofluorescence.
Each dot plot is representative of at least three independent experiments
conducted on separate days. See Table  for
the response metrics that account for the replicate experiments. Response Metrics
for Each Alteration
of the -arabinose Utilization Pathway in Listed values
are the mean and
S.E.M. (dynamic range, δ; Hill coefficient, η) or the
geometric mean and geometric S.E.M. (effective concentration to achieve
50% induction, EC) for three independent experiments
conducted on separate days. All values reflect cultures grown to ABS ∼ 0.4 unless indicated otherwise. The dynamic range
was calculated as the ratio of the maximal to minimal mean fluorescence
of the entire population, with autofluorescence subtracted from each
value. The large error associated with the dynamic range can be attributed
to basal levels approaching autofluorescence of cells lacking the
reporter plasmid. Constitutively
Expressing the High-Affinity Transporter More
Readily Generates a Uniform Response We considered different
alterations to sugar utilization pathways that were previously applied:
constitutively expressing one of the transporters, deleting the other
transporter, and deleting the catabolic genes. From a network
perspective, each alteration affects feedback within the pathway:
constitutively expressing or deleting the transporter genes disrupts
positive feedback, whereas deleting the catabolic genes disrupts negative
feedback. While differential growth on the sugar could also impart
feedback, we found that the addition
of -arabinose did not have a major impact on growth rates
for any of the pathway alterations (). We first explored the impact of constitutively expressing
either transporter to partially disrupt positive feedback in the pathway.
Within the model, we replaced the regulator-dependent expression term
for either transporter with different constant values. We found that
all evaluated expression strengths of the high-affinity transporter
eliminated the bifurcation region (Figure C). In contrast, only the highest expression strength of the low-affinity
transporter eliminated the bifurcation region (Figure G). In both cases, increasing the promoter strength reduced
the EC value by allowing greater sugar import at lower
extracellular concentrations. Because positive feedback is required
for bistability, the model predictions suggest that the high-affinity
transporter rather than the low-affinity transporter primarily drives
bistability, at least under the selected parameter set. To experimentally
probe model predictions, we replaced the native  or  promoter with a medium-strength,
synthetic promoter (P- or P-) and measured the response to -arabinose (Figure C,G). Paralleling
model predictions, constitutively expressing the high-affinity transporter
eliminated bimodality, whereas constitutively expressing the  low-affinity transporter reduced but did not eliminate
bimodality. These results clearly demonstrate that (i) constitutively
expressing the high-affinity transporter  more
readily generated a uniform response and (ii) only a single modification
was required to fully convert a bimodal response into a uniform response. Trade-offs when Deleting One Transporter We next explored
the impact of deleting one of the transporters when the other transporter
was constitutively expressed. Within the model, the second transporter
was removed by setting its maximal activity (α,
α) equal to zero. The resulting impact on the predicted
response was mixed and specific to the transporter (Figure E,I). Removing the high-affinity transporter from
the pathway with a constitutively expressed low-affinity transporter
eliminated the bifurcation region but also shifted the curves to higher
extracellular sugar concentrations (Figure I). This effect may be attributed to the high-affinity transporter
allowing sugar import at lower sugar concentrations while driving
positive feedback within the pathway. In support of model predictions,
deletion of the  operon (Δ) from the -arabinose pathway with constitutively expressed  resulted in a uniform response with a modest but statistically
significant increase in the EC value (p-value = 0.019)
(Figure I, Table ). The model predicted that removing the low-affinity transporter
from the pathway constitutively expressing the high-affinity transporter
had a negligible effect (compare parts C and E in Figure ). While this may suggest that the low-affinity
transporter is poorly induced for our parameter set, the low-affinity
transporter alone could mediate full induction of the pathway at high
extracellular sugar concentrations (). Deletion of  (Δ) from the -arabinose utilization pathway constitutively
expressing  also maintained the uniform response
(Figure E). However, there was a significant
decrease in the EC value (p-value = 0.008) and a significant
increase in the Hill coefficient (p-value = 0.003). These changes
would suggest that the low-affinity transporter contributes more than
that predicted by the model by extending the concentration range that
titrates the response. These changes also suggest that deletion of
the low-affinity transporter poses a distinct trade-off: a lower EC value at the cost of a sharper response. Trade-offs
when Eliminating Sugar Catabolism We next
explored the impact of removing sugar catabolism. Previous work concluded
that catabolism posed a barrier to a titratable response by breaking
down the inducing molecule. Separately,
sugar catabolism was predicted to entirely eliminate bistability, suggesting conflicting contributions. To examine
the impact of removing catabolism in the model, we set the activity
of the enzyme equal to zero (α = 0) and evaluated
the impact on the response metrics for all pathway configurations
(Figure B, D, F, H, J). The model predicted
both positive and negative effects of removing catabolism. As a positive
effect, removing sugar catabolism lowered the apparent EC value by preventing the intracellular breakdown of the sugar. As
two negative effects, removing sugar catabolism enhanced the propensity
for bistability and sharpened the response. Both negative effects
can be attributed to sugar catabolism conferring negative feedback
on the pathway similar to negative feedback in transcriptional circuits. To test these predictions,
we deleted the  operon (Δ) from all strains and measured the single-cell response curves (Figure B, D, F, H, J; Table ).
For all pathways (Figure ), the response metrics
aligned with model predictions. In particular, removing -arabinose catabolism significantly lowered the EC value
(p-values = 1 × 10 to 0.008), with over 100-fold
differences in some cases. Furthermore, removing -arabinose
catabolism sharpened the response (p-values = 3 × 10 to 0.005) and increased the propensity for bimodality. Finally,
removing -arabinose catabolism did not have a consistent
impact on the dynamic range, where a statistically significant increase
was observed for only two strains (P-, p-value = 0.027; P- Δ, p-value = 0.010) (Table ).
Thus, we conclude that removing -arabinose catabolism poses
a major trade-off between the amount of sugar necessary to induce
the pathway and the sharpness of the response. Breakdown of the Sugar
Can Help Linearize the Response Catabolism can deplete the
reserve of sugar in the medium, which
has been viewed as a barrier to the generation of titratable systems. However, such depletion would form negative
feedback by depleting the available sugar to induce the pathway, potentially
benefiting the response. To explore these potential effects, we first
modified the simple model to allow for the depletion of the extracellular
sugar through catabolism (see ). The resulting model was then employed to predict the response
in the presence of catabolism. As part of the model, we could specify
the relative volume of the cells to the medium (ν), which dictates
in part the rate of depletion. We specifically focused on the pathway
with the constitutively expressed low-affinity transporter (T = 0.02) and the deleted high-affinity transporter (α = 0) that yielded a graded response in the presence or absence
of sugar catabolism. The model predicted that depletion of the extracellular
sugar flattened the curve and elevated the EC value (Figure A). High depletion (ν = 0.01) was detrimental
based on the sharp response close to saturating sugar concentrations,
although intermediate depletion (ν < 0.01) improved the overall
linearity of the response. To test these predictions,
we cultured the P- Δ and P- Δ Δ strains for 6 h to final
cell densities ranging from ABS ∼ 0.004 to ABS ∼ 1.0 (Figure B). Our reasoning
was that extracellular -arabinose would be more depleted
at higher densities, but only in
the strain with catabolism. For this strain, we observed higher EC values and lower Hill coefficients with increasing cell
densities, paralleling model predictions (Figure C, Table ). For the strain lacking
catabolism, we observed similar EC values and Hill coefficients
for all cell densities. These findings provide further support for
a surprising benefit of sugar catabolism at higher densities and offer
a separate form of negative feedback in sugar utilization that may
generate more desirable titratable responses. A notable downside to
this strategy is that the extent of induction peaks and then decreases
over time at higher cell densities (), potentially complicating the tuning of expression levels. Effect of cell density in the presence or absence
of sugar catabolism.
(A) Model predictions for the pathway with a constitutively expressed
low-affinity transporter (T = 0.2) and the deleted high-affinity
transporter (α = 0) when accounting for depletion
of extracellular sugar through catabolism. Each simulation was conducted
to τ = 10. The different curves reflect the relative volume
of the cells to the medium (ν). Note that all variables were
nondimensionalized as part of the model derivation. See  for more details. (B)
Growth curves for the P- Δ strain with or without (Δ) sugar catabolism in defined medium with or without 10 mM -arabinose. Each value represents the mean of three independent experiments.
The SEM for each measurement was smaller than the symbol. (C) Representative
dot plots for both strains in log phase grown to the indicated final
cell densities. See Figure  for more information
on the dot plots. Each dot plot is representative of at least three
experiments conducted from independent colonies. See Table  for the response metrics that account for the replicate
experiments. Similar Trends When Linearizing the Response to -xylose To extend the generality of our insights, we focused on the -xylose utilization pathway in . Similar
to the -arabinose utilization pathway, the -xylose
utilization pathway encodes a high-affinity transporter and a low-affinity
transporter, a transcriptional activator that recognizes -xylose, and enzymes that shunt -xylose into the pentose
phosphate pathway (). Also paralleling
the -arabinose utilization pathway, the -xylose
utilization pathway exhibits a bimodal response when tracking the
activity of the  promoter (Figure A). We first asked how constitutively expressing the native high-affinity
transporter () impacts the response. Paralleling
the -arabinose utilization pathway, constitutively expressing
the endogenous copy of  resulted in a graded
response at all examined -xylose concentrations (Figure B). We next deleted the catabolic operon () to evaluate the impact of removing -xylose
catabolism. Further paralleling the -arabinose utilization
pathway, deletion of the catabolic operon significantly reduced the
EC value (99.8 μM ×/÷ 2.20 to 0.033 μM
×/÷ 1.10, p-value = 0.0014) at the cost of an increased
Hill coefficient (1.00 ± 0.08 to 1.58 ± 0.24, p-value =
0.019) (Figure B). Collectively, we were able
to generate a linear response to -xylose through a single
alteration and observed similar trade-offs when further deleting sugar
catabolism, all matching our observations for the -arabinose
utilization pathway. Linearizing the response to -xylose. The wild type  strain (A), the strain constitutively expressing
the high-affinity transporter  (B), and the
strain constitutively expressing the high-affinity transporter  and lacking the catabolic operon  (C) each harbored the reporter plasmid pUA66-pxylA. The designated
strain was back-diluted into M9 minimal medium supplemented with the
indicated concentration of -xylose and grown for 6 h to
ABS ∼ 0.4 prior to flow cytometry analysis. See
Figure  for more information on the dot plots.
Each dot plot is representative of at least three experiments conducted
from independent colonies. Design Rules to Engineer Sugar Utilization
Pathways for Titratable
Control Overall, our combination of mathematical modeling
and experimental probing of -arabinose and -xylose
utilization suggest general design rules when co-opting natural sugar
utilization pathways as titratable systems. The principal rule is
that there is no single, perfect set of alterations within the commonly
used set that we investigated. Instead, each alteration comes with
specific trade-offs beyond the required number of genomic alterations.
Accordingly, the best set of alterations will depend on the demands
of the desired titratable system. For instance, systems that rely
on expensive inducers would opt for modifications that minimize the
EC value, whereas systems that require fine-tuning would
minimize the Hill coefficient. The trade-offs principally applied
to the EC value and the Hill coefficient, whereas alterations
did not predictably impact the dynamic range. The next rule
pertains to the need for a uniform response free of bimodality. A
uniform response can be most readily achieved by constitutively expressing
the high-affinity transporter rather than the low-affinity transporter.
Theoretically, sufficient expression of either transporter can eliminate
bimodality, although the high-affinity transporter could be expressed
at much lower levels. The advantage of this strategy is that lower
expression conserves cellular resources and limits the toxicity of
overexpressing membrane proteins. The third rule relates to
trade-offs associated with removing one
transporter when the other is constitutively expressed. Removing the
high-affinity transporter can help eliminate bimodality at the potential
cost of a higher EC value, whereas removing the low-affinity
transporter reduces the EC value at the cost of a sharper
response. An alternative would be constitutively expressing the second
transporter, which could be explored in future studies. A final
rule pertains to sugar catabolism. Aside from requiring
higher sugar concentrations to induce the pathway, sugar catabolism
helps reduce the extent of bimodality and linearizes the response.
Linearization may be further enhanced when cultures are grown to higher
cell densities. Achieving consistent densities between experiments
may be challenging and entry into stationary phase may alter pathway
activity (). Furthermore, sugar
catabolism may perturb central metabolism as part of metabolic engineering
that complicates the results. However, the enhanced linearity would
offer finely tuned control over gene expression that may be essential
when precise pathway optimization is needed. The design rules
described above were extracted from a simple model
and probing of -arabinose utilization. The rules also applied
to the -xylose utilization pathway, suggesting broader applicability.
However, many utilization pathways exhibit variations on the simple
pathway, such as anabolic pathways or
pathways that are induced by metabolic intermediates. Further analysis of these pathways will offer insights
into the desirability of their natural responses and any required
manipulations. Separately, we relied on a more restrained parameter
set to probe alterations. Further interrogating parameter space may
reveal other parameters and design rules tailored to the behavior
of the native pathway. With additional insights, a set of more detailed
design principles could be developed. The end result will be reliable
means to convert the myriad of sugar utilization pathways in the microbial
world into versatile titratable systems for fundamental genetic studies
and for the engineering of microorganisms with optimized metabolic
processes. All strains used in
this work were derived from  K-12
substrain MG1655 and are listed in . With the exception of [Δ P]::[ P], all
genome modifications were achieved by PCR amplifying the  or  resistance cassette from pKD3 and recombineering
the linear DNA into NM400 through mini-λ-mediated recombination. The corresponding oligonucleotides are listed
in . To insert the constitutive
promoters, the promoter sequence (J23110 from the Registry of Standard
Biological Parts) was included in one of the primers used to amplify
the resistance cassette followed by a second set of primers to add
the homology arms for recombination. Successful recombinants were
verified by PCR and by sequencing. The genomic locus with the resistance
cassette was then transferred to MG1655 by P1 transduction. In the
case of Δ::, the  cassette was excised with the pCP20 plasmid to allow
for the subsequent insertion of the  cassette
as part of the replacement of the promoters for  or for . All
P1 transductions were verified by PCR. In the case of [Δ P]::[ P], the amplified  cassette was
recombineered directly into MG1655 using pDK46. Once generated,
each strain was transformed with the pUA66-ParaB or pUA66-PxylA reporter
plasmid encoding the low-copy sc101 origin-of-replication, the promoter
region of the  operon or the  operon, respectively, and a downstream copy of  with a strong ribosome-binding site sequence. The reporter plasmids along with the cloning and recombination
plasmids are listed in . Each
reporter plasmid offers a balance between maximizing the fluorescence
for high sensitivity and minimizing the copy number to limit titration
of the transcription regulators AraC and XylR. Strains
harboring the reporter
plasmid were streaked out from glycerol stocks onto LB plates supplemented
with appropriate antibiotics. Single colonies were then inoculated
in 2 mL of M9 minimal medium (1X M9 salts, 10 μg/mL thiamine,
2 mM MgSO, 0.1 mM CaCl supplemented with 0.4%
glycerol, 0.2% casamino acids, and 0.25 μg/mL kanamycin) and
grown overnight at 250 rpm and 37 °C. The overnight cultures
were then back-diluted into 2 mL of the same medium with varying concentrations
of the indicated sugar and grown under the same conditions for 6 h
to a final ABS of ∼ 0.4 unless indicated otherwise.
Cell density measurements were performed on a Nanodrop 2000c (Thermo
Scientific). For the time-course experiments (), cultures were grown for the indicated time
to the same final ABS of ∼ 0.4. Cells were diluted 1:100 in
1× PBS and run on an Accuri C6 flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson)
equipped with CFlow plate sampler, a 488 nm laser, and a 530 ±
15 nm bandpass filter. Cells were gated based on forward scatter (FSC-H)
and side scatter (SSC-H) using a gate set based on experiments with
DRAQ5 dye (Thermo Scientific). A lower cutoff of 11 500 au
for FSC-H and 500 au for SSC-H was used to eliminate the appearance
of excessive noise. At least 20 000 cells were collected for
each sample. See  for more
information on the analysis. Curve Fitting to Extract Performance Metrics The Hill
equation ( = */( + ) + , where , , and  are fit constants and  is the fluorescence
in the absence of the inducing sugar) was used to fit the mean fluorescence
values () across the different applied concentrations
of applied sugar (). Curve fitting was performed
using the least-squares approach with the natural log of the measured
and predicted mean fluorescence values. Of the fit values,  is the Hill coefficient (η),  is
the EC value, and ( +  – AF)/( – AF) is the dynamic range
(δ) (where AF is autofluorescence of the cells harboring the
pUA66 plasmid). All simulations
were conducted
in MATLAB. The ordinary differential equations were integrated using
the Euler method. The stable and unstable steady-states were calculated
by implementing the arc-length continuation method. The details of
the model can be found in , including its derivation and the selected values for the model
parameters. P-values were
calculated using
the student  test with unequal variance when comparing
all parameter metrics. The test used one tail for expected changes
between metrics (e.g., an increase in the Hill coefficient) and two
tails when no changes were expected. EC values were assumed
to follow a log-normal distribution..