The use of biological processes
for the production of chemicals and fuels is a promising alternative
to the traditional approach of chemical manufacture. They offer the opportunity to convert renewable or waste
feedstocks into higher value compounds of industrial interest. Although many biological processes have the potential
to replace synthetic chemistry, product titers and productivity often
remain to be optimized in order to achieve economically competitive
conversion rates. To facilitate and expedite the
implementation of biocatalysts with improved performance, low-cost
and high-throughput microbial engineering strategies need to be developed. Itaconic acid is an attractive platform chemical with a wide range
of industrial applications, such as in rubber, detergents, or surface
active agents. In 2004, it was reported
by the U.S. Department of Energy to be one of the top 12 building
block chemicals from biomass. The C5-dicarboxylic
acid can be converted into poly(acrylamide--itaconic
acid) which is used as a superabsorbent for aqueous solutions, or
poly(methyl methacrylate), also known as Plexiglas. Itaconate is a naturally occurring metabolite formed
by decarboxylation
of aconitate, an intermediate of the citric acid cycle. A number of
microorganisms, including , (also known
as ), and ., have been described
as natural producers of itaconic acid. It is also produced as an antimicrobial
compound by macrophages, mammalian immune cells. In  and macrophages, itaconate is synthesized
from the tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediate -aconitate through the action of a -aconitate
decarboxylase (CadA). In contrast, in  it
is produced via the unusual intermediate -aconitate. Heterologous expression of the  gene has demonstrated that the biosynthesis of itaconic
acid can be achieved in different host organisms than the natural
producer. So far, the highest titer of
biotechnologically produced itaconate has been obtained by fermentation
of . However, due to feedback inhibition
of itaconate biosynthesis at higher concentrations, considerable research efforts have been directed toward
developing alternative microbial biocatalysts. Other microorganisms
that have been investigated for the biosynthesis of itaconic acid
include , , , , , and species
of  and . Although some of these microorganisms exhibit beneficial traits,
such as a high tolerance to itaconate and a low pH, production titers need to be considerably improved. Genetically
encoded biosensors have gained increasing interest
as molecular tools enabling high-throughput strain development. They are composed of transcription factor-based
inducible gene expression systems linked to a reporter or an antibiotic
resistance gene. By using a fluorescent reporter
gene, changes in intracellular metabolite concentrations can easily
be monitored by a fluorescence output enabling the screen of millions
of single-cells in a rapid manner. Biosensors
have been successfully applied to increase products titers of platform
chemicals such as acrylate, 3-hydroxypropionate (3-HP), and glucarate. To date, no itaconate biosensor has been developed which could facilitate
the screening process for both metabolically engineered strains and
alternative feedstocks, such as biomass hydrolysates, to improve yields
and decrease production costs. This study was aimed to identify an itaconate-inducible gene expression
system and construct a fluorescence-based biosensor. Several natural
compounds were screened for biosensor induction and induction kinetics
measured. Moreover, the developed biosensor was exploited in the optimization
of itaconate production in , and its output
was compared to analytically determined itaconate titers. Identification
of an Itaconic Acid-Inducible System To build an itaconate
biosensor, which can be applied across different
species, both elements of a transcription-based inducible system,
a transcriptional regulator (TR), and the corresponding inducible
promoter, are needed. Bacterial degradation pathways, which are often
activated exclusively in the presence of the compound to be degraded,
represent a rich source of inducible promoters. Even though the pathway
for itaconate catabolism had been known for more than 50 years, and a few bacteria including  spp.,  spp., and  sp. have been shown to possess enzymatic activities for itaconate
degradation, the genes encoding these
enzymes have only recently been identified in  and () The pathway comprises three enzymatic reactions (A). The first reaction
is catalyzed by itaconate CoA transferase (Ict) which converts itaconate
to itaconyl-CoA. The CoA ester is subsequently hydrated to ()-citramalyl-CoA by itaconyl-CoA hydratase (Ich) which
is then cleaved into acetyl-CoA and pyruvate by ()-citramalyl-CoA lyase (Ccl). The production of the Ict and Ich homologues
(RipA and RipB, respectively) by  was shown to be strongly induced after macrophage infection. The upregulation of  and  was suggested by Sasikaran and co-workers to result
from macrophagic itaconate secretion as part of the defense mechanism
against pathogenic bacteria. Most likely, the promoters
of the gene clusters encoding the enzymes for itaconate catabolism
in  and  harbor
regulatory elements required for transcription of these genes in the
presence of itaconate. Interestingly, a gene encoding a LysR-type
transcriptional regulator (LTTR, here termed ItcR) is located in the
opposite direction of both the  operon (also referred to as  operon) and
the  putative six-gene operon encoding
Ich, Ict, Ccl, and three other proteins (B). The genes coding for LTTRs are occasionally
transcribed in divergent orientation with respect to the cluster of
genes they regulate, which led to the
hypothesis that transcription of the  and  itaconate degradation pathway genes is mediated
by their corresponding divergently oriented LTTR genes from an inducible
promoter located in their intergenic regions. Bacterial itaconate degradation
pathway. (A) The enzymes involved
in bacterial itaconate degradation include itaconate CoA transferase
(Ict), itaconyl-CoA hydratase (Ich), ()-citramalyl-CoA
lyase (Ccl). (B) The gene clusters in , , and  encoding the enzymes required for itaconate catabolism. Divergently
oriented LTTR genes () and putative itaconate-inducible
promoters are depicted. Gene names and locus tags are shown under
the schematic illustration of each gene cluster. Itaconic Acid-Inducible Gene Expression Is Mediated by a LysR-Type
Transcriptional Regulator http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00057/suppl_file/sb8b00057_si_001.pdf To test our hypothesis that the
itaconate degradation pathway is controlled by the transcriptional
regulator and corresponding inducible promoter, we cloned both the  PAO1 and the  YPIII DNA fragments with a putative itaconate-inducible system,
containing an intergenic region with promoters P and P, respectively, and gene
of the transcriptional regulator () (B), into the reporter
plasmid pEH006. The latter plasmid has previously been demonstrated
to be suitable for the analysis of inducible systems (). The nucleotide sequence of the  itaconate-inducible system is identical to the  one, except for three single nucleotide polymorphisms in ItcR coding
sequence (YPK_2265) resulting in one amino acid difference. The nucleotide
sequences of the intergenic regions containing putative itaconate-inducible
promoters are provided in . To
investigate the potential applicability of the two putative itaconate-inducible
systems across different species, red fluorescent protein (RFP) reporter
gene expression in response to itaconate was measured by fluorescence
output in the model gammaproteobacterium  MG1655
and the betaproteobacterium  H16.
The latter is a model chemolithoautotroph with the ability to produce
energy and chemicals from carbon dioxide and is therefore of interest
in biotechnological applications. Single time point fluorescence measurements
for  and  harboring
the putative itaconate-inducible systems, composed of transcriptional
regulator and inducible promoter (ItcR/P), were performed in the absence
and presence of itaconate (). In both microorganisms, reporter gene expression
from the  () inducible system (pEH086) is induced significantly ( < 0.01) 6 h after supplementation with 5 mM itaconate (215-fold
in  and 105-fold in ,  panels
A and B, respectively). In contrast, the  () inducible system ItcR/P (pEH177) does not mediate reporter gene
expression in response to itaconate in , whereas
in  it demonstrates an 18.5-fold induction.
In comparison, in  MG1655, the level of induction
mediated by the  itaconate-inducible
system is considerably higher than the commonly used -arabinose-inducible
system which is subject to catabolite repression. A culture of  MG1655 harboring pEH006 demonstrated a 39-fold increase
in RFP expression 6 h after addition of -arabinose to a
final concentration of 0.1% (w/v) in minimal medium. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00057/suppl_file/sb8b00057_si_001.pdf To confirm that itaconate-inducible reporter gene expression
is
indeed controlled by the episomally encoded ItcR, their coding sequences
were removed from the vectors containing ItcR/P and ItcR/P. Single time point fluorescence measurements were
repeated for  and  solely harboring the itaconate-inducible promoters in the absence
and presence of itaconate (). Without ItcR, induction of reporter
gene expression from the  itaconate-inducible
promoter (P, pEH172)
is abolished in both microorganisms. This confirms that transcription
of the  itaconate degradation
pathway genes is mediated by their divergently oriented  gene and that neither of the two tested microorganisms encodes cross-activating
TR homologues. In , the level of normalized
fluorescence from P (pEH178) and ItcR/P (pEH177) is higher than the negative control, indicating that the
promoter itself is active. However, the normalized fluorescence levels
are of equal height, suggesting that the TR might not be produced
or able to interact with its cognate operator sequence to activate
gene expression in the presence of the effector. Interestingly, in , even though the coding sequence of ItcR was removed from the plasmid, reporter gene expression from P (pEH178) is induced significantly
( < 0.01) after the addition of itaconate. A ItcR homology search in  revealed
the presence of several chromosomally encoded LTTRs exhibiting 40–50%
protein sequence identity (96–98% coverage). One of the LTTR
genes is located within close proximity to the cluster that includes
genes potentially involved in itaconate degradation similar to  ().  ItcR homologues can potentially activate gene
expression from the heterologous  itaconate-inducible
promoter even in the absence of its corresponding LTTR. However, since
both the induction level, and the absolute normalized fluorescence
in the presence of itaconate, are higher in the plasmid carrying ItcR/P (pEH177) than the
one carrying P (pEH178)
alone (by 3.5- and 52-fold, respectively), it can be concluded that ItcR is involved in activation of gene expression of the
itaconate degradation cluster of genes in  and therefore enables persistence in macrophages. The finding that
expression of the genes encoding enzymes involved in itaconate catabolism
is mediated by their divergently oriented LTTR genes may aid in developing
new antimicrobial agents. Plasmids Used and Generated in This
Study Kan; broad host range vector used to amplify the
origin of replication ; modular vector for the evaluation
of inducible systems; P--T and P-T7sl-RBS--T ; P--T and
P--T from  YPIII
genomic DNA ; P--T, P-T7sl-RBS-T, P--T and P--T ; P--T, P-T7sl-RBS--T, P--T and P--T ; P--T and
P--T from  PAO1 genomic
DNA Influence of ItcR on
inducible gene expression. Absolute normalized
fluorescence (in arbitrary units) of (A)  MG1655
and (B)  H16 harboring the  () and  () itaconate-inducible systems composed of promoter and
transcriptional regulator (ItcR/P), and promoter-only (P) implementation
in the absence and presence of 5 mM itaconate. Single time-point fluorescence
measurements were taken 6 h after inducer addition. The promoterless
reporter plasmid pEH006E was employed as negative control. Error bars
represent standard deviations of three biological replicates. Asterisks
indicate statistically significant induction values for  < 0.01 (unpaired  test). Because
of its functionality
in both tested microorganisms, regulator-dependent orthogonality and
high level of induction, the itaconate-inducible system from  was selected to be further characterized.
The sensor was evaluated for its kinetics—the time that is
required for the system to respond to a change in itaconate levels;
dynamics—the range of inducer concentration that mediates a
linear fluorescence output; and inducer-dependent orthogonality—the
specificity toward itaconate. MG1655
was transformed with the plasmid harboring the ItcR/P inducible system (pEH086),
cultivated in M9 minimal medium, and fluorescence output was monitored
over time after supplementation with different concentrations of itaconate.
As can be seen from the fluorescence curve of induction kinetics,
reporter gene expression is activated immediately after inducer addition,
taking into account the time that is required for RFP maturation (A). This immediate response suggests that the system is solely
controlled by ItcR and that it is not affected by host-originating
TRs. Furthermore, it suggests that itaconate is a primary inducing
molecule, which starts instantly to be uptaken by or diffused into
the  cells in minimal medium. It should be
noted that the growth was similar for all itaconate concentrations
tested. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00057/suppl_file/sb8b00057_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00057/suppl_file/sb8b00057_si_001.pdf The correlation between extracellular inducer concentration
and
fluorescence output, 4 and 8 h after itaconate supplementation, is
illustrated in the dose response curve (B). It indicates that gene expression can
be tuned in the range of approximately 0.07 to 0.7 mM for a linear
fluorescence output. The minimum concentration of exogenously added
itaconate required for activation of the system is approximately 0.016
mM. The dose response curve indicates a saturation of the ItcR/P inducible system
for itaconate levels above 2.5 mM. However, in order for this system
to be applied as biosensor for concentrations of more than 2.5 mM,
its elements require modification. This is commonly accomplished by
promoter or protein engineering, both strategies aiming to alter the
binding affinity of the TR for either the operator sequence or the
ligand itself. Notably, the concentration of exogenously added itaconate
required to induce the system in  MG1655 is
lower in LB medium than in M9 minimal medium. Four hours after the
addition of 0.016 mM itaconate, reporter gene expression is induced
7.7-fold in LB medium compared to a culture without itaconate (). This is in contrast to a 1.4-fold
induction in M9 minimal medium. The dose response curve indicates
that the itaconate concentration, required for a linear fluorescence
output in LB medium, ranges between approximately 0.016–0.16
mM (). Despite a 5-fold reduced
induction threshold for itaconate, the linear output range of the ItcR/P inducible system
spans 1 order of magnitude, similar to what is observed in M9 minimal
medium. This suggests that different growth conditions can contribute
to the variation of both lower and upper induction thresholds, whereas
the magnitude of system response is likely to remain constant. In addition, the analysis of extracellular and
intracellular itaconate
by using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled with
ultraviolet (UV) spectroscopy shows no significant change in the itaconate
concentration during the 12 h period in the actively growing  culture (). This demonstrates that itaconate is not metabolized
and therefore is a primary inducing molecule. Moreover, the analysis
confirms that itaconate is taken up by or diffuses into the  cell and reaches a relatively high concentration
of at least 1.3 mM after 6 h. It should be noted that the actual intracellular
molar concentration could be even higher, since our approximation
uses assumption that the intracellular cell volume is equal to the
total cell volume including the space occupied by cell membranes,
lipids, etc. Interestingly, the intracellular itaconate concentration
becomes reduced when  cells reach the stationary
phase (12-h time point, ); however, the total itaconate concentration in the culture
remains unchanged. Kinetics and dynamics of the ItcR/P inducible system. (A) Absolute normalized fluorescence
of  MG1655 harboring the ItcR/P inducible system (pEH086) in
response to different concentrations of itaconate added at time zero.
The standard deviation of three biological replicates is shown as
a lighter color ribbon displayed lengthwise of the induction kinetics
curve. For the lower concentrations, the standard deviation is too
small to be visible. (B) Dose response curve of the ItcR/P inducible system in  MG1655, illustrating the correlation between inducer
concentration and fluorescence output 4 and 8 h post-induction (hpi)
with itaconate. Error bars represent standard deviations of three
biological replicates. Extracellularly Added and Intracellularly
Produced Itaconate Distribution between Supernatant and Cells in  Culture Grown in LB Medium itaconate
extracellularly added concentration
in cell culture (mg/L) itaconate
intracellularly produced normalized
concentration in cell culture (mg/L/OD) resulting
from supernatant (% of total) resulting
from cells (% of total) Arithmetic mean ± standard
deviation is derived using data of three biological replicates. Itaconate concentration added to
cell culture at 0 h time point. The ItcR/P inducible
system was analyzed for cross-induction
by metabolites that may activate reporter gene expression in the absence
of the primary inducing molecule itaconate. These can be exogenously
added compounds or intermediates naturally involved in cellular metabolism.
Compounds that were investigated for cross-induction mainly include
citric acid cycle intermediates and structurally similar variants
thereof (A).
Evaluation of these molecules may shed light on structural features
required for TR-binding and TR affinity toward itaconate. Furthermore,
screening potential candidate compounds might expand the list of metabolites
to be detected by TR-based controllable systems and offer the possibility
to be utilized as analogue inducers to control gene expression. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00057/suppl_file/sb8b00057_si_001.pdf The fluorescence output from cultures of  MG1655 harboring the ItcR/P inducible system, and cultivated in M9
minimal medium, was
monitored over time after individual addition of each compound at
a final concentration of 5 or 10 mM. Normalized fluorescence levels
(in %), relative to the output obtained by adding 5 mM itaconate,
were determined 12 hours after compound supplementation. In addition
to the primary inducer itaconate and under the assumption that all
tested metabolites are able to enter the cell, the compounds succinate
(2), methylsuccinate (8), mesaconate (9), α-ketoglutarate (11),
propionate (14), butyrate (15), 3-butenoate (16), acrylate (18), methacrylate
(19), -aconitate (22), and -aconitate (23) induce reporter gene expression at a final concentration
of 5 mM with high statistical significance ( <
0.01) (B).
Of these 11 compounds, succinate, mesaconate, propionate, butyrate,
3-butenoate, -aconitate, and -aconitate demonstrated a significant increase in RPF expression
at a final concentration of 10 mM (). Increased activation of reporter gene expression suggests that
these inducers may exhibit a weak binding to TR inducing the system
to some extent. The highest level of cross-induction is mediated by -aconitate. At a concentration of 10 mM, it reached
9.9% of the absolute normalized fluorescence that was achieved by
using 5 mM itaconate. Since  has not been
reported to encode a -aconitate decarboxylase,
converting -aconitate into itaconate, induction
of reporter gene expression from P is more likely to be caused by ItcR promiscuity
rather than by decarboxylation of -aconitate
forming itaconate. -Aconitate and -aconitate
showed more than a 2-fold change in induction level when inducer concentration
was 2-fold increased from 5 to 10 mM suggesting that these compounds
may activate the system at higher concentrations. To obtain a more
accurate resolution of their dose responses, the ItcR/P inducible system was subjected
to a range of concentrations of -aconitate, and -aconitate. Since mesaconate has been previously shown
to act as CoA acceptor by Ict, with second lowest  after itaconate, this compound was also included in the dose response experiment. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00057/suppl_file/sb8b00057_si_001.pdf A saturation in fluorescence output when using mesaconate, -aconitate, or -aconitate as inducer
was not possible to obtain. All three inducers demonstrated some degree
of toxicity inhibiting cell growth at higher concentrations. However,
on the basis of a phenomenological model for metabolite biosensors, it can be postulated that the maximal dynamic
range of an inducible system, which is the maximal level of expression
relative to basal promoter activity, is not affected by metabolite-TR
affinity. Therefore, the maximal dynamic range calculated for itaconate
as inducer was employed to fit the dynamic range data for mesaconate, -aconitate, and -aconitate using
a Hill function (). The resulting , the extracellularly added
inducer concentration which mediates half-maximal RFP expression,
is different for each of these compounds. They reveal that mesaconate, -, and -aconitate  values are higher (45.2 mM, 31.1 mM,
and 13.2 mM, respectively) and therefore activate the ItcR/P inducible system at much higher
extracellular concentrations than itaconate ( = 0.43 mM). The structural characteristics
may contribute to the ability of metabolites to interact with ItcR
and act as inducers. Indeed, mesaconate, -aconitate,
and -aconitate have structural similarities
to itaconate, with last two harboring the complete itaconate element.
However, the observation that all three compounds have a much higher  than itaconate suggests,
that for maximal activation of the ItcR/P inducible system, the unmodified itaconate structure
is indispensable. It also suggests that the binding affinity of the
TR to a specific ligand may play an important role. Consequently,
protein engineering of ItcR may be used to change the binding affinity
for itaconate. On the other hand, it cannot be excluded that the change
in inducer dynamic range is affected by the differential uptake of
these compounds by the  cell. It should
be noted that acetate, propionate, butyrate, methylsuccinate,
and mesaconate have previously been demonstrated to act as CoA acceptors
by Ict, albeit at a much higher  than itaconate, suggesting
that these compounds might be secondary inducers of the ItcR/P inducible system. Interestingly,
their level of induction correlates with their ability to act as CoA
acceptors, with acetate, propionate, and butyrate having a higher,
and mesaconate having a lower . Furthermore, the catalytic efficiency (/) of Ict with itaconate, mesaconate, methylsuccinate, butyrate,
propionate, and acetate, shows a high
level of direct correlation with level of induction by these compounds.
This suggests there might be a structural evolutionary link between
enzyme (Ict) and transcriptional regulator (ItcR),
where both proteins have coevolved enabling a hierarchical ranking
of metabolites as enzyme substrates and TR activators in the following
order: itaconate > mesaconate > methylsuccinate > butyrate
> propionate
> acetate. The direct correlation between catalytic efficiency
and
level of induction potentially ensures that the hierarchy is supported
at the gene expression and enzyme activity levels by securing the
highest level of Ict synthesis and highest catalytic
efficiency when itaconate is present in the environment. Overall,
the ItcR/P inducible
system demonstrates a high specificity toward itaconate and may therefore
be used in combination with other inducible systems to orthogonally
control gene expression in biosynthetic pathways composed of multiple
genes. Inducer-dependent
orthogonality of the ItcR/P inducible system. (A) Compounds that were
investigated for cross-induction with the ItcR/P inducible system: itaconic acid (1), succinic
acid (2), -malic acid (3), -malic acid (4), fumaric
acid (5), oxaloacetic acid (6), -aspartic acid (7), methylsuccinic
acid (8), mesaconic acid (9), citraconic acid (10), α-ketoglutaric
acid (11), -glutamic acid (12), acetic acid (13), propionic
acid (14), butyric acid (15), 3-butenoic acid (16), valeric acid (17),
acrylic acid (18), methacrylic acid (19), tiglic acid (20), citric
acid (21), -aconitic acid (22), -aconitic acid (23), tricarballylic acid (24), isocitric acid (25).
(B) Normalized fluorescence (in %) of  MG1655
harboring the ItcR/P inducible system 12 hours after addition of different compounds
at a final concentration of 5 mM, relative to the fluorescence output
obtained by adding 5 mM itaconate. (−) uninduced sample. Error
bars represent standard deviations of three biological replicates.
Asterisks indicate statistically significant induction values for  < 0.01 (unpaired  test). Biosensor-Assisted Optimization of Itaconic Acid Production Itaconic acid can be synthesized by decarboxylation of the citric
acid cycle intermediate -aconitic acid. This reaction
is catalyzed by -aconitate decarboxylase (CadA).
The  gene has previously been expressed
in  for the biosynthesis of itaconate by using
either a constitutive promoter, or an inducible T7 polymerase-based
expression system. Overexpression of  was reported to impair cellular
growth, suggesting that fine-tuning of
CadA levels is essential to ensure optimal metabolic flux. Even though
the pathway for itaconate biosynthesis in  solely requires the introduction of one additional gene, balancing
its expression and quantitatively evaluating its impact on itaconate
production can be laborious when using standard analytical techniques.
We decided to apply the ItcR/P inducible system to monitor itaconate production by fluorescence
output in response to different levels of CadA. A single plasmid
(pEH165) was constructed that contains two modules: one for itaconate
production and one for itaconate sensing (). The  (ATEG_09971)
coding sequence was cloned downstream of the arabinose-inducible system
and a T7 mRNA stem-loop structure sequence, which was incorporated
to enhance  mRNA stability. The itaconate sensing module contains the ItcR/P inducible system in combination
with the  reporter gene. The addition of -arabinose to cells harboring this plasmid was expected to initiate  expression, resulting in biosynthesis of itaconate
and subsequent activation of reporter gene expression.  TOP10 was transformed with plasmid pEH165, and cells
in early exponential growth phase were transferred to a 96-well microtiter
plate. Subsequently, growth and fluorescence were monitored over time
after supplementation with different concentrations of -arabinose
ranging from 1 to 1000 μM. As it can be seen in the fluorescence
curve of induction kinetics, higher concentrations of -arabinose
mediate a faster fluorescence output (A). Reporter gene expression above background
levels can be observed 150 min after the addition of 100 μM -arabinose, whereas 10 μM require about 1 h more. The
dose response curve indicates that maximum absolute normalized fluorescence
is achieved by supplementation with 250 μM -arabinose
(B). This suggests
that expression of  can be fine-tuned when using
inducer concentrations in the range between 1 and 100 μM. -Arabinose concentrations of 0.5 and 1 mM, however, appear
to negatively impact reporter gene expression, indicating a drop in
itaconate levels. The negative effect of high inducer levels becomes
even more evident from the absorbance data, showing that -arabinose concentrations of 250 μM and more reduce cell density
considerably (C). Most likely, this behavior results from an increased metabolic
burden caused by overproduction of CadA, as mentioned earlier. To quantitatively validate the data which was generated from
cultures
grown in microtiter plates, the experiment was repeated in small culture
volumes.  TOP10 pEH165 was grown in 50 mL
culture tubes, and expression of  was initiated
by supplementation with different concentrations of -arabinose.
To determine itaconate titers, samples were subjected to analysis
using HPLC-UV. The highest itaconate concentration was achieved in
cultures containing 100 μM -arabinose, resulting in
0.78 ± 0.31 mM itaconate 48 h after inducer addition (D). This represents
a 4.3-fold improvement over cultures containing only 5 μM -arabinose. It should be noted that these and data in  demonstrate that
the intracellularly synthesized itaconate was actively excreted or
diffused into the media. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00057/suppl_file/sb8b00057_si_001.pdf The addition of an excessive amount
of 1 mM inducer also decreased
itaconate levels by 1.3-fold. Therefore, the quantitative data obtained
from the small-volume cultures match well with the fluorescence output
measured in the microtiter plate (compare B and D). Particularly
when itaconate titers are OD-normalized, 250 μM -arabinose
results in the highest OD-normalized itaconate titer (). This experiment illustrates that  expression needs to be carefully fine-tuned to guarantee
both optimal metabolic flux and viability of cells. Moreover,
using 100 μM of -arabinose yields itaconate
concentrations of 0.24, 0.56, and 0.78 mM after 9, 18, and 48 h post-induction,
respectively (D). These itaconate concentrations fall within the linear range of
dose response (B) and result in a fluorescence output with a unimodal distribution
suggesting that almost all cells in the population were activated
(E,F). As demonstrated
here, the itaconate biosensor can be employed to facilitate a fluorescence-based
high-throughput screen to evaluate various conditions for their impact
on itaconate biosynthesis. Schematic illustration of the plasmid containing both
an itaconate
production and sensing module. Exogenous addition of -arabinose
initiates synthesis of the -aconitate decarboxylase
CadA which converts -aconitate into itaconate.
RFP reporter gene expression is subsequently mediated by ItcR in the
presence of itaconate. Biosensor-assisted optimization of itaconate production. (A) Absolute
normalized fluorescence of  TOP10 harboring
pEH165, grown in microtiter plates, in response to 1–100 μM
of -arabinose supplemented at time zero. The means of three
biological replicates are presented. Error bars are too small to be
visible. (B) Dose response curve of  TOP10
harboring pEH165, grown in microtiter plates, 6, 9, 12, and 15 h post
induction (hpi) with 1–1000 μM of -arabinose.
The means of three biological replicates are presented. Error bars
are too small to be visible. (C) Absorbance at 600 nm of  TOP10 harboring pEH165, grown in microtiter plates,
in response to 50–1000 μM of -arabinose supplemented
at time zero. The means of three biological replicates are presented.
The standard deviation for 50 μM of inducer is illustrated as
lighter color ribbon displayed lengthwise of the growth curve. The
error bars for the other inducer concentrations are too small to be
visible. (D) Itaconate titers of  TOP10 harboring
pEH165, grown in small-volume cultures, 0, 9, 18, and 48 h post induction
with 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, 250, and 1000 μM of -arabinose.
Error bars represent standard deviations of three biological replicates.
(E) Flow cytometric analysis of  TOP 10 harboring
pEH165, grown in small-volume cultures, in response to 100 μM
of -arabinose. Samples were taken 0, 3, 6, 12, 18, and 24
h after inducer addition. For the time points  =
6,  = 12,  = 18 and  = 24, fluorescence from more than 99% of cells are displayed in
the histogram, whereas for time points  = 0 and  = 3, less than 25% of cells are below 429 A.U. fluorescence
threshold in the histogram. (F) Fluorescence intensity (median) and
percentage of uninduced and induced cells corresponding to the data
presented in panel E. Error bars represent standard deviations of
three biological replicates. Correlation between Biosensor Output and
Itaconate Concentration In addition to HPLC-UV analysis,
the samples from the small-volume
cultures of  TOP10 pEH165 were analyzed for
fluorescence output. The obtained data were used to evaluate whether
quantitatively determined itaconate titers correlate with reporter
gene expression from the biosensor. The five tested inducer concentrations
that did not impair bacterial growth produced a 59-fold range in fluorescence
after 6 h (A). The addition of 25, 50, and 100 μM -arabinose
resulted in itaconate titers that were sufficiently high to be detected
by the biosensor. Notably, in the linear response range of the ItcR/P inducible system,
the fluorescence output shows a high level of correlation with HPLC-UV
measured extracellular itaconate titers (A) and unimodal fluorescence distribution
in the cell population (B). -Arabinose concentrations of 5 and 10 μM
result in a bimodal fluorescence response, suggesting an all-or-none
induction in which intermediate inducer concentrations give rise to
subpopulations. However, when different levels of itaconate are synthesized
in the range between 0.1 and 0.78 mM, which corresponds to the linear
response range, the fluorescence output becomes unimodal (D,E and A). This confirms that for itaconate levels in the
linear range, the ItcR/P inducible system mediates a homogeneous induction of cells,
exemplifying its potential to fine-tune gene expression across cell
populations and to be utilized as a quantitatively reliable biosensor. Correlation
between biosensor output and itaconate concentration.
(A) Absolute normalized fluorescence values of  TOP10 pEH165 are correlated with their corresponding itaconate concentration
in the culture supernatant. Samples were taken 6 h after inducer addition.
The different concentrations of exogenously added -arabinose,
ranging from 5 to 100 μM, are highlighted. Error bars represent
standard deviations of three biological replicates. (B) Flow cytometric
analysis of samples from panel A. For -arabinose (inducer)
concentrations of 25, 50, and 100 μM, fluorescence from more
than 99% of cells are displayed in the histogram, whereas for concentrations
of 10, 5, and 0 μM, less than 2, 10, and 25% of cells, respectively,
are below 429 A.U. fluorescence threshold in the histogram. TOP10
(Invitrogen) was used for cloning, plasmid propagation, and biosynthesis
of itaconate. RFP fluorescence assays for biosensor characterization
were performed in wild type  MG1655 (DSMZ
18039) and  H16 (ATCC 17699). Bacterial
strains were propagated in LB medium. For reporter gene assays,  MG1655 was cultivated in M9 minimal medium supplemented with 1 μg/L thiamine, 20
μg/mL uracil and 0.4% (w/v) glucose,
unless otherwise indicated.  reporter gene
assays were performed in minimal medium containing 0.4% (w/v) sodium gluconate. Antibiotics were added to
the growth medium at the following concentrations: 25 μg/mL,
or 50 μg/mL chloramphenicol for , or , respectively.  TOP10
was grown at 30 or 37 °C. For comparison, both  MG1655 and  were cultivated at 30 °C. Plasmid minipreps were carried
out using the New England BioLabs (NEB) Monarch Plasmid Miniprep Kit.
Microbial genomic DNA was extracted employing the GenElute Bacterial
Genomic DNA Kit (Sigma). For cloning, DNA was amplified by PCR using
Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase from NEB in 50 μL reactions
under recommended conditions. Restriction enzymes and NEBuilder Hifi
DNA assembly master mix were purchased from NEB, and reactions were
set up according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The NEB Monarch
DNA Gel Extraction Kit was used to extract gel-purified linearized
DNA which was subsequently used for cloning. Chemical competent  were prepared and transformed by heat shock as previously
described. Electrocompetent  were prepared and transformed as reported by Ausubel
et al. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00057/suppl_file/sb8b00057_si_001.pdf Oligonucleotide primers were synthesized
by Sigma-Aldrich (). Plasmids were
constructed by employing either the NEBuilder Hifi DNA assembly method
according to the manufacturer’s protocol or by restriction
enzyme-based cloning procedures. Constructs
were verified by DNA sequencing (Source BioScience, Nottingham, UK).
The nucleotide sequences of pEH086 and pEH177 have been deposited
in the public version of the ACS registry () under the accession number ACS_000716 and ACS_000717, respectively. The itaconate-inducible systems ItcR/P and ItcR/P were amplified with oligonucleotide primers EH191_f and EH190_r,
EH312_f and EH311_r, respectively, from  YPIII () and  PAO1
() genomic DNA and cloned into pEH006 by AatII
and NdeI restriction sites (resulting in plasmids pEH086 and pEH177).
The itaconate-inducible promoters P and P were amplified with oligonucleotide primers EH191_f and EH302_r,
EH312_f and EH313_r, respectively, from  YPIII and  PAO1 genomic DNA and cloned
into pEH006 by AatII and NdeI restriction sites (resulting in plasmids
pEH172 and pEH178). Vector pEH164 contains both the itaconate-reporter
system composed
of ItcR-P- and the -arabinose-inducible system including
restriction sites for subsequent integration of the -aconitate decarboxylase  gene (ATEG_09971)
downstream of P. It was constructed
by employing the NEBuilder Hifi DNA assembly method. Oligonucleotide
primers EH011_f and EH075_r, EH015_f and EH012_r, EH078_f and EH190_r,
EH083_f and EH079_r were used to amplify the replication origin and
the chloramphenicol resistance gene, ItcR-P- and the -arabinose-inducible system from pBBR1MCS-2-PphaC-eyfp-c1, pEH086,
and pEH006, respectively. Vector pEH165
contains both the itaconate-production system AraC-P- and the itaconate-reporter
system ItcR-P-. Oligonucleotide primers EH294_f and EH293_r, EH296_f
and EH295_r were used to amplify exon 1 and exon 2 of ATEG_09971 from  NIH2642 genomic DNA. The PCR products were combined
with BglII/SbfI digested pEH164 and constructed by employing the NEBuilder
Hifi DNA assembly method. RFP fluorescence
was measured
with an Infinite M1000 PRO (Tecan) microplate reader using 585 nm
as excitation and 620 nm as emission wavelength. The gain factor was
set manually to 100%. Absorbance was determined at 600 nm to normalize
fluorescence by optical density. Fluorescence and absorbance readings
at a single time point, and over time, were performed as described
previously. The absolute normalized fluorescence
was calculated by dividing the absolute fluorescence values by their
corresponding absorbance values. Prior to normalization, both values
were corrected by the autofluorescence and autoabsorbance of the culture
medium. Production of Itaconate and HPLC-UV Analysis Real-time
biosynthesis of itaconate was monitored quantitatively by high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) in combination with ultraviolet (UV)
absorbance at 210 nm and by fluorescence output in  T10 harboring pEH165. Single colonies of freshly transformed cells
were used to inoculate five mL of LB medium. The preculture was incubated
for 18 h at 37 °C and 200 rpm. Subsequently, it was diluted 1:100
in 6 mL of fresh LB medium. The main cultures were grown in 50 mL
Falcon tubes at 30 °C and 225 rpm. At an OD of
0.5, 50 μL of -arabinose stock solutions were added
to achieve the final concentrations of 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, 250, and
1000 μM. One sample per biological replicate remained uninduced.
Samples of 0.5 mL were taken immediately, 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, and 48
h after inducer supplementation. They were directly used for evaluation
by flow cytometry, OD, and fluorescence measurement.
The remaining sample was centrifuged for 5 min at 16 000, and the cell-free supernatant was subjected to HPLC-UV
analysis as reported previously. To determine intracellular itaconate
concentrations when added extracellularly or synthesized intracellularly,
cultures of  TOP10 harboring pEH164 or pEH165
were grown overnight to saturation and diluted 1:100 in 200 mL LB
medium. The main cultures were grown in 1-L shake flasks at 30 °C
and 225 rpm. At an OD of 0.5, inducers were added at
final concentrations of 2.5 mM itaconate or 100 μM -arabinose to cultures of  TOP10 harboring
pEH164 or pEH165, respectively. Samples of cells containing pEH164
were taken 0, 6, and 12 h after addition of itaconate. Samples of
cells containing pEH165 were taken 0, 18, and 36 h after addition
of -arabinose. Each time, the culture volume corresponding
to an OD of 50 was centrifuged for 10 min at 16 000. The supernatant was removed and stored at −80
°C for HPLC analysis. Subsequently, the cell pellet was washed
once in 1 mL of phosphate buffered saline (PBS), transferred to a
microcentrifuge tube and centrifuged as before. The supernatant was
completely removed, and the pellet was weighed using fine balance
and frozen overnight at −80 °C. The extraction of
intracellular metabolites including itaconate was performed as described
previously with modifications as described
below. Briefly, 250 μL of −40 °C cold methanol–water
solution (60% v/v) was added to the wet cell pellet with the volume
of 50–70 μL. Subsequently, the sample was mixed vigorously
using vortex until completely resuspended. The cell suspension was
frozen at −80 °C for 30 min, thawed on ice, and vortexed
vigorously for 1 min. This step was repeated three times before the
sample was centrifuged at −10 °C and 26 000 for 20 min. The supernatant was collected and kept at
−80 °C. To the pellet, another 250 μL of −40
°C cold methanol–water solution (60% v/v) was added. The
cells were resuspended completely using vortex, three freeze–thaw
cycles were performed as above, and then the cells were centrifuged
as before. The supernatant was pooled with the first collection and
stored at at −80 °C until subjected to HPLC analysis. Calculation of Intracellular Itaconate Concentration in Cell
Culture The total cell volume () in the sample was calculated by dividing the weight of wet cell
pellet by the cell density of 1.105 g/mL. Together with the volume of extraction solvent added to the sample,  was used to calculate the dilution factor
required to determine the intracellular molar concentration of itaconate.
Subsequently, the intracellular itaconate concentration in the cell
culture () was calculated
using equation:The remaining parameters correspond to the
formula weight of itaconic acid (FW),
the intracellular molar concentration of itaconate determined by HPLC-UV
() and the culture volume sampled
(). Cells were analyzed for induction homogeneity
by flow cytometry. The culture sample was centrifuged for 4 min at
5000. Subsequently, the cell pellet was resuspended
in cold and sterile filtered PBS to an OD of 0.01 and
kept on ice until analyzed using an Astrios EQ flow cytometer (Beckman
Coulter) equipped with a 561 nm laser and a 614/20 nm emission band-pass
filter. The voltage of photomultiplier tube (PMT) was set to 400 V.
The area and height gain was adjusted to 1.0. For each sample, at
least 100 000 events were collected. The data was analyzed
using the software Kaluza 1.5 (Beckman Coulter). To determine the
percentage of induced cells, gating was performed on the uninduced
sample to include 99% of cells. The same gate was subsequently applied
to each induced sample. Calculation of Half-Maximal RFP Expression Because
of toxicity at higher levels, the concentrations of mesaconate, -aconitate, and -aconitate, which
mediate half-maximal RFP expression (), were predicted using a phenomenological model
as described previously. The model describes
the change in dynamic range of an inducible system as a function of
inducer concentration. It assumes that (1) the maximum dynamic range
of a biosensor (μ) remains constant as long as
the genetic context does not change, and (2)  is dependent on metabolite-TR affinity. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00057/suppl_file/sb8b00057_si_001.pdf The dynamic range (μ, also referred to as induction factor)
for each concentration of itaconate was calculated using the absolute
normalized fluorescence values from the time course experiment 6 h
after itaconate addition. After subtraction of the basal output, the
resulting dynamic range was fit to the corresponding inducer concentration
using the Hill function:The remaining parameters correspond to concentration
of inducer (), and the Hill coefficient (). Subsequently, the itaconate μ was
used as fixed parameter to calculate  for mesaconate, -aconitate,
and -aconitate employing the same Hill function.
The fitted data are illustrated in . Calculations were performed using Prism GraphPad software version
7.03..