Transcription activator-like
effectors (TALEs), proteins secreted by  plant pathogenic bacteria, have been
a major breakthrough in the rapid and systematic targeting of any
DNA sequence of choice. Efforts in developing TALE technology have led to applications such
as activation, repression, deletion, and insertion of a desired DNA
sequence in an ever-expanding range of model organisms and cell types. TALEs have a modular DNA-binding domain (DBD) consisting of
repetitive
sequences of residues; each repeat region consists of 34 amino acids (Figure ). A pair of residues at the 12th
and 13th position of each repeat region determines the nucleotide
specificity and are referred to as the repeat variable diresidue (RVD). The last repeat region, termed the half-repeat,
is typically truncated to 20 amino acids. Combining these repeat regions allows synthesizing sequence-specific
synthetic TALEs. The C-terminus typically contains
a nuclear localization signal (NLS), which directs a TALE to the nucleus,
as well as a functional domain that modulates transcription, such
as an acidic activation domain (AD). The endogenous NLS can be replaced by an organism-specific localization
signal. For example, an NLS derived from the simian virus 40 large
T-antigen can be used in mammalian cells. The RVDs HD, NG, NI,
and NN target C, T, A, and G/A, respectively. Recent studies
suggest that NH has a higher specificity for G than NN and results
in stronger TALE binding. The nucleotide
preferences of commonly used RVDs appear in Figure . This basic code enables DNA targeting where each RVD corresponds
to a specific nucleotide. Out of the
RVDs that have close to a one-to-one correspondence, HD and NH bind
more strongly to DNA and target C and G, respectively. A list of RVDs and their binding preferences
for nucleotides appears in Table . There are additional TALE RVDs that can be used for
custom degenerate
TALE-DNA interactions. For example, NA has high affinity for all four
bases of DNA. Additionally, N*, where
* is an RVD with a deletion in the 13th residue, can accommodate all
letters of DNA including methylated cytosine. Further work has also shown that S* has the ability to bind to any
DNA nucleotide. An important consideration
toward building efficient TALEs is to
include at least 3–4 strong RVDs in the TALE array while avoiding
more than 6 weak RVDs in a row, especially at either end of the repeat
region. For TALEs tested as transcriptional
activators, the most efficient DBDs range from 15.5 to 19.5 repeats. Identification of new RVDs will likely continue as evidenced
by
the characterization of TALE protein analogs recently discovered in . These “RipTALs”
have a similar repeat variable diresidue domain and several RipTAL
RVDs appear to have affinity for specific letters of DNA. In the case
of the  effectors, ND targets C, HN targets
A and G, and NP prefers C, A, or G. To conclude, it is important to mention that TALE proteins prefer
a thymine to precede the targeted DNA sequence and may have lower
affinity for sequences that lack this 5′ T. Additionally, the Brg11 RipTAL prefers a guanine to precede
the target DNA. Structural
representation of a transcription-activator-like effector.
Top left: the corresponding RVD for each letter of DNA, including
5-methylcytosine. Bottom left: the DNA binding domain of the TALE
protein includes several repeat modules of 34 residues flanked by
an N and C-terminus, which may include mammalian NLS or functional
domains. Right: a list of domains for fusion to TALE and their function
within cells. Nucleotide
preference of commonly used RVDs. The affinities for
all four nucleotides appears for each RVD normalized to the strongest
reported affinity of RVD HD for letter C. Two separate groups have helped elucidate the crystal structure
of TALEs. The results show that HD and NN form stronger interactions
with DNA by forming hydrogen bonds. In contrast, weaker domains, such
as NG and NI form van der Waals interactions with DNA. Deng et al. examined the crystal structure of dHax3, an artificially
synthesized TALE with 11.5 repeats comprised of HD, NG, and NS, in
the DNA-bound and DNA-free states. The
dHax TALE has a right-handed superhelical pitch of 60 Å, which
is reduced to 35 Å in the DNA bound state; overall, there is
a compression of the superhelical structure in the DNA-bound state
that adds to the flexibility of TALEs binding to DNA with minor shifts. Mak et al. investigated the crystal structure of PthXo1, a TALE
protein with 23.5 repeats. The structure
of PthXo1 bound to DNA suggests that a proline at the 27th position
of each repeat may be important for the consecutive packing of TALE
repeats and for the TALE-DNA association. Compared to Deng et al.,
Mak et al. studied a naturally occurring TALE and analyzed a wider
variety of RVDs, including HD, NG, NI, NN, NS, N*, and NG. Both
studies analyzed TALE crystal structure data of the TALE DNA-binding
domain. Recent work on the crystal structure of the N and C-terminus
of the TALE protein shows that residues 162–288 of the N-terminus
have four repeat regions that directly bind to DNA and are structurally
similar to the TALE repeats without specificity. A number of online tools
are available today for designing TALEs
to target a specific DNA sequence. Accordingly, commercially available
kits (summarized in Table ) allow rapid, custom
assembly of TALE repeat regions between the N and C-terminus of the
protein. These methods can be used to assemble custom DBDs,
which are then cloned into an expression vector containing a functional
domain. Most options for  synthesis
of TALEs or
TALE nucleases (TALENs) in the laboratory combine digestion and ligation
steps in a Golden Gate reaction with type II restriction enzymes. Higher-throughput assembly methods of TALE proteins include Ligation-Independent
Cloning (LIC), Fast Ligation-based Automatable
Solid-phase High-throughput (FLASH) assembly, and Iterative-Capped Assembly (ICA). FLASH uses a library of 376 plasmids containing 1-, 2-, 3-, or 4-mers
to synthesize up to 96 TALEs in less than a day. Alternatively, the iterative capped assembly (ICA) method
constructs TALEs by sequentially adding monomers to create custom
length TALEs in parallel without relying on an extensive library. Finally, LIC uses larger overhangs (10–30
bp) than Golden Gate based assembly; these overhangs remain stable
during transformation and eliminate the need for a prior ligation
step. Furthermore, LIC has high fidelity, eliminating the need for
a selection procedure under optimal conditions. Table  contains a list of TALE
assembly options. Repositories and libraries of TALE proteins
may prove important
in allowing rapid and high-throughput application of this technology.
An initial effort involved the synthesis of a library of 18 740
TALEN pairs that span the human genome. Toward genetic screen applications, we recently developed a methodology
to construct versatile transcription activator-like effector libraries. As a proof of principle, we built an 11-mer
library that covers all possible combinations of the nucleotides that
determine the TALE-DNA binding specificity (i.e., approximately 4
million TALEs). Considering the highly modular nature of TALEs and
the versatility and ease of constructing these libraries we foresee
broad implications for genomic assays. Given the application
of TALE proteins across the genome, one of
the major concerns with this new technology lies in mitigating off-target
effects. TALE-NT 2.0 ranks target sites for key characteristics including
off-target effects (using Target Finder for TALEs or Paired Target
Finder for TALENs). The off-target predictions
are based off of RVD nucleotide preference detailed by Moscou and
Bogdanove. Furthermore, TALgetter is
a recently developed computational tool that incorporates positive
and negative efficiencies of each RVD in addition to RVD sequence
specificities. TALENoffer uses the TALgetter
algorithm to specifically address off-target effects. TALENoffer can
rank potential off-target sites and incorporate several parameters
including homodimer and heterodimer nuclease domains as well as evaluating
both strands of genomic DNA. Cellectis Bioresearch 4–12 weeks Basic: 4 weeks, validation
of TALEN with SSA yeast assay. First: 4–9
weeks, confirmed efficiency in human cells
and mouse/rat cell lines upon request; validation by deep sequencing. Premium: 12 weeks, validation in custom cell lines,
and validation
by deep sequencing. Create TALEs of either 17.5 or 23.5 repeats. Binding sequence must be 19 or 25 bp long and the 5 end must contain a T. Options include a
nuclease (Fok1), activator (VP16), repressor
(KRAB), or a functional domain of choice (MCS). Creates TALE nucleases
(Fok1) or activators (VP64). Offers various
levels of validation from basic sequencing (2
weeks) to chromosomal level functional validation (8 weeks). Also offers “safe-harboring” a selected
gene
in the AAVS1 chromosomal location via TALEN mediated homologous recombination. TAL library made of 96-mer repeats. Can adopt to high-throughput (automated) or medium
throughput
(hand) synthesis. Uses type II restriction endonucleases to ligate anywhere from
10.5 to 30.5 repeats. Monomers are added
to a growing chain to create the complete
DNA binding domain (DBD). Allows custom creation
of DBD of any length. Library of 2-, 5-, 6-, or 18-mer
repeats used to assemble a
DBD with medium or high-throughput. Under
optimal conditions, additional selection steps can be
eliminated, reducing the total time. Robotic assisted high-throughput liquid phase assembly. Produces TALE activators, repressors, and nucleases
that target
between 14 and 31 base pairs. Functional Domain
Based Repression and Activation TALE activators and repressors
function across many eukaryotic
systems. The majority of the
repression examples rely on fusing the TALE with a functional domain
known to interfere with the RNA Polymerase II complex. TALEs with
either the KRAB domain or the mSin3 interacting
domain inhibit mammalian transcription. Furthermore,
TALE repressors in combination with post-transcriptional repressors
such as shRNA show virtually complete repression in mammalian cells. For activation, fusing the herpes simplex
virus derived VP-16 or
VP-64 activation domains to a TALE can cause an increase in transcription. Weaker activation domains such as the AD of human NF-κB add
to the variety of options for gene activation. Furthermore, as shown on endogenous promoters, combinations of TALE activators can be used
to introduce synergistic effects. Several C-termini modifications
have shown robust increase in gene
expression and may enable stronger activation. Miller et al. used
a Δ152 truncation (+152) at the N-terminus based on a previous
study and experimented with truncating
the C-terminus. Out of the C-terminal truncations tested (+278, +133,
+95, +23), they found that +95 amino acids (AA) yielded nearly ∼70-fold
higher activation in comparison to the original TALE. Mussolino et al. looked at N and C-termini truncations
using a luciferase assay and found that 153 AA at the N-terminus and
17 AA at the C-terminus gave optimal results. Zhang et al. also studied several truncations and found the TALEs
had the most efficient activation with +240 AA and retained ∼80%
of activity with +147 AA upstream and +68 AA downstream of the DNA
binding domain. Data suggests that
the N-terminus is more important to conserve
than the C-terminus. While it appears that the ideal TALE architecture
depends on the specific conditions, it can be concluded from these
studies that at least 100 residues are needed at the N-terminus and
∼60 residues at the C-terminus. TALE
nucleases utilize a C-terminal fusion with the type II restriction
enzyme FokI to create a heterodimer which produces a double-stranded
break (DSB) in DNA. Nuclease-induced
DSBs are repaired by nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) or homologous
directed repair (HDR), where homologous recombination (HR) is the
most important type of HDR. NHEJ is an error-prone mechanism that
results in a functional gene knockout by creating small insertions
or deletions (indels) while HR, in combination with a template donor
DNA sequence, results in a gene insertion or direct nucleotide exchange. Introducing heterodimerization for nuclease activity has been
a
significant step toward minimizing off-target effects, first with
zinc finger nucleases and then with TALENs. Using this technique, two TALEN proteins must
bind to the plus and minus strand of DNA to create a FokI heterodimer
and form a double-stranded break. TALENs have been useful in creating knockout strains and studying
mutations in a variety of organisms such as bacteria, yeast, plants, nematodes, fish, embryos, human cell lines, rodents, and rat embryonic stem cells. In addition,
TALE nucleases have successfully modified human stem cells, allowing
editing and gene expression tools for tissue engineering. Several assays allow researchers to assess the cutting efficiencies
of TALENs. The surveyor method can be used
to detect DSBs by PCR amplification. Another method is the traffic
light reporter (TLR) assay, which can be used to determine whether
a TALEN cuts the target DNA and induces NHEJ or HR. A mutated GFP
and a frameshifted RFP provide the initial target DNA for the TALEN.
If HR occurs, a functioning GFP protein replaces the mutated GFP;
if NHEJ occurs, red fluorescence protein (RFP) is shifted into frame. Though TALE nucleases have wide applications,
the double strand
breaks they create are predominately repaired by NHEJ. NHEJ and HR
are believed to be competing pathways. Error-prone NHEJ is greatly reduced by utilizing TALE nickases,
which only cut a single strand of DNA. TALE-MutH has recently been
shown to be an efficient, programmable nickase. Here, a single TALE-MutH protein created the desired single-stranded
break (SSB) in DNA, thereby inducing the HR repair mechanism. Other
strategies to create TALE nickases may involve the FokI nuclease,
where one unit of the heterodimer is catalytically inactive. Site-specific recombinases
(SSRs) can integrate, excise, or invert
specified DNA segments. Most SSRs are part of one of two major families:
tyrosine (λ) recombinases and serine (resolvase/invertase) recombinases.
Tyrosine recombinases use a Holliday junction to break and rejoin
single strands in pairs while serine recombinases introduce a DSB
before strand exchange. Mercer
et al. created recombinatorial TALE proteins (TALER) by
fusing a Gin invertase, a serine recombinase, to edit both mammalian
and bacterial cells at specific locations. This study also shows that in  longer targets
of 26 and 32 bp recombined 100 fold more efficiently than the shorter
targets of 14 and 20 base pairs. Translating this assay to mammalian
cells showed a ∼20 fold efficiency with a 44 bp target and
∼6 fold efficiency with a 32 bp target, much lower than the
observed efficiencies in . In mammalian cells,
the combined use of a zinc finger recombinase and TALER to create
a heterodimer improved recombinase activity. The presence of methylation on DNA
target regions was initially
recognized as a potential limitation of the TALE technology. Subsequently,
computational modeling of the TALE structure data suggests that RVDs
which have relatively small side-chains or a deletion at residue 13,
such as HG and N* respectively, could prevent steric hindrance at
methylated cytosine (mC). studies confirm that TALENs with N* better accommodate
methylated regions of DNA. However, HG
and N* are not highly selective and can accept a purine as well. Further structural analysis from Deng et al. suggests that
NG may
also be able to recognize mC. In the
TALE cipher, NG normally targets T, but experimental data shows that
methylated cytosines can be targeted by a TALE with NG. Thus, TALE DBDs engineered to target potentially
methylated DNA targets may require the RVD N* in order to accommodate
methylated cytosine or cytosine and therefore
target a region in a state of dynamic methylation. Alternatively, applications that require specific identification
of mC could utilize NG, which recognizes mC but has low preference
for cytosine. The ability of TALEs to
target methylations may allow introducing
modifications on the DNA level. Indeed, a fusion of the LSD1 demethylase
to TALE was recently used to demonstrate epigenetic control in mammalian
cells. The TALE-LSD1 fusion altered the chromatin at enhancers and
modified gene expression. An approach to regulate TALEs involves the
use of dimerization
domains controlled by a small molecule. In this work, the TALE was fused with the Rheo receptor protein,
which can dimerize with a second protein called the Rheo activator
that contains a functional domain (e.g., an activation VP-16 domain).
While the TALE-Rheo receptor fusion can bind to its DNA target, it
lacks an activation domain and thus does not regulate transcription.
After the addition of a small molecule, GenoStat, the TALE-Rheo receptor
dimerizes with the Rheo activator tethered to the VP-16 activation
domain. The small molecule control of TALE expands the ability to
bring inducible control to any promoter. The same small molecule dimerization
methodology was recently adopted to demonstrate inducible control
of endogenous genes. The protein
dimerization methodology also allows
interfacing the function of TALEs with endogenous signals,
such as hypoxia. In particular, by fusing a TALE DBD with ARNT, which
forms a heterodimer with the transcription factor HIF-1α under
hypoxia or CoCl treatment, a TALE can modulate transcription
in response to hypoxia. Both the ARNT and Rheo fusions led to activation
of the target promoter under dimerization with the application of
GenoStat showing a clear dose dependent activation of the target promoter. Recent work on light-inducible transcriptional
activators (LITEs)
can be used for spatiotemporal regulation of TALEs. Here, a TALE DBD-CRY2 complex dimerizes with CIB-VP64 when
induced with blue light (466 nm). This system shows TALE activity
in as little as 30 min (∼5-fold activation) after blue-light
induction with full saturation at 12 h (∼20-fold activation).
The system also demonstrated epigenetic modification using epiTALEs
where an TALE-CIB1 complex dimerizes with a CRY2-histone effector
domain in blue light, resulting to 2–3 fold reduction of the
target gene mRNA. Protein dimerization also allows implementation
of Boolean logic
where individual vectors express different parts of a TALE protein
but only become functional as intein fragments are spliced and combined. Notably, when designing the individual components,
the placement of the splice site requires careful consideration of
the secondary structures. Finally,
TALEs can be used synergistically to fine-tune gene expression.
Maeder et al. targeted DNA-hypersensitive regions for three genes:
VEGFA, NTF3, and the microRNA cluster miR-302-367. For the VEGFA gene, 54 TALES were made and tested individually
for nine regions. Additionally, repeat lengths varying from 14.5 to
24.5 were tested. In general, TALEs with 16.5–20.5 repeats
had the highest efficiency, and the results showed up to a 114 fold
increase in activation above basal level. Synergistic effects for
all three regions were subsequently tested. Interestingly, for the
VEGFA region, the 6 TALEs had a synergistic effect when transfected
at 1/6 the amount of each individual TALE but no synergistic effect
when transfected together at the higher individual dosage. Of the
three genes, miR-302-367 had the most noticeable synergistic effect
with approximately 50-fold increase using all five TALEs together
rather than each individual effector. Synergistic TALEs may be useful
to significantly increase efficiency but may increase off-target effects
at the same time. Perez-Pinera et al. targeted
four genes, IL1RN, KLK3, CEACAM5, and ERBB2, with six to eight synergistic
TALEs. Additional data suggests that open chromatin may not be a prerequisite
to selecting an efficient TALE target site and silenced genes may
be activated by synergistic TALEs. Testing all 63 possible combinations
of TALEs for IL1RN, KLK3, and CEACAM5 showed highly tunable gene expression. TALEs hold promise in
addressing current challenges in rewiring
endogenous and engineered networks to achieve synthetic biology goals. A timeline listing TALE research papers of outstanding interest
appears in Figure . The opportunity to apply
custom-made transcriptional activation and repression, targeted cutting
and genome modifications, and epigenetic control greatly expands the
synthetic biology toolkit and will enable the implementation of more
complex genetic circuits. This genome editing and transcriptional
control tool is rapidly advancing toward higher precision and efficiency. Furthermore, recent results in optogenetics and small molecule-based dimerizations allow for highly controllable TALE and TALEN
spatiotemporal function. While transcription activator-like
effectors show significant promise
there are still plenty of opportunities for improving their function.
Single-nucleotide precision in transgene integration and modifications
remains a challenge for custom genome editing and genetic engineering. Another key challenge is increasing the nuclease selectivity for
HDR or NHEJ. Finally, while recent results
offer tools to assess unintended activity, additional work must be performed to ensure tight regulation and
quality control, particularly toward therapeutics and industrial scale
applications. Timeline of papers in TALE technology development..