Because of new technologies in sequencing and bioinformatics, it
is now relatively trivial to identify novel biosynthetic pathways
to secondary metabolites in cultivated organisms and in the environment. Research in this area has led to a renewed appreciation
that many secondary metabolites have yet to be described and that
a vast resource awaits discovery. Although pathway
identification is simple, discovering the compounds produced by these
pathways remains much more challenging, especially when the pathways
are silent or encoded in the genomes of uncultivated organisms. To
obtain the new compound, in many cases, the identified genes must
be transferred to a new host and successfully expressed. Despite many advances in technology, this is
still nontrivial. To date, many heterologous expression hosts
have been developed
for secondary metabolite production. Most of these focus on expression of bacterial biosynthetic pathways,
for which numerous hosts exist. For eukaryotic pathways, such as those
from filamentous fungi, genes have been heterologously expressed in , , , and several other yeasts and
filamentous fungi. Practical scale production of fungal compounds in bacteria has proven
to be challenging. provides a robust platform but with relatively modest purified yields.
Additionally, it does not handle introns well, requiring that introns
be removed prior to expression. Similarly, heterologous expression
platforms in various filamentous fungi have led to relatively modest
yields, although in many cases fungal introns are tolerated, allowing
genomic DNA to be employed directly. These expression
systems generally use housekeeping or related primary metabolic promoters
that induce robust transcription of the desired genes, indicating
that perhaps seeking improvements in level of transcription alone
is insufficient to provide high levels of secondary metabolites, and
suggesting room for the development of other strategies. Here,
we sought to take advantage of high-titer production of equisetin
in the filamentous fungus  ATCC
74349. produces
equisetin at ∼2 g L on corn grit agar (CGA),
yet production is undetectable (10 ng L detection
limit) in many other types of media. We thus hypothesized that if
an exogenous biosynthetic gene was placed under the control of the
equisetin biosynthetic regulon, the heterologous compound would be
synthesized in a yield similar to that observed for equisetin in the
wild-type strain. Moreover, the highly controlled regulation of the
equisetin locus might enable the production of compounds that are
natively toxic to . This strategy
bears similarity to that previously used in actinomycetes to synthesize
polyketides but stands in contrast to
a commonly used strategy in filamentous fungi, wherein promoters or
regulators from primary metabolism are used to produce recombinant
polyketides. Using the model described below, we produced several
heterologous
fungal polyketides in . In fungi,
polyketides are biosynthesized by iterative decarboxylative condensation
of malonyl units. The minimal domains that make
up the polyketide synthase (PKS) include acyltransferase (AT) domain,
which selects the substrate; acyl carrier protein (ACP), which tethers
the growing chain during extension; and the ketosynthase (KS) domain,
which catalyzes the condensation reaction. In addition,
PKS enzymes may contain other modifying domains such as the methyltransferase
(MT) domain, which introduces varying patterns of C-methylations along
the polyketide backbone. For the reducing-type PKS, varying levels
of reduction are achieved by ketoreductase (KR), dehydratase (DH),
and enoyl reductase (ER) domains. In
general, all domains required to produce a fungal polyketide are contained
on a single polypeptide, but for several PKSs, the ER is trans-acting
and is translated as a separate polypeptide from the other PKS domains. In the latter case, the trans-ER protein is required to produce
the natural product. In many fungi, PKS modules exist as hybrids with
nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS), resulting in formation of
polyketides fused to amino acids. Unlike standalone PKSs
that rely on hydrolysis via a thioesterase domain (TE) for product
release, several PKS-NRPSs use a terminal reductase (R) domain, which
catalyzes a Dieckmann reaction in tandem with product release to form
a tetramic acid ring. Here, we describe a platform
that enables production of heterologous
fungal secondary metabolites in high titers (∼1 g L unoptimized yield). The platform was applied to several problems
in biosynthesis and drug discovery, including resurrection of a silenced
pathway of potential use in tuberculosis. The strategy was based
upon prior knowledge of the regulation of equisetin production. Equisetin
biosynthesis requires the coordinated action of the PKS EqxS, the
auxiliary ER EqxC, and the N-MT EqxD (Figure ). The first two of these are synthesized
from genes that are divergently transcribed from a promoter region, . A regulatory transcription factor, EqxR, drives production
of equisetin. On CGA media, a large amount
of equisetin is produced, while on other media such as potato dextrose
agar (PDA; Difco) or potato dextrose broth (PDB; Difco), equisetin
is not produced. Equisetin is constitutively
produced on CGA and slowly accumulates over a 21-day period. We thus
selected  as a platform for producing metabolites,
under control of EqxR. In this conception, the  region also contains a hypothetical gene, ,
which is commonly found in equisetin-like pathways. For simplicity,
this region was left in place in the current study. In some vectors,
we used only one-half of  to express genes in
one direction; in this series,  is disrupted,
and the promoter region is referred to as . In others, the bidirectional promoter region  was used; in these cases  is not disrupted. While the wild-type regulator  was well controlled
to produce equisetin solely on CGA, we envisioned applications in
which we might desire more rapid production in liquid media. In previous
work, we fused the  promoter () with  (Figure C). While  is inducible, it
exhibits significant basal expression. Indeed,  led to constitutive production of equisetin even in broth. However, production yields were lower in broth,
and there was a concern that toxic metabolites may delay or halt fungal
growth under control of . By contrast,
an advantage of the PDB method was that production could be achieved
in 5–7 days, rather than the 21+ days used with CGA. The strategy
thus took advantage of this strong control of equisetin production.
If toxicity was a concern or if high yields were required, the wild-type  construct was used. For a faster assessment of whether
a recombinant metabolite could be produced, the  construct could be employed. In this study, we employed two strategies
to introduce : (1) we recently reported
a modified  strain, Palc:eqxR, which
overexpresses the equisetin positive regulator  under control of the  promoter to allow equisetin
production in broth culture after 5 days, whereas normally no equisetin
is produced in liquid broth; (2) we included
the  gene in an expression vector that
could be transferred to , along with
desired secondary metabolic genes. We had two major concerns in terms of practical genetics:
could
we repetitively use a single promoter element, and could we process
different classes of introns?  largely
undergoes ectopic recombination in our hands, and it is quite difficult
to obtain homologous recombinants. For this reason, we believed that
repetitive use of  would be tolerated by the
strain, enabling production of more than two gene products without
recombination. Indeed, in this study, we show that multiple copies
of this element are stable in recombination, meaning that the strategy
is scalable to recapitulate multigene biosynthetic pathways. We were
also concerned about the ability to splice different types of introns.
While this will presumably always be a problem in some cases, here,
we show that a quite divergent set of introns can be processed. However,
our overall strategy mainly uses artificially spliced, intron-free
DNA. Our construction strategy involved using shuttle vectors,
in which
we could employ yeast recombination in () to build the desired vectors,  to amplify those vectors, and  for production of compounds. Each vector thus required selection
and replication elements for each strain (see ). We constructed and tested multiple types of selection markers
so that multiple different vectors could be inserted into . Previously, we used hygromycin () and phleomycin () resistance effectively. Here, we also employed uracil auxotrophy as
an additional selection marker. By combining
these elements, it becomes possible to use stepwise engineering to
insert multiple copies of genes under control of . In addition, it is always possible to insert multiple copies of
the promoter into a single vector prior to transformation into , making the strategy highly scalable. Finally, we used an 8-cutter restriction endonuclease site, either
AscI or PacI, to linearize the vectors before fungal transformation.
These sites were selected so that the linearized vectors would contain
the complete promoter-heterologous gene construct in the correct order.
Otherwise, there was a danger of integration with a disrupted reading
frame. In addition, we put these sites in some cases between selectable
markers and synthetic green fluorescent protein (sGFP) to ensure that
the vector was inserted in the correct manner. However, in the event,
we never found a rearrangement that necessitated using sGFP. In , linearized vectors integrated ectopically
and intact. Below, we describe a stepwise application of these
principles to
construct a heterologous expression platform. (1) The basics of transcription
using both wild-type  and  were examined using sGFP. Although simple chemical analysis of equisetin
production previously revealed fundamental aspects of pathway regulation,
employing sGFP enabled a direct translational readout that would complement
our understanding of  and . (2) We desired to test this strategy by adding a single, discrete,
heterologous PKS that leads to a known and well characterized product.
We selected the  gene from the  cyclopiazonic acid pathway for this purpose. Not only
is  exceptionally well characterized, but  is in a different class (Eurotiomycetes)
from  (Sordariomycetes). (3) We next tested
the applicability to systems requiring two genes for production of
compounds. In the event, we used both the homologous equisetin pathway and the heterologous lovastatin pathway, again
from an . By examining equisetin production, we hoped to determine whether
chromosomal location impacted production; in the event, it did not.
The lovastatin PKS genes are well characterized and biomedically of great importance, making
this an interesting target for production. Moreover, only two proteins
are required to synthesize the complex core of the molecule. (4) We
aimed to produce more than two genes and to test the practical application
of the platform to a real-world problem. This involved production
of the “extinct” metabolite, pyrrolocin. Taken together,
these approaches fully define the application of equisetin regulatory
elements to produce diverse secondary metabolites in high yield. Model of the regulation of equisetin production.
(A) The wild-type
equisetin biosynthetic gene cluster, , contains
genes encoding biosynthetic proteins (green), a transcription factor
(blue), and a promoter region used in this study (, red). (B) In the wild-type , equisetin
is produced when the fungus is grown on corn-derived media. A model
is that the transcription factor gene  is transcribed,
leading to transcription of the pathway via . Shown is transcription of  and , which together produce the desmethyl-equisetin analog, trichosetin,
which is shown at left. (C) In support of this transcriptional model,
when the heterologous promoter  is placed in
front of , production of equisetin becomes constitutive
and no longer depends upon growth on corn. Supporting Information Figure S4 Supporting Information Figure S5 We desired
to compare expression in the wild-type  with expression in an  knockout strain. Although  has been previously deleted,  was
difficult to delete. Here, we created a knockout vector in which , , , and
the promoter region  were deleted (Figure ). The resulting strain, FusΔeqx5 was confirmed
to be an  cluster knockout by PCR (). Subsequent
genome sequencing of FusΔeqx5 revealed that the  gene was knocked out in the 5′ end and that the deletion
vector was inserted into a total of 3 locations in the genome (). Knockout of  genes. (A) The wild-type gene
cluster. (B) Previously,  was deleted with . (C) Here, this  knockout was extended
to delete  and  and to
disrupt the 5′-regions of  and , using the  marker. This knockout
required the prior deletion of  and did not work
in the wild-type strain. Promoter Drives Expression of sGFP in
Recombinant Strain Supporting Information Figure S1 To test whether the  promoter sequence could be used to express exogenous genes, and
to determine timing and control of heterologous expression, the  was fused to sGFP and transferred to wild-type  in vector FH-1 (Figure A; ). After 21 days on CGA, sGFP was observed in fungal filaments when
examined by confocal fluorescence microscopy. Moreover, the fungus
was fluorescent over the full expression period on CGA, but it lacked
any observable fluorescence on PDA. This was a clear indication that  was sufficient for heterologous expression.
It also further supported previous observations that production was
constitutive on CGA but completely shut off on PDA and other media.
By contrast, when sGFP was added to strains containing the leaky  gene (Figure B), the
resulting  strain was constitutively
fluorescent on all media. Monitoring -driven
transcription
with sGFP. (A)  was placed immediately downstream
of  and cloned into the wild-type fungus.
The wild-type control (left) was compared with the transformed fungus
(right) on CGA. Shown is a single corn grit from a 21-day CGA culture,
by confocal microscopy. Fluorescence was constitutive on CGA, but
not visible on other media. Fungal filaments can be seen glowing green,
over the red autofluorescent background. (B)  was tethered to the gene, , downstream of the  promoter. The resulting vector also contained
the constitutive  regulator. Shown here
is a photograph of constitutively fluorescent fungal colonies grown
on PDA, visualized on a Dark Reader. Expression of the  Gene from  Produces Expected Metabolite Supporting Information Figure S13 To determine
whether the  could lead to biosynthesis
of new compounds, the well-characterized  gene
from  was cloned into FH-1 to make
pHygB-Cpas. The resulting  mutant,
Peqx:Cpas, was then cultured in potato dextrose broth (PDB) for 7
days. The predicted product, cAATrp  was identified
by high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Figure A) and isolated. Comparison of the H NMR spectrum
and the molecular formula of  with those of the previously
reported cAATrp showed that they were identical (). This confirmed the value of  in producing
heterologous compounds. However, high levels of equisetin  were coproduced (Figure A). Supporting
Information Figure S2 In other systems, it has been shown that eliminating
the production
of undesired metabolites increases substrate flux to the target pathway
resulting in higher yields of the desired compounds. In our case, we reasoned that deleting the equisetin biosynthetic
genes would not only increase flux of the building block, malonyl
CoA, to polyketide-type heterologous pathways, but also ease downstream
target compound purification and analysis. The  gene was cloned into vector FH-2 (), which contained a copy of  for constitutive expression in broth. An sGFP tag was fused to the
C-terminus of . After transformation of this
construct into the  knockout strain FusΔeqx5,
we isolated a mutant Δeqx5:Peqx:CpaSgfp that glowed bright yellow
on a dark reader (Figure B). This strain was
cultured in 100 mL PDB for 7 days, extracted, and the extract analyzed
by HPLC-DAD to show that  was robustly produced, while
equisetin was absent (Figure B). Production
of  was measured to be 100 mg L by
HPLC-DAD in comparison with a standard curve. This is an order of
magnitude greater than the previously reported production of the same
compound when the  was expressed in  under control of a housekeeping promoter. In addition, this experiment provided some support
for our hypothesis, since the yield in the deletion mutant was increased
by approximately 4-fold in comparison to production in the wild-type
equisetin producer. When the Δeqx5:Peqx:CpaSgfp mutant
was cultured for 21 days
on CGA, production of  rose to over 1 g kg without any optimization of production conditions.  is quite phylogenetically distant to , with the former in Class Eurotiomycetes and the latter in Class
Sordariomycetes, indicating that the strategy may be widely applicable
to fungal metabolites from different groups. Expression of CpaS and
production of cAATrp (). (A)
Expression in the wild-type um strain.
HPLC-diode array detection (DAD) analysis of crude extracts of PDB
cultures of Peqx:Cpas mutant and the Palc:eqxR control. The eqxS promoter
drives expression to avail expected product . Coproduction
of equisetin  is observed. (B) Expression in  knockout strain. Production of  is improved,
and equisetin  is no longer observed. Use of the Divergent Promoter
for Simultaneous Dual Gene Introduction In initial experiments,
only one side of  was used, comprising 1.5 kbp
of gene sequence. To express two genes,  was
synthesized, containing the entire ∼2.5
kbp of the divergent promoter, to generate vector FH-3 (Figure A). Previously, we showed by knockout mutagenesis
that  was critical for the production of equisetin  and trichosetin , and we proposed that it
was the trans-acting ER for the equisetin pathway. Here, we showed the direct involvement of  in the biosynthesis of trichosetin . Both  and  were cloned into vector FH-3
under control of the divergent  promoter. In initial
experiments,  was fused with a C-terminal sGFP
tag so that we could readily confirm protein expression. The resulting
vector, hpheqxC+eqxSgfp, was transformed into FusΔeqx5. The
isolated transformants were brightly fluorescent, demonstrating appropriate
gene expression under control of the divergent promoter. In addition,
the fluorescence was constitutively obtained on PDA, further demonstrating
the constitutive regulation of the pathway under control of leaky . Trichosetin synthesis requires EqxC and unmodified EqxS.
(A) Expression
vector FH-3 designed with complete intergenic sequence , for dual expression of genes. Also shown are elements that permit
cloning by recombination in  and selection
in . (B) Analytical HPLC of crude extracts
of PDB cultures of FusΔeqx5 transformed with  together with either  or noncognate -ER . Also shown is nontagged  coexpressed with  and the trichosetin
standard. Trichosetin is only produced in the presence of  and unmodified . (C) LC/MS analysis
of crude extracts shows that a gfp tag on the C-terminus of EqxS interferes
with formation of trichosetin and instead results in production of
only the ring-open form . Dieckmann Cyclase Depends upon Unmodified C-Terminal R Domain Supporting
Information Figure S11 To our surprise, trichosetin was not detected by HPLC-DAD in the
crude extracts of the isolated mutants (Figure B). Instead, close inspection of the LC/MS trace showed a new product  heavier than trichosetin by 18 Da, but with a similar fragmentation
pattern (Figure C; ). Compound  was characterized
by NMR experiments, including H, C, gCOSY,
gHSQC, and gHMBC, to be the ring-opened derivative of trichosetin
that had not undergone the terminal Dieckmann reaction. This result implied that  is indeed the equisetin
synthetase, but the gfp tag interferes with the proper functioning
of the reductase domain, preventing Dieckmann cyclization and instead
promoting water-mediated hydrolysis of the intermediate. This was,
in fact, found to be the case because, when  was
cloned without a C-terminal tag, trichosetin was robustly synthesized
at wild-type levels (Figure B). Production
of Multiple Gene Products Leads to Synthesis of Lovastatin
Precursors in Supporting Information Figures S8–S10, S12–S14 To establish
the utility of this new expression strategy for coexpression of heterologous
genes, we cloned the well-studied lovastatin nonaketide synthase () from  together
with its cognate -ER () to make the hphlovC+lovBgfp plasmid. We also
cloned only  into FH-3 to make the plasmid hpheqxC+lovBgfp.
Transformation of these constructs independently into FusΔeqx5
resulted in production of the expected products. Without its cognate -ER, the expressed LovB synthesized the previously
reported truncated intermediates,  and  (Figure A). Coexpression of  with  produced the expected reduced metabolites  (Figure A), the dihydromonacolin L acid ,
and the lovastatin precursor lactone  (Figure B). These metabolites were characterized
by comparing their liquid chromatography/mass spectroscopy (LC/MS),
ultraviolet (UV), and H NMR data to previous reports (). This confirmed that, indeed, the intergenic sequence between  and  could guide transcription
divergently to heterologously coexpress two genes. The purified yield
of  was 130 mg kg, and  was produced in about equal amounts, indicating that the initial
unoptimized yield should exceed ∼300 mg kg. Dual expression with  promoter reconstitutes
pathway to lovastatin precursor. (A) Analytical HPLC of crude extracts
of PDB cultures of FusΔeqx5 transformed with  together with  or a noncognate trans-ER . In the presence of ,  produces the polyene pyrone  and ketone ; and more reduced pyrone  with  coexpression. (B) LC/MS analysis of crude extracts shows formation
of the lovastatin precursor, dihydromonacolin L acid  and the lactone  when  is
coexpressed with . EqxC is not able to complement
LovB to form  or . In
the course of cloning and analyzing , we coexpressed  and  under control of the divergent
promoter. No trichosetin was produced under these conditions (Figure B). LovC could not complement EqxC, indicating that
EqxS could not interact with the noncognate ER. Further, the complementary
experiment in which EqxC was coexpressed with LovB failed to yield
reduced intermediates (Figure A). By contrast,
the ERs were fully functional when coexpressed with their cognate
PKS proteins. Resurrection of Antituberculosis Agent from
a Silenced Biosynthetic
Pathway In collaboration with scientists at Wyeth (now Pfizer),
researchers in the Barrows lab cultivated an endophytic fungus, designated
strain NRRL 50135, obtained in Papua New Guinea as part of their International
Cooperative Drug Discovery Group (ICBG) project. The crude extract
was potently active against , and assay-guided purification led to the identification of a novel
compound, pyrrolocin A (), as the active principle.
In 2007, a tentative structure  was assigned based
upon HRESIMS and NMR (Figure A), but the amount
of compound was not sufficient to assign the stereochemistry or to
perform further activity tests. Unfortunately, the fungus ceased producing
the compound after the initial isolation experiments, which is an
extremely common phenomenon in natural products research, so that
the project could not be further pursued or published. Numerous attempts
at modifying production conditions, using many different published
methods, failed to resurrect the synthesis of this potentially important
compound. This presented the perfect challenge to test the application
of our new production platform. The goal was to resurrect production
in , in tandem with greatly increasing
the production level so that the compound could be further developed. We sequenced the NRRL 50135 genome, which after assembly was found
to be 54.1 Mbp on 5809 contigs (calculated GC content is 47.5%). Autoannotation
software predicted 17722 proteins. From the preliminary structure
of , we predicted its biosynthesis would be similar
to that of equisetin, requiring a PKS-NRPS, -ER, and MT. BLAST analysis of the predicted proteins
using EqxS as a query produced only 2 PKS-NRPS genes in the entire
genome. When the database was queried with EqxC, the top hit was on
the same 50.7 kbp contig as the identified top hit obtained with the
EqxS query (Figure B). These genes were subsequently
designated  and , in analogy
with the equisetin nomenclature. However, we could not find an MT
that coclustered with either of the PKS-NRPS genes. Instead, distantly
similar genes (37% identity to the equisetin -methyltransferase,
EqxD) were found unclustered with any PKS. Supporting
Information Figure S3 Since production of  was predicted to require
coexpression
of more than two genes, we created a derivative strain of FusΔeqx5,
in which the strain was transformed into the uracil auxotroph, FusΔeqx5ΔpyrG10,
by directed knockout of the orotidine 5′-phosphate decarboxylase
gene (). A complement vector for this auxotroph
was constructed using the native , to create expression vector FH-4 (). The  and  sequences were then cloned into FH-4 and used to transform
strain Δeqx5ΔpyrG10 to prototrophy. An isolated mutant
ΔpyrG:Peqx:prlS+prlC was cultured in 250 mL PDB for 5 days.
The crude extract contained pyrrolocins B () and C
(), the desmethyl derivatives of  (444
Da [M + H]). Compounds  and  (Figure C)
were produced in a 2:1 ratio, totaling >800 mg kg on CGA, which is greatly in excess of what was initially found for  in the native producer before production was lost (∼50
mg L). Two MTs were cloned in attempts to
methylate the tetramate ring.
The first, PrlD, was the top hit resulting from BLAST analysis of
NRRL 50135 when EqxD was used as the query (36% identity).  was from a contig that was not linked with , meaning that it might result from a separate biosynthetic
pathway. EqxD itself was also coexpressed with PrlS and PrlC. Each
MT was cloned into complementary vector FH-1 and separately transformed
into  ΔpyrG:Peqx:prlS+prlC.
The mutants were cultivated for 7 days. Analysis of the crude extracts
by HPLC-DAD and LC/MS showed that both PrlD and EqxD led to synthesis
of methylated products. Interestingly, the EqxD-expressing strain
produced a minor amount of authentic pyrrolocin A  (<10
mg kg) in a background of ∼800 mg kg of nonmethylated  and . The methylated derivative  produced by the PrlD-expressing
strain did not match the NMR data for  and is therefore
not the correct MT. No obvious MT exists in the sequenced genome that
would be predicted to perform that transformation. (A) Preliminary structure
of antituberculosis agent  with mass 458 Da (M+H) initially isolated from endophytic
fungus NRRL 50135. (B) The identified candidate gene cluster for the
biosynthesis of  after genome sequencing contains a
PKS-NRPS hybrid gene , an enoyl reductase , two transcription factors  and , and two exporter genes  and . (C) Analytical HPLC of crude extract of FusΔeqx5ΔpyrG10
transformed with both  and  driven by the  promoter shows synthesis of
two new products  and  with corresponding
mass of 444 Da (M+H). Further introduction of methyltransferases  and  led to synthesis of new minor
products  and , respectively. (D) Compounds  and  were found to have antituberculosis
activity and to have the core structure of . Heterologous expression is potentially the
most universal solution to produce natural products from cryptic pathways
and unculturable organisms. We set out to develop
such a production platform based on the equisetin biosynthetic regulon,
which would enable production of important metabolites with sufficient
yield to ease purification and downstream assays. This platform was
designed based upon the hypothesis that high-level transcription alone
was insufficient to produce high levels of secondary metabolites.
Instead, exploitation of a natively high-producing biosynthetic pathway
would provide the ideal environment for secondary metabolite biosynthesis.
In developing and testing this platform, we designed derivative strains
of  and a suite of expression vectors
into which various heterologous genes could be cloned. These new tools
were validated by producing a range of fungal polyketides from widely
different fungi, in unoptimized yields ranging from several hundred
mg to >1 g per liter. In fact, we found that cultures on just 50
g
of CGA provided enough material for complete characterization of novel
compounds. We provided proof of concept by resurrecting an important
silenced pathway. Another advantage of this platform is that
it seems to process introns from a broad phylogenetic diversity of
fungi.  and  contained introns
that were properly processed (otherwise interrupting the reading frame
of the proteins), demonstrating the breadth of the platform in handling
introns from diverse strains. As has been found in other heterologous
expression strategies, a disadvantage is that pathway shunt products
are often produced along with the major natural product. However,
in this case, the abundant amount of desired products compensated
for this problem. We have demonstrated practical application
of this platform in
reviving antituberculosis activity previously observed from pyrrolocin
A, a product of the NRRL 50135 strain. Direct cloning of  and  from genomic DNA of strain NRRL 50135
into our expression vectors and subsequent high-level production of
related active compounds  and  demonstrated
the ease with which such eukaryotic genes ridden with introns could
be characterized. This work enabled the structures of the pyrrolocins
to be fully elucidated and the biological activity to be characterized. This strategy is widely applicable to
many types of natural product
synthesis in different organisms. The key factors that led us to select  as the production host were as follows:
(1) the robust synthesis of the native compound, which meant that
even if the recombinant yield were greatly reduced it should still
be sufficient for chemical analysis; (2) the strict controllability
of compound production, where essentially no natural product is produced
on most media types, leading to a reduction in problems related to
toxicity; (3) the apparent constitutive expression of the natural
pathway, where compounds are slowly produced, exported, and accumulated
in the medium over the course of weeks on CGA. It is likely that other
systems with similar features would be amenable to the same approach. A few biochemical observations were also enabled by these studies.
During the complementation of the  knockout strain
with  and , we directly
show that both these genes are required for equisetin production.
However, we found that R domain function is altered when fused to
an sGFP tag. Instead of the expected tetramic acid ,
we obtained the ring-open . We speculate that sGFP alters
the structure of the R domain to prevent either transfer from the
T domain or to allow water to enter the R domain active site. The
tetramic acid derivative is nearly instantaneously formed from thioesters
under neutral buffer conditions in water, making it especially remarkable that the linear form can be obtained
from thiotemplated synthesis. Potentially, if desired, this problem
might be circumvented by experimenting with different types of linkers
that do not disrupt the R domain. A cleavable linker strategy may
also be feasible. However, in our hands, we found that sGFP is optional;
for example, the complete vector is usually integrated intact in . We also found that the ER proteins cannot
be crossed between these pathways but that the wild-type ERs are required
at least in these cases. The interaction of these ER proteins is also
of interest, since having the correct set of protein partners is essential
in the synthesis of the desired natural products. In the wild-type
fungus NRRL 50135,  was the major
compound produced, with a small amount (<1% estimated from HPLC-MS)
of  as a side-product. Based upon the sequenced gene cluster and the recombinant expression
performed here, it is clear that the combination of PKS-NRPS and auxiliary
ER lead to the formation of . Unlike our findings here,
the wild-type fungus did not produce any -decalin
product, such as . It is possible that one of the other
hypothetical genes in the gene cluster could be responsible for this
discrepancy and may act as the pyrrolocin Diels–Alderase, but
there are also other interesting possibilities. Of note, no obvious
MT was present in the  cluster that might produce . The closest homologue of EqxD from the genome did not
produce . By contrast, EqxD itself produced ∼10
mg kg of . This minor production,
using a combination of heterologous and homologous proteins, would
likely not have been observable if starting with a less efficient
expression system. This emphasizes the value of starting with a high-yielding
platform. The yield was still sufficient for biological and chemical
characterization from a single 1 kg scale experiment. The reaction
with EqxD is also remarkable in that  contains -Ser, while  contains -Ser, and the
decalin ring is also enantiomeric between  and . This indicates that, perhaps, EqxD has fairly relaxed
substrate selectivity. Cloning of Vectors and
Expression Plasmids Standard
PCR techniques were employed and plasmid construction carried out
as previously described. Details of vector
construction can be found in the . Vector images were generated with Vector NTI software (Invitrogen). Transformation of  was done
as previously described except that protoplasts were prepared from
8 to 10-h germinating spores. When antibiotic
selection was required, hygromycin or phleomycin was added to media
at 150 μg mL. For uracil auxotroph selection,
protoplast regeneration agar lacking uracil was prepared containing
1 M sucrose, 0.02% yeast extract without amino acids, 0.02% BSM supplement,
and 1% agar. Supporting Information Figure S5 Knockout of  FusΔeqx5 was constructed by transforming FusΔeqxC
with
knockout vector ClusterPhleoKO () and transformants selected on phleomycin. The knockout cassette
was made of the phleomycin resistance marker flanked by sequences
homologous to regions within  and  (Figure ). Isolated transformants were counter-screened
for hygromycin sensitivity and verified by colony PCR. The genome
of the identified knockout FusΔeqx5 was extracted and sequenced.
The reads were aligned to the FusWT reference genome with Novoalign and output visualized with the integrative
genomics viewer (). Generating the Uracil Auxotroph Supporting Information Figure S6 The pyrG knockout cassette
in the TOPO-pyrGKO plasmid was made by cloning a randomly selected
sequence (first exon of ) into the  sequence. Translation of this sequence
results in a truncated, nonfunctional PyrG. FusΔeqx5 was transformed
with TOPO-pyrGKO, and the protoplasts were regenerated for 72 h at
30 °C before plating on selection medium made of Czapek Dox Broth,
5-FOA (4 g L), uracil (1.12 g L), uridine (140 mg L), and 1.5% agar. Transformants
were cross-streaked on Czapek–Dox agar with and without uracil
to identify auxotrophs. Diagnostic PCR for homologous integration
was done to confirm FusΔeqx5ΔpyrG10 as a true knockout
(). Visualization of gfp expressing
mutants on CGA was done on an Olympus FV1000 spectral confocal microscope.
Visualization of gfp expressing mutants on PDA was done on a Dark
Reader (Clare Chemical). All
fungal genomes were
extracted with the DNeasy Plant Minikit (Qiagen) and sequenced at
the University of Utah Huntsman Cancer Institute sequencing facility
on an Illumina HiSeq 2000. The raw reads from NRRL 50135 genome
sequencing were assembled using the SPAdes de novo genome assembler with a kmer range from 31 to 85. Autoannotation
of the genome was done using Augustus. To locate the pyrrolocin biosynthetic cluster, BLAST analysis was
done using EqxS, EqxC, and EqxD sequences as queries. Selected transformants were screened
for compound production by culture in potato dextrose broth (PDB)
for 7 d at 30 °C with shaking at 180 rpm. Spores of compound
expressing mutants were then inoculated on to corn grit agar and incubated
at room temperature for 21 d. Extraction of filtered PDB broth was
done with ethyl acetate containing 1% acetic acid, and CGA was wholly
extracted with acetone. Solvents were removed under vacuum, and the
crude extracts analyzed by HPLC-DAD and LC/MS using C18 chromatography. Supporting Information Figures
S7 and S13 The crude extract
from a PDB culture (250 mL) of Δeqx5:Peqx:CpaSgfp was purified
by preparative HPLC (4 mL min; 5–70% acetonitrile/water-0.05%
TFA in 35 min). The pooled fractions were dried under vacuum to afford
pure  (9 mg), which was then analyzed by H NMR and LC/MS (), in comparison to previously published reference
data. A standard curve was generated using pure  by HPLC-DAD and production was quantified from crude extracts
of 100 mL PDB cultures and 50 g CGA cultures of Δeqx5:Peqx:Cpasgfp
to average 100 mg L and 1.25 g/kg (±0.24
g kg,  = 3), respectively. CGA culture of Δeqx5:Peqx:eqxC+eqxSgfp
(50 g) was extracted with acetone. The crude residue was then fractionated
by flash chromatography on end-capped C18 with a methanol/water gradient
and fractions screened by LC/MS. The fraction containing  was further purified by preparative HPLC to afford previously undescribed
compound  (4.7 mg), which was characterized spectroscopically
(see ). Purification
of Dihydromonacolin L The
crude extract from 50 g CGA culture of Δeqx5:Peqx:lovC+lovBgfp
was fractionated by flash chromatography on end-capped C18 with a
methanol/water gradient. Fractions were screened by LC/MS and  was found to be contained in one fraction. This fraction
was dried, and the residue was separated on silica column with 2:1
ethyl acetate/hexanes mobile phase. Further preparative HPLC purification
afforded  as a white solid (6.6 mg). MS and H NMR data were compared with those for the previously reported material. To purify , the crude extract from
200 g CGA culture
was fractionated by flash chromatography on end-capped C18 using a
methanol/water gradient. The fractions were analyzed by HPLC-DAD,
and a portion (12.5%) of the fraction containing  was
purified by several rounds of preparative HPLC to obtain pure  (8.6 mg; isolated yield 344 mg kg).
A similar strategy was used to obtain other derivatives..