A central
goal of synthetic
biology is to build programmed cells that respond to exogenous or
endogenous signals with a desired behavior. Two-input logic gates
are a fundamental unit of decision-making and thus have been a focal
point for building desired cellular function from the ground up. With
a few notable exceptions, the predominant
focus has been on building transcriptional networks that function
as logic gates, which are then combined to build more complex behavior. The focus on transcriptional networks is well
placed due to their inherently modular nature. However, the capacity
of proteins as computational elements has long been appreciated. Theoretically, proteins have the capacity to
perform all 16 possible two-input logic gate operations. Proteins as single-molecule level computational
units offer a number of desirable attributes. Protein encoded logic
operations do not rely on other cellular components for functionality,
aside from the fact that they require cell components for their synthesis.
A one molecule functional unit is inherently attractive for simplicity.
Protein-based logic operations do not rely on transcription, translation,
and protein degradation for functionality. Thus, computational operations
can be performed more quickly and without the consumption of cellular
resources. As a result, networks of proteins can be envisioned that
perform complex operations inside or outside the cell. However, the
complexity of proteins and generally their relative lack of modularity
(compared to gene networks) are serious impediments to the realization
of proteins’ potential as logic gates that rival transcriptional
networks. One approach to building protein logic gates is to
adapt natural
allosteric proteins with gating behavior. For example, Lim and co-workers
redesigned the modular allosteric protein N-WASP (which naturally
functions as an AND gate) to function as AND and OR gates for new
inputs. Here, we explore the adaptability
of engineered allosteric enzymes to exhibit different logic gate functions.
We have previously constructed β-lactamase enzymes that are
positively regulated by maltodextrins by inserting circular permutations
of TEM-1 β-lactamase into the  maltose
binding protein (MBP). MBP undergoes a large conformational
change that consists of a hinge bending motion such that the two domains
of MBP close upon the maltodextrin. A
variety of biochemical and biophysical studies indicate that at least
one of our protein switches, RG13, functions by an allosteric mechanism
dependent on this conformational change in the MBP domain. We designed our protein switches
to function as a simple, single input YES gate for maltose. We confirmed
this property both  (by enzymatic assay)
and  (by measuring the β-lactam resistance
of cells expressing the switches in the absence and presence of maltose). Although we designed these switches with only YES gate functionality
in mind, we have shown that the switches also possessed OR and ANDN
gate functionality. This gating behavior was predicable from the biochemical
and structural properties of MBP. As both maltose and maltotriose
induce similar conformational changes in MBP, both maltose and maltotriose
activate RG13, constituting OR gate behavior.
As β-cyclodextrin (a large cyclic maltodextrin) binds to the
same site in MBP as maltose but induces only a small change in conformation, it is not too surprising that RG13 is an ANDN
gate for maltose and β-cyclodextrin, since β-cyclodextrin,
at sufficient concentrations, prevents activation by maltose. Finally, we have also redesigned a related switch,
MBP317-347, to function as an OR gate for sucrose and maltose by introducing
mutations into the binding site of the MPB domain that conferred sucrose
binding without eliminating maltose binding. Here, we further tested the ability of RG13 to be engineered
to
function as logic gates. We used a rational design approach involving
engineered disulfides to redesign RG13 to function as AND, ORN, and
YES gates for new inputs. We were inspired by the fact that cellular
responses to oxidative conditions often involve redox-controlled proteins
with cysteines that can be reversibly oxidized. Disulfide bond formation
between the cysteines can serve as redox-sensing mechanism that detects
cellular oxidizing factors such as oxygen, reactive oxygen species,
and cellular reducing factors such as thioredoxin, and glutathione. Disulfide formation/reduction can modulate the
protein function directly via affecting functional residues or indirectly
via conformational changes. Accordingly, many researchers
have successfully engineered redox control over protein function through
the introduction of cysteines at the proper position in the protein
structure such that disulfide bond formation/reduction mediates protein
structure and function. Here, we integrated
redox-control into RG13 by introducing disulfide bonds to keep the
MBP domain in either an open or closed conformation in order to elicit
AND, ORN, and YES gate behavior. Although some gates behaved suboptimally,
we show that the maltose-regulated allostery of RG13 can be rendered
dependent on whether the disulfide bond is present or not; hence,
the effector-controlled switching property can be turned on or off
by redox agents. Our results illustrate one way in which protein switches
can be rationally redesigned to execute different logic gate functions
through a manipulation of their allosteric mechanism. Rationale
for the Design of New Gating Behavior into Protein
Switch RG13 RG13 consists of a circularly permutation of
BLA inserted in place of residue 317 of MBP. In the absence of maltose,
the enzymatic activity of RG13 is compromised relative to BLA (/ of RG13 is
about 4% of the value of BLA), but maltose binding restores activity
to a level equivalent to that of BLA. In
addition, the gene encoding RG13 confers a switching phenotype to  cells as maltose increases the ampicillin resistance
over the resistance observed in the absence of maltose. MBP is known to undergo a hinge-bending conformational
change from an open to a closed state upon binding maltose. A variety of biochemical and biophysical evidence
indicates that a very similar conformational change occurs in RG13
and that this conformational change is responsible for switching.
First, mutations in the hinge region of MBP that are known or suspected to cause partially closed states
in MBP decrease the magnitude of switching (ratio of enzymatic activity
in the presence of maltose to that in the absence of maltose) by raising
the activity in the absence of maltose. Second, the
fluorescence and NMR spectra of RG13 in the absence and presence of maltose
is consistent with the MBP domain of RG13 being in the open and closed
state, respectively. Based on these studies, we hypothesized
that the switching behavior of RG13 could be altered by manipulating
the state of the MBP domain with engineered disulfide bonds (Figure ). An important criterion in our design was to place
the disulfide bonds away from the effector binding and enzymatic active
sites so as to not directly perturb their properties. We sought to
achieve redox control over the conformational equilibria between the
closed and open state of the MBP domain. We reasoned that the proper
placement of a disulfide bond in the hinge region could hold the MBP
domain in the open conformation regardless of the presence of maltose,
resulting in AND gate behavior for maltose and a reducing agent (Figure B). Conversely, a disulfide placed to hold the MBP
domain in a closed position even in the absence of maltose would result
in ORN gate behavior, with enzymatic activity being in an off state
only in the presence of reducing agents and the absence of maltose
(Figure C). Finally, a disulfide in the hinge
region combined with mutations that selectively weaken the stability
of the open conformation (for example by disrupting interactions in
the hinge region) would convert RG13 from a YES gate for maltose to
one that was a YES gate for a reducing agent (Figure D). This particular case would be an example of converting
an effector-controlled protein switch to redox-mediated protein switch. The use of a reducing agent as
an input for the gates results in
gating behavior that is dependent on the state of the disulfide bond,
and thus, our proposed gates have the added complexity of a toggle
switch function. For example, a hypothetical AND gate (in the state
with a disulfide bond) that requires maltose and a reducing agent
for activation does not require the reducing agent for activation
once the disulfide is not present. In this context, the redox agent
can be thought of as an input that toggles the protein from being
an AND gate for maltose and reducing agent to an ANDN gate for oxidizing
agent and maltose. Likewise, for our proposed ORN gate, the redox
agent toggles the protein from being an ORN gate for reducing agent
and maltose to an OR gate for oxidizing agent and maltose. Idealized
logic gate design. (A) The switching mechanism of RG13,
a protein comprised of a BLA domain (blue) and MBP domain, whose two
subdomains are colored in red and pink. RG13’s ability to convert
β-lactam antibiotics (circle) into an inactive form (star) is
dependent on maltose (green square) and the conformational change
in the MBP domain upon binding maltose. Note that the enzymatic activity
of RG13 is not completely off in the absence of maltose, and the designation
of the state as “off” is meant to convey a less active
state. RG13 is a YES gate for maltose. (B) AND gate design. A disulfide
bond (green line) introduced in the hinge region holds the MBP domain
in an open conformation. Activation of enzyme activity requires both
maltose and reduction of the disulfide bond with DTT. (C) ORN gate
design. A disulfide bond (green line) is introduced to hold the MBP
domain in the closed state resulting in an active enzyme domain. The
switch is in an off state only if the disulfide is reduced with DTT
and maltose is absent. (D) Inversion of RG13 YES gate behavior. In
addition to a disulfide in the hinge region holding the MBP domain
in the open conformation, mutations in the hinge destabilize the open
conformation such that reduction with DTT is sufficient to activate
enzyme activity. (E) The truth tables that describe the three logic
gates. Identification
of the Locations for the Engineered Disulfide
Bonds in RG13 We utilized the only available crystal structure
of RG13 (PDB ID: 4DXC), which was obtained in the presence
of Zn and the absence of maltose, recognizing the limitation
that Zn is a negative effector that noncompetitively
switches off enzyme activity. We sequentially replaced all possible
pairs of residues in RG13 with cysteines and predicted the disulfides
based on their geometrical constraints using the side-chain conformation
prediction algorithm, SCWRL. Of the 202 566
possible pairs of residues, 11 pairs were identified as possible target
locations for cysteine substitution. We further reduced this to four
pairs by requiring that one residue should be located in each of the
subdomains of the MBP domain of RG13. We built models of these
four RG13 variants. The cysteines of RG13-AND1 (A301C/M588C) and RG13-AND2
(E308C/G584C) are located in the hinge region on the opposite side
of the protein from the maltose-binding site (Figure B). Residues 301 and 308 reside on the N-terminal domain,
and residues 588 and 584 reside on the C-terminal domain. We predicted
the length of disulfide bonds in RG13-AND1 and RG13-AND2 to be 2.08
and 1.88 Å, respectively. Disulfide bond formations in both constructs
were expected to lock the MBP domain in the open conformation and
elicit AND gate behavior as per Figure B.
The cysteines of RG13-ORN1 (P229C/P298C) and RG13-ORN2 (Q72C/P601C)
are located on the side of MBP at which maltose binds (Figure C). Residues 298 and 72 reside on the N-terminal
domain and residues 229 and 601 reside on the C-terminal domain. We
predicted the length of disulfide bonds in RG13-ORN1 and RG13-ORN2
to be 2.02 and 2.37 Å, respectively. We predicted that disulfide
bond formation in these two would lock the two subdomains of the MBP
domain in the closed conformation and elicit ORN gate behavior, as
depicted in Figure C. Sequence and structure
RG13 (PDB ID: 4DXC) with engineered disulfide bonds. (A)
A graphical illustration of the RG13 sequence based on the MBP and
BLA domain. The MBP domain sequences are in red, BLA domain sequence
is in blue, and the linker region is shown in gray. In the MBP domain
in the ribbon diagram, the N-terminal domain (residue 1–110
and 261–316) is in pink and the C-terminal domain (residue
111–260 and 585–637) is in red. (B) The open conformation
of the MBP domain (PDB ID: 1OMP) with engineered disulfide bonds for RG13-AND1 (A301C
+ M588C) and RG13-AND2 (E308C + G584C) shown in yellow spheres. (C)
The closed conformation of the MBP domain (PDB ID: 1ANF) with engineered
disulfide bonds for RG13-ORN1 (P229C + P298C) and RG13-ORN2 (Q72C
+ P601C) shown in yellow spheres. Switching Cellular Phenotype Shows Redox-Dependent, Maltose-Controlled
Switching Behavior Supporting Information Figure 1 We constructed the set of four mutants
RG13-AND1, RG13-AND2, RG13-ORN1, and RG13-ORN2 on the platform of
RG13-AA, a variant of RG13 in which the two cysteines native to the
BLA domain that normally participate in a disulfide bond were mutated
to alanine (Table  and ). We removed these cysteines
to prevent improper intramolecular disulfide formation and eliminate
the possibility that any affect observed depended on the state of
this native disulfide in the BLA domain. The removal of this disulfide
bond of the BLA domain has no effect on the switching activity of
RG13. We initially assessed the gating
behavior of these constructs by the ampicillin resistance phenotype
their genes confer to . We measured the ratio
of the minimum inhibitory concentration of ampicillin (MIC) in the presence and absence of maltose and the reduced form of
glutathione (GSH) in the growth media. The maltose-dependent
MIC ratio of RG13-AA remained
unchanged in 0 mM and 3 mM GSH, suggesting that GSH has no inherent
effect on the enzymatic activity of the BLA domain (Figure A) and that the switching activity is unaffected
by the change in redox potential. Of the four design constructs, RG13-AND1
and RG13-ORN1 did not show a significant maltose effect on Amp resistance
under any conditions and were not investigated further (). In contrast,
the gene encoding RG13-AND2 conferred an AND gate phenotype to  GSH was required for maltose to cause an 8-fold
increase in the MIC (Figure B). This supports the hypothesis that the engineered disulfide bond
in RG13-AND2 would keep the MBP domain in an open conformation until
the disulfide is reduced. Once the disulfide bond is reduced, maltose-regulated
allostery and subsequent switching behavior are shown in maltose-dependent
ampicillin resistance. This result also provides additional evidence
that maltose-dependent closing of the MBP domain causes the increase
in enzyme activity for RG13. Although RG13-ORN2 did not confer
ORN gate behavior to  as designed, the MIC increased significantly
in the presence of maltose, both in the absence and presence of GSH
(Figure C). RG13-ORN2 did not confer ORN gate
behavior because the MIC was not high in the absence
of both maltose and GSH. However, interpretation of switching phenotypes
is complicated by the fact that a maltose-dependent switching phenotype
results from one or both of two mechanisms: (1) maltose-binding increases the specific catalytic activity of
the switch, and (2) maltose increases the cellular abundance of the
switch, resulting in an increase in ampicillin hydrolysis activity
in the cell. A disulfide bond holding the MBP domain in the closed
conformation might compromise the abundance of the switch unless maltose
is present to stabilize the protein. In addition, the observation
of the desired switching types depends to some extent on our ability
to maintain the desired reduced or oxidized state in the periplasm
throughout the culturing of the cells. Potentially the cell’s
inherent mechanisms for controlling the oxidizing conditions of the
periplasm, the cellular compartment in which the switches are expressed,
could complicate our experiments. For these reasons we decided to
investigate the gating behaviors of RG13-AND2 and RG13-ORN2 . Primary
Sequence and List of Mutations
of the Proteins Used in This Study MBP[1–316]-BLA[227–286]-GSGGG-BLA[24–226]-S-MBP[319–397]-6xHis RG13 C433A + C479A + A301C + M588C RG13 C433A + C479A + E308C + G584C RG13 C433A + C479A + E308C + G584C + M588A
+ Q592A RG13 C433A
+ C479A + P229C + P298C RG13 C433A + C479A + Q72C + P601C Supporting Information
Figure 1 Based on
gene sequencing. A sequence
alignment can be found in . Logic gate performance and fluorescence characterization
for (A)
RG13-AA, (B) RG13-AND2, (C) RG13-ORN2, and (D) RG13-YES. For each
of the designs in Figure , the gating behavior
in cells (left bar graph) and  (right bar
graph) is presented for the inputs of reducing agent (red.) and maltose.
The numerical values for these two graphs are presented in the table
along with the respective truth table and color key. Cellular gating
was measured by the minimum inhibitory concentration for ampicillin
(MIC). The values presented are the median of three
trials (data for all trials in ).  gating was measured by
enzymatic activity for nitrocefin hydrolysis using purified protein.
The values presented are the mean of three independent trials and
the standard deviation. The fluorescence spectra under the four input
conditions are presented on the right. The reducing agents used were
GSH (cells), DTT (enzyme assays), and TCEP (fluorescence). Red, neither
reducing agent nor maltose; orange, presence of reducing agent; light
blue, presence of maltose; dark blue, presence of reducing agent and
maltose. RG13-AND2 and RG13-ORN2 Exhibit Gating Behavior We purified RG13-AA, RG13-AND2, and RG13-ORN2
and measured
their enzymatic activity in the presence and absence of maltose with
and without the reducing agent DTT. All three proteins purified as
a single species of the same size in size exclusion chromatography
and had a free thiol content of <1% as measured using Ellman’s
reagent. These results indicate that the cysteines in RG13-AND2 and
RG13-ORN2 were in an intramolecular disulfide bond as designed. In
the absence of maltose, RG13-AA enzyme activity remained approximately
the same both in the presence and absence of DTT without maltose presence,
indicating that DTT did not inherently alter the enzymatic activity
of the BLA domain (Figure A). As expected,
the addition of maltose, increased enzymatic activity of RG13-AA regardless
of the presence of DTT. In contrast, RG13-AND2 was significantly compromised
in maltose activation in the absence of DTT, although some maltose
activation was apparent (Figure B). Similarly,
DTT had some ability by itself to activate enzymatic activity. However,
enzyme activity in the presence of both maltose and DTT was 41% higher
than would be predicted by the additive effects of maltose and DTT
individually. Additionally, the levels of enzyme activity in the presence
of both maltose and DTT were the same for RG13-AND2 and RG13-AA, indicating
that only in the presence of both compounds is the enzymatic activity
of RG13-AND2 fully activated. Thus, RG13-AND2 is controlled by two
input signals (ligand binding and change in redox potential) and exhibits
AND gate behavior. The maltose-dependent allosteric mechanism of RG13-AND2
cannot be fully activated until the engineered disulfide bond is reduced
by changing the redox potential. The enzymatic activity of RG13-ORN2
had the fundamental property of an ORN gate: activity was lowest when
one but not both of the two inputs was present (Figure C). In the absence of maltose, RG13-ORN2 showed a 54% decrease
in enzyme activity with addition of DTT. This result is qualitatively
consistent with the expected role of the disulfide on enzyme activity,
keeping the MBP domain in a closed conformation such that the BLA
domain is more active even in the absence of maltose. However, the
disulfide bond alone does not fully activate the switch, perhaps because
the disulfide causes a closed conformation that is not equivalent
to the one caused by maltose and one that does not fully activating
the enzyme domain. The ability of maltose to further activate the
disulfide bond form of RG13-ORN2 is consistent with this view. Although RG13-AND2 exhibited
AND gate behavior, it was partially activated by the addition of DTT
alone (Figure B). One potential reason is
that the E308C/G584C mutations partially destabilize the hinge region
that helps keep the MBP domain in the open conformation. In the absence
of the disulfide (i.e., with the addition of GSH), this destabilization
shifts the MBP open/closed equilibrium more toward the closed conformation,
resulting in the observed increase in enzyme activity. This hypothesis
inspired us to attempt to invert the YES gate functionality of RG13-AA,
by introducing mutations into RG13-AND2 designed to further destabilize
the hinge such that the enzyme activity could be controlled with only
the redox potential independent of maltose binding. Alanine mutations
in MBP at the equivalent residues Met588 and Gln592 in RG13 greatly
increased the maltose binding affinity. These mutations did not cause significant structural changes in
either the closed or open conformation of MBP, but rather removed
interactions in the hinge that shifted the equilibrium of conformational
states toward the closed conformation such that the binding affinity
could be greatly increased. Inspired
by this study, we introduced the M588A and Q592A mutations into RG13-AND2
to create RG13-YES. Although the results  were
promising, RG13-YES most clearly exhibited the desired DTT YES gate
behavior  (Figure D). RG13-YES retained RG13-AND2’s inability to be activated
by maltose in the absence of DTT, but now could be almost fully activated
by DTT alone. RG13-YES represents a nearly complete inversion of the
YES gate functionality of RG13-AA for maltose to a YES gate functionality
for DTT. Conformational Changes As Monitored by Intrinsic Protein Fluorescence We next interrogated conformational changes in the switches using
intrinsic protein fluorescence. MBP exhibits a quenching of fluorescence
and small shift in the maximum fluorescence wavelength upon maltose
binding owing to the presence of several tryptophans in the vicinity
of the maltose-binding pocket, a behavior
that RG13 shares. Since DTT quenches the
fluorescence signal, TCEP was used as an alternative reducing agent.
We confirmed that TCEP and DTT had equivalent effects on the enzymatic
activity of RG13-AND2 (data not shown). For all variants, maltose
caused a decrease of fluorescence intensity and a slight shift of
the emission spectrum within the range of 345–350 nm with or
without TCEP. We interpret this result as indicating that all constructs
bind maltose. For RG13-AA, maltose quenched the fluorescence and TCEP
exhibited no effect on the fluorescence spectrum, as expected (Figure A). The maltose quenching of fluorescence of RG13-AND2
(Figure B) was TCEP independent as was RG13-AA
but not as substantial as in RG13-AA. This spectroscopic result was
inconsistent with the simplistic expectation that enzymatic activity
should be inversely correlated to fluorescence quenching. However,
maltose may still be able to bind in the presence of the disulfide,
which results in a fluorescence change, but it may not activate enzyme
activity due the engineered disulfide bond, which keeps the conformational
equilibrium toward the open state. Alternatively, since BLA is inserted
near the hinge region of MBP, the disulfide may interfere with the
coupling of maltose-binding and enzyme activity. In contrast, the
fluorescence behavior of RG13-ORN2 qualitatively matched the simplistic
expectation. Unlike with RG13-AA and RG13-AND2, TCEP alone increased
RG13-ORN2 fluorescence intensity, consistent with a conversion from
a disulfide-forced closed conformation to the open conformation (Figure C). The introduction of the hinge-destabilizing
E308C/G584C into RG13-AND2 to create RG13-YES caused a TCEP-dependent
change in fluorescence in the absence of maltose to appear (Figure D). The effect of TCEP on RG13-YES in the absence
of maltose was opposite of that on RG13-ORN2, causing a decrease in
fluorescence (as expected for a change toward the closed state). However,
similar to RG13-AA and RG13-AND2, RG13-YES showed no TCEP difference
in the spectra in the presence of maltose despite the large difference
in enzyme activity By modulating the conformational
equilibrium
of RG13’s MBP domain with disulfide bonds without intentionally
altering the molecular recognition of the input and output domains,
we developed three switchable enzymes that could respond to a change
in redox conditions. These proteins, which we built from the same
starting protein switch, exhibited the three designed logic gate functions . In two out of three cases, the genes for these
proteins conferred the same logic gate behavior to  cells. Although we did not realize ideal logic gating behavior,
our study demonstrates the potential for a single protein to be engineered
to have multi-input control and different logic gate behavior. Although
the integration of protein logic gates into genetic circuits will
be challenging, we note that the protein logic gates described here,
despite being a model system, should be able to be integrated into
our previously design band-pass circuit in which gene expression was
tied to β-lactam levels and the amount of cellular β-lactamase
activity. Finally, the use of redox conditions
has potential practical applications, since cellular compartments
can have different redox states. For example, an enzyme with AND gate
behavior such as RG13-AND2 resulting in selective therapeutic properties
can be envisioned that makes enzymatic prodrug activation depend on
entry of the AND gate into the reducing environment of the cytosol
and the presence of a cancer marker. All chemicals used were purchased from Sigma
(St. Louis, MO) unless otherwise noted. Nitrocefin was purchased from
EMD Millipore (Billerica, MA). BL21 competent cells purchased from
Agilent Technologies (Santa Clara, CA). pDIMC8-RG13, the plasmid that
contain the RG13 gene, was previously described. pDIMC8-RG13
was used as a template plasmid DNA to make variants using the PCR-based
QuikChange mutagenesis procedure by Agilent Technologies. DNA of regions
containing the targeted codon was sequenced and confirmed by Genewiz
(Germantown, MD). Identifying Target Residues for Engineering
Disulfide Bonds
and Molecular Modeling of Disulfide Bonds-Engineered RG13 Variants All possible pairs of residues in the molecular structure of RG13
(PDB ID: 4DXC) were systematically substituted with cysteines, and disulfide bonds
were predicted using SCWRL 4.1. Once
the target residues for engineering disulfide bonds were identified,
the molecular models were constructed on the scaffold of RG13. The
pairs of target residues were replaced with cysteines, and the side
chain positions were subsequently optimized by using SCWRL 4.1. The
final models were optimized by energy minimization using the GROMACS
4.1.3 package. The models were visualized,
and the disulfide bonds were examined using UCSF Chimera. The liquid
culture MIC assay was performed as previously described. BL21 cells were transformed with pDIMC8 plasmids containing genes
that encode the protein variants. For each overnight culture, 5 mL
of tryptone broth (10 g/L tryptone and 10 g/L NaCl) was inoculated
by picking a single colony and incubated in a 37 °C shaker for
16–18 h. The optical density at 600 nm (OD) of the cultures was measured. Approximately 1 × 10 colony forming unit (based on OD) from these
cultures was added to 1 mL of tryptone medium containing chloramphenicol
(, 50 μg/mL), isopropyl-β--thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG, 300 μM), Amp (0 to 8192 μg/mL,
in 2-fold increments), and either the absence or presence of 10 mM
maltose and the absence or presence of 3 mM of GSH in each well of
a 96-well assay block (Corning, Tewksbury, MA). Cultures were incubated
in a shaker incubator at 25 °C for 28–32 h. An additional
5 mM GSH was added after 12 h of incubation. The MIC was defined as the lowest concentration of ampicillin at which the
OD was <5% of the OD in the absence of ampicillin. Expression and Purification
of RG13 Variants Proteins
were expressed and purified from BL21 cells grown in M9 minimal media,
as previously described. Proteins were
dialyzed against 5 L of a dialysis buffer (50 mM phosphate, pH 7.2).
Approximately 5 mg of purified proteins were obtained with >95%
purity,
as estimated by coomassie blue staining of SDS-PAGE gels. Nitrocefin
Hydrolysis Enzymatic Assay Enzymatic assays
were performed as previously described in 200 mM
sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.5 at a final protein concentration of
1 to 5 nM. Proteins were incubated in the absence and presence of
10 mM maltose and the absence or presence of 2 mM of dithiothreitol
(DTT) for 30 min at 25 °C. Nitrocefin was added to the final
concentration of 50 μM. The absorbance at the wavelength of
486 nm was recorded by using a SpectraMax Plus Microplate
Reader (Molecular Devices) and the initial rate of nitrocefin hydrolysis
reaction was determined by SoftMax Pro 5.0 software package. Proteins (0.3 μM)
were incubated at 25 °C for 30 min in 200 mM sodium phosphate
buffer (pH 7.5) containing 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP),
10 mM maltose, 10 mM TCEP, and 10 mM maltose, or neither TCEP nor
maltose before measuring the fluorescence. Fluorescence emission spectra
were recorded in a PTI Quantamaster 30 Fluorescence Spectrofluorometer
(Photon Technology International, Edison, NJ) with excitation at 280
nm and spectral bandwidths of 2 nm (excitation) and 4 nm (emission)
using quartz cuvette (path length of 1.0 cm). All spectra were recorded
at 25 °C and baseline-corrected..