Protein phosphorylation
is a
ubiquitous and essential mechanism of cell regulation and plays important
roles in pathology. This reaction is catalyzed
by a large superfamily of kinases, which accounts for nearly 2% of
the genes in the human genome. Studying kinase function
using genetic manipulation or small-molecule pharmacological agents
provides poor spatial and/or temporal resolution, limiting our ability
to examine how subcellular localization and the kinetics of protein
phosphorylation contribute to regulation. New molecular tools are
needed to probe the role of kinases in native cellular environments. There has been considerable progress in developing genetically
encoded, light-controlled molecules that can manipulate biological
processes in living cells and animals. Many of these applications
utilize analogues of proteins, where the protein of interest has been
fused to light-responsive protein domains, or to proteins that interact
with such domains (reviewed in the literature). This can affect the normal biological activity of the target protein
and is typically implemented through overexpression of ectopic proteins.
Recently, the light-sensitive LOV2 domain from  phototropin 1 (here referred
to as LOV2) was adapted to control the activity of peptides. We extend this work to control peptides that inhibit kinases and
demonstrate that the approach can control endogenous kinases in living
cells. LOV2 is a member of the PAS superfamily. It contains a flavin mononucleotide (FMN) cofactor located
in the
center of the PAS fold and a large α-helical region at the C-terminus
of the fold termed the Jα helix. Upon exposure
to blue light, a covalent adduct is formed between the FMN and a cysteine
side chain in the PAS fold, leading to a large conformational change
that ultimately causes the unfolding of the Jα helix (Figure A). When irradiation
ceases, reversion of the thiol bond and a conformational change back
to the dark state occurs. We hypothesized
that these conformational changes could be used to control inhibitory
peptides with light, providing a selective and minimally invasive
way to manipulate endogenous signaling pathways . Figure S1B,
Supporting Information Figure
S1, Supporting Information We began our study by choosing regions within the
LOV2 sequence
that could serve as sites for peptide incorporation, where light-induced
conformational changes might affect exposure of the peptide. We first
selected the flexible loop between the PAS fold of LOV2 and the Jα
helix (Figure B). For our initial studies,
we selected the widely used naturally occurring PKA inhibitory peptide
PKI. The PKI gene encodes a heat-stable, 76-amino acid peptide that
acts as a high-affinity, highly selective competitive inhibitor of
the catalytic subunit of PKA ( 2.5–36
nM). The pseudosubstrate region of PKI
is between amino acids 18–22, and PKI is commonly used as a
17-amino acid fragment encompassing amino acids 6–22 (PKI 6–22),
or as a shorter 9-amino acid fragment encompassing amino acids 14–22
(PKI 14–22). Moreover, the expression of PKI fusion proteins
has been shown to effectively dampen PKA signaling in living cells. We incorporated the shorter PKI 14–22 between the Thr517
and Glu518 residues of the LOV2 sequence along with flanking Gly-Ser
linkers to retain peptide flexibility (PKI 14–22 Int; Figure B). We expressed a “dark state” mutant
(C450A) of LOV2 that abolishes FMN-thiol bond formation, or a “lit state” mutant (I539E)
that destabilizes the Jα helix in
HEK293 cells. PKA activity was stimulated using the adenylyl cyclase
agonist forskolin (10 μM, 1.5 h), and PKA activity monitored
by Western blot using an antibody that specifically recognizes phosphorylated
PKA motifs. We found that both C450A
and I539E mutants were able to inhibit PKA activity (Figure C,D; C450A, 29.6 ± 5.9%; I539E, 41.2 ±
4.5% compared to LOV2 alone). As it was unlikely that the peptide
could adopt a PKA-interacting conformation in both the lit and dark
state structures, this data suggested that peptide incorporation at
this site altered the folding of LOV2. In a previous study, our laboratory
created a photoswitchable version of the Rac GTPase using LOV2 (PA-Rac). By incorporating the PKI sequence into this
construct at the loop position described above (between Thr517 and
Glu518), we could test whether peptide incorporation affected light-induced
conformational changes. Light-dependence of Rac activity was examined
using a previously established biochemical method for assessing Rac
activation, in which Rac was pulled down with the CRIB domain of the
Rac effector p-21 activated kinase (). Indeed,
pulldown of wild-type PA-Rac increased with light, but the light response
was lost with loop incorporation of PKI (). On the basis of our previous
studies of peptide interactions with
the Jα helix, we next examined whether we could
cage PKI by embedding it in the C-terminus of this helix. The three-dimensional
structure of LOV2-PKI C-terminal fusions were modeled using the I-TASSER
algorithm. Intriguingly, whereas PKI 6–22
became unstructured at its C-terminal end, PKI 14–22 remained
helical within the Jα helix, suggesting that the length of the
peptide sequence may predominantly determine the success of C-terminal
peptide incorporation (Figure A–C).
Experiments were consistent with this prediction: LOV2-PKI 6–22
inhibited induction of PKA signaling in both the light and the dark
(Figure D,E; Dark, 33.3 ± 14.2% of control;
Light, 24.1 ± 12.0% of control), but for cells expressing LOV2-PKI
14–22, PKA induction was substantially reduced in the light
but not in the dark (Figure D,E; Dark, 98.4
± 5.1% of control; Light, 52.5 ± 14.6%). In previous work
we described an interaction between a C-terminal phenylalanine and
a hydrophobic patch within LOV2 that could enhance light dependent
caging of C terminal peptides on LOV. However,
this failed to have an effect here (LOV2-PKI 6–22Phe, Figure D,E; 24.0 ± 19.8% of control). Figure S2, Supporting Information We found that the C-terminal fusion
of PKI inhibited PKA signaling
to a similar degree as cell-permeable PKI peptide (). Moreover, in reversibility
assays, we found that PKA activity returned to basal states between
15–40 min after the cessation of blue light (Figure F,G; 0 min, 39.8 ± 7.8%; 2 min, 36.1 ±
9.9%; 8 min, 40.4 ± 6.1%; 15 min, 78.6 ± 15.0%; 40 min,
126.1 ± 27.4%). These results demonstrate that the C-terminal
fusion of PKI could effectively inhibit PKA signaling in the presence
of blue light in a reversible manner. Figure S2, Supporting Information We renamed the LOV2-PKI
14–22 construct photoactivatable
PKI (PA–PKI) and performed a set of experiments to determine
its utility in living cells. In order to test the response of PA–PKI
to light, we followed PKA-dependent phosphorylation of a single PKA
substrate. We irradiated cells with blue light using a 460 nm LED
array and monitored forskolin-dependent phosphorylation of cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB). CREB is a transcription factor that
is activated through phosphorylation at Ser133 by an ensemble of kinases
including PKA, protein kinase C (PKC), Ca/calmodulin-dependent
kinase (CaMK), p90Rsk, and MAPKAPK-2 (Figure A). We saw no effect on CREB induction
using PA–PKI C450A in the light or PA–PKI WT in the
dark (Figure B,C; C450A Light, 101.6 ±
1.7%; WT Dark, 98.7 ± 7.8% of control). In contrast, PA–PKI
in the light produced a substantial reduction in forskolin-induced
PKA phosphorylation that was comparable to that produced by existing
reagents in previously published reports (46.8 ± 10.4% of control;
see ,
for comparison). An important advantage
of PA–PKI is its ability to affect
PKA signaling in a subset of cells within a population. Primary cultured
mouse cortical neurons aged 6 days  (DIV
6) were sparsely transfected with PA–PKI or PA–PKI C450A
for 48 h and stimulated with forskolin in the presence of blue light.
Whereas a robust signal for phosphorylated PKA substrates was seen
in the majority of cells, neurons expressing PA–PKI, but not
PA–PKI C450A, showed a substantial decrease in PKA activity
(Figure ). When quantified, irradiation of
cells expressing PA–PKI diminished PKA phosphorylation by ∼47%
(Figure B; fluorescence intensity, C450A,
725.8 ± 48.07; WT, 390.9 ± 24.63). Together, these results
demonstrate the ability of PA–PKI to target endogenous signaling
events in living cells in a light-dependent manner. We next asked if we could
apply our methods to create additional
photoswitchable inhibitory peptides. To this end, we selected myosin
light chain kinase inhibitor peptide 18 (MKI). Like CREB, myosin light chain 2, also known as myosin regulatory
light chain, is targeted for phosphorylation by multiple kinases.
These include myosin light chain kinase, Rho kinase, and the cell cycle regulator
Cdc2 (Figure A). We employed a design similar to that used for PA–PKI,
fusing MKI to the C-terminus of Jα with a single glycine linker.
I-TASSER modeling of this sequence showed that MKI adopted a helical
conformation similar to PA–PKI (Figure B). When tested in HEK293 cells, we saw a dramatic light-dependent
decrease in cellular levels of phosphorylated myosin light chain (Figure C,D). Phosphorylated myosin light chain levels were
unaffected in irradiated cells expressing PA-MKI C450A and in nonirradiated
cells expressing PA-MKI WT (Figure D; C450A,
92.4 ± 7.8%; WT, 93.8 ± 4.6% of control), while irradiated
cells expressing PA-MKI exhibited a ∼70% decrease in phosphorylation
(Figure D; 30.4 ± 8.1% of control). Given the role of myosin light chain kinase on
peripheral membrane
movements, we expressed PA-MKI in COS-7
cells and examined its effects on the protrusive activity of living
cells (Figure ). These cells exhibit a wide
variation of protrusion and retraction behaviors, both within a cell
and between cells. Not only is MLC phosphorylation modulated in parallel
by multiple kinases, these cell morphodynamic behaviors are controlled
by a wide-range of other cytoskeleton processes that are independent
of myosin activity. Therefore, we expected that acute inhibition of
MLCK by PA-MKI might generate subtle effects. Indeed, histograms of
local edge velocities (see ) in the
absence (dark) and presence (light) of activated PA-MKI showed no
obvious trends compared to the large spread of the distributions (Figure A). Figure S3, Supporting Information Figure S4, Supporting Information To analyze the morphodynamic behaviors
more systematically, we
separated protrusion and retraction events and quantified the persistence
(duration) and maximal velocity per event. To integrate data from
multiple cells we normalized the distributions relative to the median
duration and maximal velocities, respectively, during the first dark
phase of the experiment. Neither median values for the normalized
distributions from cells expressing LOV2 alone, nor those expressing
PA-MKI showed a statistically significant difference between the dark
and light phases (Figure D,G). However, the
variation between the whisker lengths of the distribution box plots
for cells expressing PA-MKI indicated that optical activation of the
inhibitor affected the extreme ranges of protrusion velocities. We
therefore generated separate distributions of the top (>75%) and
bottom
(<25%) quartiles (Figure B,C,E,F). These
analyses revealed that light had no effect on control cells expressing
LOV2 alone, but membrane protrusions, and not retractions, were dampened
by PA-MKI activation (Figure  and ). Simply using
the membrane permeable MLCK inhibitory peptide 18 produced a dampening
of protrusion velocities similar to that of PA-MKI (). These observations are
consistent with previous studies showing that myosin light chain kinase
plays a role in phosphorylating peripheral myosin light chain to control
the structure of actin networks. Moreover,
these results demonstrate the utility of photoactivatable peptides
in isolating distinct signaling pathways within living cells. In summary, we report the development of photoswitchable inhibitory
peptides that target endogenous kinase signaling. We leveraged the
large structural changes that occur during LOV2 irradiation to produce
light-responsive kinase inhibitors. Within the field of cell signaling,
a great challenge has been to distinguish between competing signaling
pathways within a cell. Phosphorylation sites within substrate proteins
are often targeted by multiple kinases, and there are currently limited
approaches to dissect the biological roles of distinct pathways in
cells. Our method provides a minimally invasive approach to address
these challenges with high spatiotemporal precision. Peptides are
competitive inhibitors of many classes of enzymes and serve a broad
range of biological roles, including allosteric modulation and directing the subcellular localization of
proteins. Novel classes of peptide therapeutics
have been proposed ranging from noncompetitive kinase inhibitors to peptides that regulate angiogenesis, the Rho GTPases, and viral infection. The methods described here should
be applicable to many other peptides, for investigation and manipulation
of processes beyond kinase function. Perturbation of dark-state LOV2 due to peptide incorporation in
the Jα loop. (A) Schematic showing the light response of LOV2.
Blue represents the LOV2 globular domain, yellow represents the Jα
helix. Upon irradiation with blue light, a conformational change in
LOV2 causes the unwinding of Jα. (B) Crystal structure of LOV2
showing the PAS fold of LOV2 (blue), the Jα helix (yellow),
and the loop region connecting the two domains (arrowhead). The sequence
of PKI and its incorporation between Thr517 and Glu518 are shown in
the box. (C) Western blot showing total phosphorylated PKA substrates
in HEK293 cells and actin loading control. Note the loss of PKA phosphorylation
in both dark-state mutant (C450A) and light-state mutants (I539E).
(D) Quantification of (C),  = 4, * < 0.01, Student’s  test. Photoswitchable response
of LOV2-PKI 14–22. (A) I-TASSER
prediction of the structure of LOV2-PKI 6–22 and LOV2-PKI 14–22
(B). The Jα helix (yellow), the PKI 14–22 sequence (red),
and the variable linker region of PKI 6–22 (green) are indicated.
(C) Sequence showing the C-terminal fusion of PKI to LOV2. Amino acids
537–541 are shown for LOV2 in yellow. Green represents the
variable PKI sequence and red the core PKI inhibitory region. (D)
Western blot showing the dark and light response of LOV2-PKI 6–22
and LOV2-PKI 14–22, LOV2-PKI 6–22Phe, and actin loading
control. Note the inhibition of phosphorylation in LOV2-PKI 14–22
only upon irradiation. LOV2-PKI 6–22Phe is shown in the dark.
(E) Quantification of (D),  = 4, * < 0.01, Student’s  test. (F) Western
blot showing the recovery of PKA signaling upon cessation of light
stimulation. (G) Quantification of (F),  = 4, * < 0.01, Student’s  test. Light-dependent inhibition of CREB phosphorylation by
PA–PKI.
(A) Schematic showing pathway-dependent specificity of PA–PKI
in CREB phosphorylation. (B) Loss of phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) but
not total CREB upon irradiation in HEK293 cells. (C) Quantification
of (B),  = 3, * < 0.01, Student’s  test. Inhibition of forskolin-induced
PKA phosphorylation in primary
cultured cortical neurons by PA–PKI. (A) Immunofluorescence
of total phosphorylated PKA substrates (pPKA substrate) in cells expressing
mVenus–PA-PKI or the dark-state mutant (C450A) of mVenus–PA-PKI.
Arrows indicate transfected neurons. Arrowheads indicate untransfected
nearby neurons. (B) Fluorescence intensity quantification of (A),  = 20 cells per group, * < 0.01, Student’s  test. Construction
of a photoactivatable myosin light chain kinase inhibitor
(PA-MKI). (A) Schematic showing kinases that phosphorylate regulatory
myosin light chain. (B) I-TASSER prediction of the conformation for
PA-MKI. (C) Western blot showing a reduction of phosphorylated myosin
light chain (pMLC) but not total (MLC) in response to blue light irradiation.
(D) Quantification of (C),  = 3, * < 0.01, Student’s  test. Changes in the protrusion dynamics of COS-7 cells in response
to
PA-MKI activation. (A) Snapshot of raw image data before (left), during
(center), and after (right) light stimulation of a cell expressing
PA-MKI. Colors represent the cell edge over the entire imaging interval
(blue, early time points; red, late time points). Histograms of instantaneous
edge velocity for the three imaging intervals are shown below. (B–D)
Box plots showing normalized distributions of protrusion persistence
(duration of protrusion phase; red boxes) and maximum velocity per
protrusion event (green boxes) for cells expressing LOV2. The three
plots represent normalized distributions of the >75th (left), <25th
(center), and total (right). Boxes within each plot represent the
distributions before (left; gray fill), during (center; white fill),
and after (right; gray fill) light stimulation. Data was derived from  = 6 cells expressing LOV2 domain only (control). (E–G)
Box plots showing normalized distributions of protrusion persistence
(duration of protrusion phase; red boxes) and maximum velocity per
protrusion event (green boxes) for cells expressing PA-MKI. The three
plots represent normalized distributions of the >75th (left), <25th
(center), and total (right). Boxes within each plot represent the
distributions before (left; gray fill), during (center; white fill),
and after (right; gray fill) light stimulation. Data was derived from  = 6 cells expressing PA–PKI. Note the decrease
in maximum velocity in the <25th percentile of control cells, presumably
due to irradiation toxicity. However, in contrast to the decrease
in cells expressing PA-MKI, this shift is statistically nonsignificant.
* < 0.01, Anderson–Darling test. A detailed
description of the analyses can be found in the . Antiphospho-PKA
substrate (RRXS*/T*), antiphospho-CREB (Ser133), anti-CREB, antiphospho-myosin
regulatory light chain (Ser19), and antimyosin regulatory light chain
were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. Anti-GFP (JL-8) was
purchased from Clontech, anti-β-Actin was purchased from Millipore.
Forskolin was purchased from Tocris bioscience. All restriction enzymes
were purchased from New England Biolabs. HEK293 cells (ATCC) were
cultured in a 5% CO humidified incubator in DMEM, 10%
(v/v) fetal bovine serum (Hyclone) and 2 mM Glutamax (Invitrogen).
Transfections were performed in 6-well dishes using Lipofectamine
2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Inhibitory peptides
were fused to the C-terminus of the Jα helix of the LOV domain
of  phototropin
1 (404–541) by polymerase chain reaction and cloned into pmVenus-C1
using XhoI and RI sites. Primer sequences used
are as follows: LOV2 sense (5′-CTCGAGAAATGGGATCCTTGGCTACTACACTTG-3′),
PKI (6–22) antisense (5′-GAATTCCTAAATAGCATTACGACGACCAGTACGACCAGAAGCAATAAAATCAGC
ATAAGTCTCATCAATATTTTCTGCAGTTTT-3′),
PKI (14–22) antisense (5′-GAATTCCTAAATAGCATTACGACGACCAGTACGTCCCTCATCAATATTTTCTGCAGTTTTC-3′),
MKI antisense (5′-GAATTCCTATTTACGACGATATTTATATTTTTTACGAGAAGCAATAAAATCAGCATAAGTCTCATCAATATTTTCTGCAGTTTT-3′). Cells (HEK293
or neurons) expressing the appropriate constructs were irradiated
in an incubator with blue light generated from a 30 W, 30.5 cm ×
17 cm panel containing an array of 711 light-emitting diodes (LEDs)
radiating 460 nm light (LEDs Super Bright). Cells were irradiated
at a distance of 9 cm, which produced a light intensity of 5.6 mW/cm. For PKA assays, plates containing transfected cells were
placed under the LED array for 15 min prior to the addition of forskolin.
Plates were placed back into the incubator and irradiated for an additional
1.5 h. For MLCK assays, cells were irradiated in the incubator for
1–1.5 h. Cells were lysed in NuPage LDS sample buffer (Life
Technologies) supplemented with 1% β-mercaptoethanol, 1×
Complete Mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and 1× Halt
Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Mouse
cortices were dissected from embryonic day (E) 13.5 to E 16.5 animals,
trypsinized with TrypLE express at 37C for 10 min,
and dissociated with a fire-polished Pasteur pipet in plating medium
(Neurobasal medium with 5% fetal bovine serum, Glutamax, B27 (Invitrogen),
and Antibiotic-Antimycotic (Invitrogen)). Dissociated neurons were
seeded onto 24-well plates containing coverslips coated with poly--lysine (0.1 mg/mL) at a density of 1 × 10 cells/well. Neurons were incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO and the plating medium changed into Neurobasal medium supplemented
with 4.84 mg/mL Uridine 5′-triphosphate (Sigma), 2.46 mg/mL
5-fluoro 2-deoxyuridine (Sigma), Glutamax, B27, and Antibiotic-Antimycotic
at days  (DIV) 3 and DIV 6. Neurons were
transfected on DIV 6 with various DNA constructs using Lipofectamine
2000. After 48 h in culture, neurons were irradiated upon PKA induction
with forskolin and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA)/4% sucrose
in phosphate buffered saline for 30 min. Freshly fixed
neurons were washed with PBS and permeabilized and blocked with 8%
bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100. Neurons
were then incubated with primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight.
After washing with PBS, appropriate Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary
antibodies (Life Technologies) were used to detect the signal. The
secondary antibody was incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Coverslips
were mounted onto glass slides using Fluoro-Gel mounting medium (Electron
Microscopy Sciences). To quantify PKA activity in neurons, Metamorph
software (Molecular Devices) was used to create a binary mask of the
cells from the mVenus images. This defined the area of the transfected
cell of interest. The average intensity of the immunofluorescence
signal produced from staining with the antiphospho-PKA substrate antibody
was measured within this defined region. COS-7 cells were
transiently cotransfected with LifeAct-mCherry 20–28 h before
imaging. Cells used for live cell imaging were seeded on coverslips
coated with 10 mg/mL fibronectin in Ham’s F-12K medium free
of Phenol Red and containing 5% FBS. Coverslips were mounted in an
Attofluor live cell chamber (Invitrogen) placed on a heated microscope
stage (Warner). Images were acquired using an Olympus IX81-ZDC microscope
equipped with a CoolSNAP HQ2 14-bit camera (Photometrics). Bandpass
and neutral density filters (Chroma) were switched using motorized
filter wheels (Ludl Electronic Products) controlled by Metamorph Software
version 7.6.4. YFP and mCherry images were acquired using a 100 W
Hg arc lamp with a 1% ND filter, and 510–520 nm or 565–595
nm band-pass filters respectively, for 500 ms. For peptide activation,
a 5% ND filter and a 426–446 nm band-pass filter were used.
The activation period of imaging consisted of a pulse protocol (alternating
5 s light 5 s dark) that lasted a total of 15 min. Images were processed
post acquisition  shading correction, background
subtraction, and binary masking using Metamorph software (Molecular
Devices). The images acquired
by live-cell microscopy were analyzed using in-house software. For
each frame of the movie, the cell edge was first detected and then
divided into a series of 1 μm wide segments, as
described in. Local cell edge velocities
were calculated by tracking the displacement of segments from one
frame to the next. Per-segment velocity time series were then divided
into protrusion and retraction events, and for each event the duration
and maximal velocity recorded. In order to quantify changes in these
parameters between the initial basal (dark), stimulated (light), and
recovery (dark) imaging intervals, the distributions were normalized
by the median value of the basal interval. This normalization corrected
for distribution bias associated with the heterogeneity of morphodynamic
behavior among cells. Both persistence and max protrusion/retraction
velocities approximately followed a log-normal distribution. The Anderson–Darling
Test was used on the exponentiated values to determine the significance
of observed differences among the distributions collected from the
three imaging intervals..