In many cell
types the proper
subcellular positioning of organelles is crucial for correct functioning
and also determines their inheritance in daughter cells after cell
division. Even in cells with a less defined cellular
architecture, many organelles rely on contacts with other organelles
for functions like metabolism, lipid transfer and signaling. Despite this importance, studying the role of organelle positioning
has until recently been difficult due to the lack of adequate tools
to position organelles at will in living cells. We have previously shown that cellular cargoes such as
organelles can be positioned in living cells by chemically induced
recruitment of constitutively active motor proteins. Recently, we and others have extended this toolbox by making
this heterodimerization light-inducible, allowing to
control organelle positioning with subcellular precision or . In these light-inducible
approaches, dimerization of LOV domains or cryptochromes is induced by blue
light. Alternatively, UV light can be used to
uncage a chemical dimerizer, but only at the expense of spatial precision
and repeated reversibility. Nevertheless,
also the use of blue light-sensitive domains severely limits the design
of live imaging experiments, because GFP-tagged proteins cannot be
imaged without activation of the dimerization system. In addition,
these dimerization systems rely on their intrinsic dissociation kinetics
for unbinding of the motors after returning to dark conditions. Even
though binding affinities and rates of these systems have been optimized
to suit a variety of applications, a direct “off-switch” that actively
dissociates motors from their cargoes should enable more precise positioning.
Finally, an orthogonal heterodimerization system that responds to
a different color would allow multicolor control of the relative positioning
of different organelles. Light-inducible dimerization domains
in phytochromes from  have been
shown to behave as bidirectional
photoswitches. The amino-terminal domain
of phytochrome B (PhyB) can be switched from a red light-absorbing
Pr state to a far-red light-absorbing Pfr state with red light in
the presence of the cofactor phycocyanobilin (PCB). In the Pfr state,
PhyB interacts with Phytochrome Interacting Factors (PIF) and importantly, remains bound until illuminated
with far-red light, which reverts PhyB into its Pr state and thereby
dissociates from PIF rapidly. This photoswitchable
system has so far been used to regulate gene transcription in yeast,
mammalian cells and  in zebrafish or to engineer light-sensitive signal cascades. Here, we develop organelle positioning assays using phytochrome-derived
dimerization domains to establish switch-like control over organelle
movement on subcellular scale with high temporal resolution using
red and far-red light. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_001.pdf To couple
motor domains to organelles, we engineered fusion constructs
of PhyB(1–908) and GFP-labeled organelle markers and fused
PIF6(1–100) to previously characterized motor domains of kinesin
and dynein motors. Light-induced dimerization should
then induce transport of the target cargo to the cell periphery or
the microtubule organizing center (MTOC), respectively (A). First this system was tested
in fixed cells that were globally exposed to red light for 30 min
prior to fixation. Recycling endosomes tagged with Phy-Rab11 were
spread throughout the cytoplasm and partly enriched in the perinuclear
region in control conditions. In the presence of kinesin-3 derived
Kif1-PIF and PCB, repositioning of recycling endosomes could be induced
with red light illumination in 96% of the cells imaged (B,D). Moreover, to test the
universality of this system, we repeated the experiment with the motor
domain of Kif5b, a member of the kinesin-1 family. Recruitment of
Kif5-PIF to recycling endosomes also induced their robust repositioning
to the cell periphery ( Figure S1). Similarly, by recruiting BICD-PIF to recycling endosomes,
dynein-mediated transport to the MTOC was induced and recycling endosomes
heavily accumulated at the MTOC in 74% of cells (C,E). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_001.pdf In addition, we performed the same kinesin recruitment assays
with
peroxisomes labeled with Phy-Pex. Both coupling of kinesin-1 or kinesin-3
motor domains resulted in efficient repositioning of peroxisomes to
the cell periphery after illumination with red light in 96% and 88%
of cells imaged, respectively ( Figure S2). Together these results demonstrate that our strategy
to reposition cellular organelles by recruiting motor proteins using
phytochrome-derived dimerization domains can efficiently be used for
different combinations of organelles and motors. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_001.pdf To further
optimize organelle tagging and to reduce the construct
size of the fusion protein, a shorter amino-terminal truncation of
PhyB was tested. However, already in
the absence of light, significant repositioning of endosomes to the
periphery was observed after addition of PCB in 70% and 44% of cells
expressing Phy(1–650)-Rab11 and Kif5-PIF or Kif1-PIF, respectively.
Moreover, the coupling was irreversible under far-red light ( Figure S3). Such irreversible
hyperactivity of short amino-terminal truncations has also been reported
previously and we therefore abandoned this
approach. To directly assess repositioning dynamics, we next
carried out
live-cell imaging experiments. Since exposure of PhyB to low levels
of ambient light may already activate PIF binding, addition of PCB was delayed until briefly before start
of illumination. This allowed better handling of samples and prevented
unintentional premature activation. Yet, we consistently noticed that
the blue light used to excite GFP was already sufficient to activate
recycling endosome repositioning in our assays. Therefore, we tested
the reactivity of recycling endosome repositioning in a fixed experiment
in which cells were either not illuminated or illuminated with far-red,
red, green or blue light before fixation (A). Indeed, exposure to blue light resulted
in repositioning of recycling endosomes to the cell periphery with
similar efficiency as red light illumination in 87% and 90% of cells,
respectively. Similarly, 51% of the cells illuminated with green light
showed endosome accumulations at the cell periphery, indicating that
this motor recruitment assay is very sensitive to activation by light
of the entire visible spectrum (B). As expected, the relative radial distribution of
recycling endosomes in far-red light illuminated cells was smallest,
with 90% of endosomal fluorescence located in 9 μm distance
from the cell center, compared to 14, 18, 27 and 35 μm for dark,
green, blue and red illuminated cells of similar size, respectively
(C). Thus,
while organelle repositioning is not exclusively activated by red
light, it can be prevented by far-red illumination, suggesting that
the system may still be used for effective on/off photoswitching of
organelle motility. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_002.avi During subsequent live-imaging
experiments, cells were exposed
to far-red light before the start of the acquisition or whenever motors
should be dissociated from recycling endosomes (A). During illumination with 625 nm light
repositioning of recycling endosomes to the cell periphery could be
followed (B, ) and quantified (C–E). The increase in peripheral Phy-Rab11
fluorescence intensity was accompanied by a simultaneous loss of intensity
in the perinuclear region of the cell (C). The frame-to-frame correlation index,
which quantifies overall motility by comparing the overlap between
subsequent frames (1 indicates completely similarity, 0 means completely
dissimilarity), decreased nearly instantly after
onset of 625 nm illumination, indicating that motility of recycling
endosomes increased instantly after onset of 625 nm illumination(E). The peripheral
intensity and displacement radius (C,D) of recycling endosomes increased shortly
after as endosomes move toward the cell periphery. The correlation
and the displacement radius already level off during the 625 nm illumination
window as endosomes gradually accumulate at the cell periphery, but
the increase in peripheral Phy-Rab11 fluorescence intensity only stopped
after cells were illuminated with 740 nm light. These results demonstrate
that organelle positioning can be temporally controlled by exposing
cells to sequential illumination with red and far-red light. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_003.avi http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_003.avi Next, we further studied the switch-like dynamics of the
phytochrome
system by quickly cycling between “on” and “off”
states. Twenty-five frames of GFP imaging
and illumination with 740 nm light were followed by 5 frames of GFP
imaging and 625 nm illumination and this cycle was repeated five times
(F). While
overall relocation of recycling endosomes to the cell periphery was
observed in this assay (G,H, ), increased motility
of recycling endosomes was confined to periods of 625 nm illumination
and stopped within seconds after inactivation (I–K, ). These results show that the PhyB-PIF dimerization can be used
as a photoswitch to increase temporal precision of organelle repositioning. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_004.avi http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_005.avi In addition to increased temporal resolution when using the phytochrome
system, patterned illumination with red and far-red light should allow
local activation/deactivation of organelle repositioning at subcellular
resolution. To test this, we actively dissociated motors from recycling
endosomes with global far-red illumination, while a smaller region
of the cell was illuminated with red light to locally induce organelle
repositioning (A). Peripheral accumulation of recycling endosomes was observed in
the region that was illuminated with red light, whereas the far-red
illumination prevented repositioning elsewhere (B,C, ).
To test whether organelle repositioning induced with red light could
also locally be stopped using far-red light, we adjusted the illumination
scheme to illuminate a subcellular region with far-red light after
prior global activation of repositioning using red light (D). Recycling endosomes
initially started moving toward the cell periphery, but were prevented
from reaching the cell periphery in far-red illuminated areas (E,F, ). This local inactivation of organelle
repositioning could further be quantified by correlation analysis,
showing decreased motility in a far-red illuminated area (G). In addition,
measuring the average speed of recycling endosomes in this area showed
that the red light-induced increase was reversed after local deactivation
with far-red light (H). Single trajectories from recycling endosomes show that
endosome motility in far-red illuminated areas rapidly decreased while
endosomes outside this region remained mobile. Interestingly, endosomes
crossing into the far-red illuminated area also quickly stopped moving,
because the far-red light actively reversed the interaction between
motors and organelles (I). Thus, phytochrome-mediated heterodimerization combined
with spatially patterned illumination allows controlling organelle
dynamics with high spatiotemporal precision. We next compared the PhyB-PIF
system with the blue-light sensitive
TULIP system that we previously used. The bidirectional control of
heterodimerization using red and far-red light provides two modes
of control that are not available with the blue-light based system:
acute inhibition and sustained activation. Indeed, whereas we observed
a rapid arrest of phytochrome-controlled motility when organelles
moved from red to far-red illuminated areas (I), such acute inhibition of motility was
not observed using blue-light dependent heterodimerization and local
illumination, because the slow reversal time scales of 30–60
s and motor velocities of 1–2 μm/s resulted in long excursions
into the nonilluminated area (J). In addition, when recycling endosomes were relocalized
to the cell periphery using a blue-light based system, these organelles
spontaneously regained their original distribution when left in the
dark for half an hour (A). In contrast, when using the PhyB-PIF system, endosomes
were still enriched at the periphery after half an hour in the dark
(B). These
results demonstrate that the two-color bidirectional control provide
by the PhyB-PIF system adds unique capabilities to the organelle repositioning
toolbox. Finally, we tested whether we could combine both systems
to achieve
independent control over the positioning of different organelles in
one experiment. Recycling endosomes were labeled with PhyB fused to
the yellow fluorescent protein Venus, which could be excited with
509–518 nm light without activating TULIP-based heterodimerization,
whereas unwanted activation of PhyB could be reversed used far-red
light (C).
Peroxisomes were labeled with the light-sensitive part of the TULIP
system (LOVpep) fused to mRFP. At the start of the experiment, Venus
and RFP could be excited with green and red light, while PhyB activation
was prevented using far-red light. Subsequent PhyB activation with
red light resulted in dynein-driven perinuclear enrichment of recycling
endosomes, whereas peroxisome positioning was unaffected until illumination
with blue light induced kinesin-dependent transport that moved the
peroxisomes out of the perinuclear region (D–F). Thus, by carefully choosing
fluorophores and illumination strategy, blue-light controlled and
red-light controlled systems can be used independently in a single
cell and also combined with two-color imaging. In conclusion,
we demonstrate that phytochrome-derived motor-cargo
switches allow fast and actively reversible coupling of organelles
and motor proteins. This interaction could be spatiotemporally controlled
by exposing regions of interest to red and far-red light to induce
or reverse binding, respectively. The main advantage over blue light-inducible
recruitment of motors to organelles lies in the fast and active reversibility
of the phytochrome system with a separate wavelength. Even though we found that phytochromes are sensitive to
a broad spectrum, including blue light, far-red illumination actively
dissociates PhyB-PIF interactions during live imaging of GFP-labeled
structures. In addition, we demonstrated that the phytochrome system
can be combined with blue light-sensitive systems to allow orthogonal
control of positioning of two organelles, similar to previously demonstrated
gene expression assays. Dependence
on PCB as a cofactor could be considered a limiting
factor for this system, because it is not expressed in animal cells.
However, for our purposes, this dependence enabled us to easily handle
transfected cells in ambient light conditions before the start of
the experiments, because addition of purified PCB to the cell medium
for 1 h was sufficient. In other model systems, particularly , this may prove more challenging. However, injection
of PCB into zebrafish embryos has been reported and cultured cells have also been engineered to metabolize
abundant biliverdin into PCB to overcome
this limitation. Recently, a photoswitchable dimerization system has
been reported that uses biliverdin in its chromophore and is activated
by far-red light. This system may thus
overcome the requirement of exogenous compounds and the broad activation
spectrum reported here, but its photoswitch behavior might be less
effective as reversal by red-light was not complete. We expect that
the assays reported here, as well as future improvements of the optogenetic
dimerization systems, will contribute to a better understanding of
the spatial biology of cells by enabling precise control of organelle
positioning in dynamic cells and tissues as well as in well-controlled
minimal cell reconstitutions. Repositioning of recycling
endosomes using light-induced phytochrome-based
dimerization with motor proteins. (A) Assay and constructs. Recycling
endosomes were tagged with fluorescently labeled Rab11 fused to PhyB(1–908)
(Phy-Rab11). Upon exposure to red light, PhyB changes confirmation
from the Pr to the Pfr state, allowing it to bind PIF6 which is coupled
to Kif5b(1–807)-mCherry (Kif5-PIF), Kif1a(1–383)-mCherry
(Kif1-PIF), or the dynein adaptor BICD(1–500) (BICD-PIF). (B)
Distribution of recycling endosomes tagged with Phy-Rab11 in COS-7
cells expressing Kif1-PIF with or without PCB incubated either in
the dark or under red light for 30 min. (C) Distribution of recycling
endosomes tagged with Phy-Rab11 in U2OS cells expressing (color-less)
BICD-PIF with or without incubation of PCB either in the dark or under
red light for 30 min. (D,E) Quantification of manually scored Phy-Rab11
localization of experiments shown in (B) and (C), respectively. Numbers
in bars indicate  cells analyzed for each condition.
Scale bars are 20 μm. PhyB-PIF interaction is sensitive to a range of visible
wavelengths
and requires far-red illumination to dissociate. (A) Distribution
of recycling endosomes tagged with Phy-Rab11 in U2OS cells expressing
Kif1-PIF incubated with PCB either in the dark or under indicated
colored light for 30 min. (Red: 625 nm, Green: 530 nm, Blue: 470 nm,
all ∼20 μW/cm, Far-red: 740 nm, ∼400
μW/cm). (B) Quantification of manually scored Phy-Rab11
localization of experiments shown in (A). Numbers in bars indicate  cells analyzed for each condition. (C) Cumulative measurements
of Phy-Rab11 signal measured radially from the cell center to the
periphery for cells shown in (A). Intersection with horizontal gray
line indicates radius encompassing 90% of all Phy-Rab11 signal. Scale
bar is 20 μm. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_002.avi http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_003.avi Live-cell imaging
demonstrates photoswitch behavior of phytochrome-based
organelle repositioning. (A) Schematic representation of light exposure
during live-cell imaging experiments. Between each blue light exposure
for GFP imaging (at 5 s intervals), U2OS cells were illuminated with
pulses from 740 or 625 nm LEDs. (B) Recycling endosomes imaged before,
during and after dimerization of Phy-Rab11 with Kif1-PIF. Scale bar
is 30 μm. See also . (C–E)
Analysis of Phy-Rab11 localization over time during the experiment
shown in (B). (C) Measurements of fluorescence intensity in the perinuclear
region (black) and at the cell periphery (red) indicated in (B). (D)
Displacement expressed as the radius of the circle surrounding 80%
of the PhyB-Rab11 signal. (E) Frame-to-frame correlation (from 0 to
1) indicating motility of Phy-Rab11. (F) Schematic representation
of light exposure during live-cell imaging experiment as in (A). Note
that 5 cycles of alternating 740/625 nm illumination were carried
out. (G) Recycling endosomes imaged at the beginning and end of the
experiment shown in (F). See also . (H) Close-up on the region indicated in (G) showing Phy-Rab11 localization
before illumination and after each 625 nm illumination. Scale bar
is 15 μm. (I–K) Analysis of Phy-Rab11 localization over
time during the experiment shown in (F–H). (I) Measurements
of fluorescence intensity at the cell periphery. (J) Displacement
expressed as the radius of the circle surrounding 50% of the PhyB-Rab11
signal. (K) Frame-to-frame correlation (from 0 to 1) indicating motility
of Phy-Rab11. Blue lines indicate cell outlines, all times given in
min:s. Red boxes indicate 740 nm illumination, orange boxes indicate
625 nm illumination. For clarity red boxes indicating 740 nm illumination
are not shown in quantifications. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_004.avi http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_005.avi Local illumination with
patterns of red/far-red light allows spatial
control over organelle positioning. (A) Schematic representation of
light exposure during live-cell imaging experiment. After global illumination
with 740 nm light for 20 frames, a small area is illuminated with
625 nm light for 40 frames, followed by global 740 nm light to dissociate
all motors. Illuminations were interspersed with GFP imaging excitation
light every 5 s. Blue lines indicate cell outlines. Orange and red
boxes indicate 625 and 740 nm illumination, respectively. (B) Recycling
endosome localization in U2OS cells before and after local dimerization
to Kif1-PIF with 625 nm light in region indicated with orange dashed
box. See also . (C) Quantification
of peripheral Phy-Rab11 at 625 nm illuminated region (red) and control
region (black) as indicated in (B). (D) Schematic representation of
light exposure during live-cell imaging experiment. After global activation
with 625 nm light for 20 frames, a small area is illuminated with
740 nm light for 50 frames to locally dissociate motors. (E) Recycling
endosome localization during local dissociation of Phy-Rab11 from
Kif5-PIF as outlined in (D). Red dashed box indicates 750 nm illuminated
area. See also . (F) Zooms of regions
1 and 2 shown in (E). Colored arrowheads highlight position of the
same recycling endosomes in consecutive frames. Color of image border
indicates wavelength of local illumination. (G) Frame-to-frame correlation
(from 0 to 1) indicating motility of Phy-Rab11 in region 3 shown in
(E). (H) Average speed of individual recycling endosomes in the area
illuminated with 740 nm light (red dashes in (E)). (I) Trajectories
of recycling endosomes inside, outside or on the border of locally
deactivated area. Trajectories are shown in black during initial global
740 nm illumination (frame 1–10), orange during global 625
nm illumination (frames 11–30) and red during local 740 nm
illumination (frames 31–80). Note that these time intervals
are not equally long. (J) Trajectories of recycling endosomes locally
activated using the blue-light sensitive TULIP system in Cos7 cells
and remaining mobile in the nonilluminated area. Scale bars are 30
μm. Combining blue-light sensitive and red-light sensitive systems
for orthogonal control of the transport of different organelles. (A)
Recycling endosome localization before, directly after and 30 min
after global association of LOV-coupled Rab11 with Kif5-ePDZb1 in
COS-7 cells. Blue lines indicate cell outlines. (B) Recycling endosome
before, directly after and 30 min after global association of Phy-Rab11
with Kif17-PIF in Cos-7 cells. Excitation and illumination light was
paused for 30 min following activation of PhyB-PIF dimerization to
prevent reassociation by the excitation light. (C) Schematic illustrating
the different illumination wavelengths used for excitation and activation
required to combined two-color imaging with both the PhyB-PIF system
and the TULIP system. (D,E) Localization of recycling endosomes (D)
and peroxisomes (E) in a single COS-7 cell, before activation of either
the TULIP or Phytochrome B systems (left panels), after induced dimerization
of PhyB-Venus-Rab11 with BICD-PIF6 (middle panels), and after subsequent
induced dimerization of PEX-mRFP-LOV with Kif1A-ePDZb1 (right panels).
Blue lines indicate cell outlines, all times given in min:s. Scale
bar: 10 μm. (F) Measurements of fluorescence intensity of PhyB-Rab11
(black) near the microtubule organizing center (red region in D) and
of PEX-LOV (white) in the perinuclear region (red region in E), showing
orthogonal activation of the TULIP and PhyB-PIF systems in a single
cell. Scale bars: 10 μm. The following constructs have been described:
PEX3-mRFP-LOVpep, FRB-TagBFP-LOVpep, FKBP-tagRFPt-Rab11, Kif1A(1–383)-GFP-ePDZb1,
Kif5B(1–807)-GFP-ePDZb1 and Kif17md-GFP-FRB. To produce pβ-actin Kif1A-, Kif5B-, Kif17-,
and BICDN-mCherry-PIF6, previously characterized motor-domain fusion
proteins were digested with NotI and SalI and ligated
with PCR amplified mCherry-PIF6 (5′-TTTTGTCGACTATGGTGAGCAAGGGCGAG-3′
and 5′-TTTGCGGCCGCTTAGTCAACATGTTTATTGCTTTCCAACATGT-3′),
generated from pSV40-mYFP-PIF6APB (addgene
plasmid 22276) (5′-TTTAGGCGCGCCTATGATGTTCTTACCAACCGATTATTGTT-3′
and 5′-ATTTGTCGACTTAGTCAACATGTTTATTGCTTTCCAACATGT-3′). PhyB(1–908)-eGFP-GS-Rab11 was generated from PCR amplified
eGFP-Rab11 containing a 29 amino acid long GS linker separated by
NheI and SnaBI sites (5′-TTTGAATTCGGTGGCGGGGGCAG-3′
and 5′-TTTGCGGCCGCTTAGATGTTCTGACAGCACTGCACC-3′)
inserted into PhyB-mCHERRY-CAAX (addgene
plasmid 22282) using EcoRI and NotI sites. PhyB(1–908)-Venus-GS-Rab11
was generated from PCR amplified Venus flanked by EcoRI and NheI sites
(5′-AGCGAATTCGGTGGCGGGGGGAGCGGGGGTGGGAGTAAGCTTGTGAGCAAGGGCGAGGAG-3′
and 5-′AACGGCTAGCCTTGTACAGCTCGTCCATGCCG-3′)
inserted into PhyB(1–908)-eGFP-GS-Rab11. Similarly, PHYB(1–650)-eGFP-GS-Rab11
was generated by Gibson
cloning of PCR amplified eGFP-Rab11 (5′-GTTAGGTTCTAGAGGTGGCGGGGGCA-3′
and 5′-CTCGAGAAGTACTAGTTTAGATGTTCTGACAGCACTGCACCT-3′)
and PhyB (5′-AAGCTTGCCACCATGGTTTCCGGAGTCGGG-3′
and 5′- CCTCTAGAACCTAACTCATCAATCCCCTGTTCC-3′)
into NcoI and BcuI sites of pβ-actin. PCR amplified human PEX26
(246–305) with NheI/NotI sites (5′-TTTGCTAGCACGCACTTCTTTTCTCTGCCC-3′
and 5′-GCGGCCGCTTCAGTCATG-3′) or with
SnaBI sites (5′-ATGCTACGTAACGCACTTCTTTTCTCTGCCC-3′
and 5′-ATGCTACGTATCAGTCATGGATGCGGAGCT-3′)
was ligated into PhyB(1–908)-eGFP-GS-Rab11 to generate PhyB(1–908)-eGFP-PEX26
or PhyB(1–650)-eGFP-GS-Rab11 to generate PhyB(1–650)-eGFP-GS-PEX26,
respectively. Cell Culture and Fluorescence Microscopy http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00333/suppl_file/sb6b00333_si_001.pdf African green
monkey kidney fibroblast-like COS-7 (B, J, , ) and human bone osteosarcoma
U2OS (C, , , , ) cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal
calf serum and penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C in 5% CO. For fixed experiments, cells were seeded on glass
coverslips and transfected with 1.8 μg plasmid DNA (1:2 ratio
cargo:motor) and polyethylenimine (PEI) (1:3) for 16–24 h prior
to fixation. Cells were incubated with 15 μM phycocyanobilin
(PCB, Frontier Scientific, batch FSI15–4496) for 1 h and exposed
with light illumination schemes described below, followed by fixation
with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature in the dark,
washing with PBS and mounting on glass slides using Vectashield or
Mowiol. Epifluorescence images were acquired using a 40× (Plan
Fluor, NA 1.3, Nikon) or 100× (Plan Apo Lambda, NA 1.45, Nikon)
oil-immersion objective on a Nikon Eclipse Ni upright fluorescence
microscope equipped with a Coolsnap HQ2 CCD camera (Photometrics),
a mercury lamp (Osram) and emission filters ET-GFP (49002), ET-mCherry
(49008) (both Chroma) and controlled with NIS software (Nikon). For
live cell imaging, cells were transfected with Fugene6 (Promega) and
imaged 16–24 h later after incubation with 15 μm PCB
for at least 1 h in fresh culture medium at 37 °C and 5% CO. For live-cell imaging of Rab11 using the TULIP system, 100
nM of rapalog (AP21967, Ariad Pharmaceuticals) was added at least
20 min prior to imaging in order to couple FRB-LOV to FKBP-Rab11.
Cells were imaged with a 40× (Plan Fluor, NA 1.3, Nikon) oil-immersion
objective on a Nikon Ti inverted microscope equipped with a sample
incubator (Tokai-Hit), a mercury lamp (Osram), ET-GFP (49002), ET-mCherry
(49008) and ET 514 nm Laser Bandpass (49905) filter cubes (all Chroma)
and a Coolsnap HQ2 CCD camera (Photometrics), controlled with μManager
1.4 software. For fixed experiments,
transfected
cells were incubated in the dark or in red, blue or green light using
either a custom array of RGB-LEDs (625 nm, 530 nm, 470 nm, ∼20
μW/cm), custom far-red LEDs (740 nm, ∼400
μW/cm) or a commercial color adjustable LED light
(∼40 μW/cm, LivingColors 70019, Philips)
for 30 min. For live-cell imaging using the Phytochrome B system,
cells were illuminated with >725 nm light prior to acquisition
using
the halogen transmission light path and a 725 cut-on colored glass
filter (FSQ-RG9, Newport) at ∼10 mW/cm on the specimen.
To illuminate the cells during acquisition we used a Polygon 2000
digital mirror device (DMD) equipped with 470, 625, and 740 nm LEDs
(all Mightex) that exposed ROIs between imaging frames with up to
300 mW/cm, 70 mW/cm and 30 mW/cm, respectively (powers measured at the back focal plane and converted
to intensity using the projected area of the DMD). Light exposure
was synchronized with camera frames using camera-evoked TTL triggers.
For global illumination of GFP blue excitation light pulses for GFP
imaging (200 ms) were interspersed with 4.5 s of 625 or 740 nm light
pulses at 10% and 100% of maximal LED power, respectively. To allow
for spontaneous relaxation of activated PhyB following global activation
of PhyB-PIF dimerization, the entire illumination and excitation scheme
was paused for 30 min to prevent reactivation of PhyB-PIF dimerization
by blue excitation light pulses. For local activation of PhyB-PIF
dimerization, after each GFP excitation,
the activation ROI was illuminated with 2% 625 nm LED power for 500
ms followed by a 3.8 s exposure of the surrounding inactivation area
with 100% 740 nm LED power. To locally dissociate PhyB-PIF dimers,
a ROI was illuminated with 100% 740 nm LED power for 3.8 s, after
illuminating the remainder of the cell with 2% 625 nm LED power for
500 ms to keep it activated between excitation pulses. It is important
to note that without far-red illumination between imaging excitations,
PhyB will be activated by the light required to image eGFP. For global activation of LOV-ePDZ dimerization, light pulses for
tagRFP imaging (50 ms) were interspersed with 29 s of 470 nm light
pulses at 10% maximal LED power. For local activation of LOV-ePDZ
dimerization, the activation ROI was illuminated with 10% 470 nm LED
power for 4.5 s, after each excitation of tagRFP. For orthogonal
control optogenetic control of LOV-ePDZ and PhyB-PIF
dimerization in the same cell, a light exposure scheme was preprogrammed
on the digital mirror device to run independently of camera shutters
and manually initiated to run synchronously with excitation light
pulses and camera frames with the following effect: excitation light
pulses for Venus imaging (514 bandpass filter set; 200 ms) and mRFP
imaging (mCherry filter set; 50 ms), acquired at a 5 s interval, were
interspersed with three different illumination regimes for sequential
activation of PhyB-PIF and LOV-ePDZ dimerization. In the first regime,
in which both systems remain inactive, cells were illuminated with
100% 740 nm LED power for 2.2 s. In the second regime, which induced
the dimerization of PhyB-PIF but not of LOV-ePDZ, cells were illuminated
with 50% 625 nm LED power for 0.5 s. In the third regime, which induced
the dimerization of LOV-ePDZ, but not of PhyB-PIF, cells were illuminated
with 50% 470 nm LED power for 0.5 s and subsequently illuminated with
100% 740 nm LED power for 2.2 s. Analysis of Endosome Distribution Analyses of acquired
images were performed with FIJI software and resulting graphs were
plotted with Graphpad Prism 5. To quantify the effect of organelle
repositioning in fixed cell experiments, organelle localization in
cells of at least 2 coverslips were categorized as perinuclear enriched,
evenly spread throughout the cytoplasm or clearly enriched at the
cell periphery (see ). The number of cells () is shown for each
experiment. To quantify the efficiency of organelle repositioning
in response to illumination with different wavelengths, we quantified
the cumulative signal of thresholded (top 8% of signal) Phy-Rab11
measured along radial ROIs from the center to the periphery of the
cell relative to the sum of all signal measured. The intercept of
the resulting curve with  = 0.9 indicated the radius
of a circle surrounding 90% of all organelles. To quantify peripheral
organelle enrichments over time in live cell experiments, fluorescence
intensity relative to the average of the first 10 imaging frames (baseline
before induction of dimerization) was plotted as measured in background
subtracted (rolling ball radius of 20 px) ROIs located as indicated.
Further measures of organelle motility and repositioning (correlation
index, tracking and displacement measures) were done as described
previously..