Since the
first restriction-enzyme-based
cloning was performed in the early 1980’s, the techniques used for molecular cloning have made significant
advancements. Restriction enzymes were the method of choice for molecular
cloning for decades. However, restriction cloning requires the presence
or absence of enzyme recognition sites, thereby complicating the design
of DNA constructs and limiting high-throughput assembly. These problems
were solved with the invention of sequence- and ligation-independent
cloning (SLIC). The SLIC method was the
first sequence-independent cloning method reported. SLIC allows for
the easy generation of scarless constructs and the assembly of DNA
fragments independent of restriction sites. It is based on the introduction
of overlaps between the vector and insert by PCR. These overlaps are
processed to single-stranded overhangs by the 3′ to 5′
exonuclease activity of T4 polymerase and are annealed with their
homologue partner strand. The annealed construct is transformed into
bacteria, which subsequently ligate the construct. One drawback of
this technique is that the exonuclease activity is difficult to control
and tends to produce longer single-stranded regions than required.
As result, single-stranded gaps, which are inefficiently repaired
by the host, are introduced in the final construct, thus impairing
cloning efficiency. Gibson et al. improved the SLIC method further
and created a very
popular cloning method. The main difference
in the new method is the use of an enzyme mix containing an exonuclease
to produce single-stranded ends, a high-fidelity polymerase to fill
in single-stranded gaps, and a heat-stable ligase to ligate the final
constructs. This method, called one-step isothermal assembly, can
be used to clone double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) fragments seamlessly,
even when they are hundreds of kilobases long, or to synthesize short sequences (200–450 bp) from single-stranded
oligonucleotides. We hypothesized that
it must be possible to combine both applications of the one-step isothermal
assembly and thereby simplify existing cloning workflows even further. Currently, all sequence-independent cloning methods available for  need homologous overlaps for the
assembly of the fragments, which are usually introduced by primers
in a PCR reaction. This can be challenging in cases where PCR amplification
and subsequent sequencing is problematic. In addition, it requires
a new PCR reaction for each overlap needed during subcloning, increasing
the number of steps involved in sample preparation. Herein, we show
that it is possible to synthesize these overlaps  from oligonucleotides during the cloning assembly. The  synthesis of overlaps suppresses the need for redundant
PCRs each time a DNA fragment is subcloned into a new vector. We further
show that it is simultaneously possible to assemble  sequences from oligonucleotides and to clone long DNA fragments.
This approach allows the effortless and flexible introduction of modified
DNA stretches from 30–255 bp. These modifications can be used
to enhance protein expression or to characterize a protein of interest
by the combination of customized ribosomal binding sites (RBS), affinity
tags, antibody tags, secretion signals, localization signals, and
promoters. Simultaneous Assembling of One dsDNA Fragment
and the  Synthesis of an Additional Sequence Our
initial task was to assemble a set of constructs in which a gene of
interest was fused to a target sequence at the beginning of the gene.
However, the size of the fusion (3–90 bp) made it difficult
to introduce these sequences in a primer for PCR amplification. Therefore,
we tested whether the simultaneous  synthesis
of a sequence and assembly of the gene of interest is possible with
one-step isothermal assembly. In the state of the
art, these methods can be used either to assemble multiple overlapping
dsDNA molecules or, alternatively, to synthesize  DNA molecules from overlapping oligonucleotides. The combination
of both in a one-step reaction has not yet been described. Supporting Information Figure 1 We
tested this approach by cloning 47 constructs combining six different
promoters, four different N-terminal fusions, and five genes (). Of the 120
theoretically possible constructs, we chose 47 for cloning. The library
of 47 constructs was assembled in a miniTn4001-Puro-1 backbone (GenBank
accession no. KC816623). The constructs consisted of a PCR insert (dsDNA
between 500 and 2700 bp) and a  sequence (between
30 and 255 bp). These  sequences were built
from combinations of two to eight oligonucleotides of around 60 bp
with an overlap of 20 bp. For the complete experiment, 77 oligonucleotides
were used (). The  sequence contained the promoter and
a short sequence that should be fused to the PCR insert. In the first
round of cloning, we obtained 29 out of 47 constructs with the correct
sequence. After two more rounds of transformation and screening, we
obtained 42 out of 47 constructs (). We reused the initial assembly reaction for the second
and third rounds of transformation and colony screening. Two out of
four constructs with seven oligonucleotides were not obtained with
the correct sequence, even though both constructs with eight oligonucleotides
were obtained with the correct sequence. We observed background in
the transformation, partly because of recircularization of the vector
(32% of all colonies) as well as the generation of an unknown product
during the assembly process (29% of all colonies). The unknown product
is a consequence of the instability of the vector backbone (minitransposon
vector) and was also detected during conventional cloning using this
vector. Nonetheless, this strategy enabled a convenient one-pot assembly
of constructs that would be difficult to prepare in any other way.
We evaluated colony PCR hits and error rates in detail for the constructs
obtained in the third round of the transformation (Table ). To increase transformation efficiencies for these
constructs, the assembly reaction mixtures were purified by MinElute
columns before transformation. Twelve colonies for each construct
were screened, with a hit rate of 63% in the colony PCR. However,
the overall hit rate was only 40.5%, partially because of the problematic
backbone. For each construct, we selected four colonies that showed
a hit in the colony PCR, and we sequenced the construct. On average,
we obtained a correct sequence for 50% of the clones. However, the
individual rates for each construct varied from 25 to 100% of correct
sequences. As a general trend, longer synthesized stretches contained
more errors. This is not surprising because the synthesis of oligonucleotides
is error-prone and the errors accumulate with an increasing number
of oligonucleotides used for a construct. The errors observed were
14 insertions, five mutations, and two deletions; all were located
in the part synthesized by oligonucleotides. In the screening of the
complete library, only one truncation and one mutation were detected
in the parts introduced as dsDNA PCR products. Detailed Statistics of Nine Constructs
from Assembling One dsDNA Insert and De Novo Synthesis of a Sequence
Between 30–255 bp sequencing result
mutated/failed/correct All
nine constructs were obtained
in the last round of transformation. The identifiers of the constructs
are given in the first column (refer to ). The percentage of positive clones from
12 colonies when screened by PCR is given in column two. The result
from four positive clones sent to sequencing is given in the third
column. Where indicated, failed corresponds to no sequencing result.
The DNA synthesis length column specifies the length of sequence synthesized
by oligonucleotides in the corresponding construct. The errors total
column indicates the number of all errors found per construct, including
multiple errors in one construct. The next column reports the error
rate per synthesized base pair: the dsDNA parts were not counted towards
this error rate. The last column reports the type of errors that were
found. The bottom row reports the average for columns 2, 4, and 7
as well as the sum for all other columns. Generation of Overlaps from Oligonucleotides After observing that sequence synthesis from oligonucleotides and
DNA assembly can be done simultaneously using a one-step isothermal
assembly master mix, we investigated whether the overlaps needed for
assembly could be added simultaneously . To synthesize the overlaps necessary for the enzymatic assembly , we added four different oligonucleotides to the
enzymatic assembly mix. Each oligonucleotide overlaps 20 bp with the
insert (the  gene including the promoter, PCR
amplified from pJET 1.2, GenBank accession no. EF694056.1,
was used as template) and 20 bp with the linearized vector pETM14 (Figure a) (GenBank accession
no. KC816624). After transforming Top 10  competent cells with 1 μL of the assembly mix, 748 positive
colonies were obtained on average. We plated transformed cells
on agar plates containing either ampicillin
or kanamycin as the selective agent. This allowed us to distinguish
between background colonies and colonies containing our insert on
a global scale without the need to use colony PCR. We observed that
two oligonucleotides can be sufficient for the assembly (Figure c), and it appears that oligonucleotide 2 is essential
for assembly, whereas oligonucleotides 3 and 4 are exchangeable. We
have no explanation for this, and we observed different dependencies
on other occasions (data not shown). We hypothesize that properties
of the individual oligonucleotide sequence, synthesis, or preparations
are the determining factor. Therefore, we recommend using as a standard
procedure all four stitching oligonucleotides because this provides
the most robust condition for the successful assembly of the construct.
The optimal concentration of oligonucleotides in the final master
mix was around 45 nM (Figure b). Very high
concentrations of oligonucleotides (>150 nM) inhibited the DNA
assembly
step as well as reduced the efficiency of the transformation. Overall,
we demonstrated that it is possible to  synthesize
overlaps in a one-step isothermal assembly reaction, and we found
robust parameters for this assembly. This facilitates the high-throughput
cloning of the same fragment into many nonstandard vectors by exchanging
only the stitching oligonucleotides. We observed that isothermal
assembly mixtures containing only the
linearized vector yielded significant amounts of colonies, whereas
the linearized vector without isothermal assembly or in the absence
of Taq ligase yielded no colonies. We obtained the same results with
a commercial version of the isothermal assembly mixture obtained from
NEB in combination with a commercial linearized vector containing
a death gene (pJET 1.2). The recircularized assembly products are
truncated versions of the original vector and not a simple religation
of the linearized vector. This is known to many in the field. It poses
no problem in standard cloning applications because the rate of positive
clones in a normal assembly is close to 90%. The background is observed
only when the assembly fails or in the negative control of the vector.
This is a drawback when assembly conditions have to be optimized against
a negative control. Therefore, we recommend optimizing the assembly
conditions using an antibiotic resistance gene as the insert or planning
a colony-screening scheme with sufficient throughput. (a) Schematic representation
of the oligonucleotides used for the  generation
of overlaps. The oligonucleotides are
shown with respect to the assembled dsDNA fragments. The bar indicates
the size of the oligonucleotides (they are not to scale with the overlapping
regions). (b) Effect of oligonucleotide concentration on the number
of colonies obtained after transformation as well as the percentage
of positive colonies obtained (c) Number of colonies obtained depending
on different combinations of oligonucleotides as well as the percentage
of positive colonies. The percentage of positive colonies was determined
by dividing the colony count on a plate with ampicillin (AMP) by the
colony count on a plate with kanamycin (KAN). The oligonucleotide
numbers correspond to those in panel a. Assembly of Two Inserts by  Generation
of Overlaps and  Assembly of a Promoter and
RBS (156 bp) After demonstrating that the  synthesis of overlaps from oligonucleotides is possible and that
it can be combined with the assembly of dsDNA fragments, we tested
whether it is possible to combine the two methods and clone multiple
fragments (Figure ). For this, we chose to
clone the importin-α (1.6 kb) and importin-β (2.6 kb)
genes in the pCDF-Duet vector while building a 156 bp spacer in between
them composed of a T7 promoter and modified RBS (GenBank accession
no. KC816625). To achieve this, three different oligonucleotide concentrations
were tested in the final master mix: 550, 55, and 5.5 nM. As negative
controls, we used a one-step isothermal assembly master mix without
Taq ligase and one complete master mix missing the oligonucleotides
(). We screened
12 colonies of the assembly mix with 55 nM oligonucleotides for the
presence of both inserts, and we found eight colonies with a PCR signal
for importin-α and four colonies for importin-β. Three
of the colonies were positive for both inserts. The plasmid DNAs of
the double-positive clones were purified, and no errors were detected
after sequencing. We obtained 26 colonies in the assembly of the negative control
without oligonucleotides and 10 in the negative control without ligase.
Sequencing results showed that the background is the result of a misprimed
product of the PCR linearization of the backbone. This product produced
two homologous ends that were able to combine during the reaction.
Such byproducts can be easily eliminated by PCR screening and do not
affect the overall convenience of this method. We have shown
that the synthesis of sequences from single-stranded
oligonucleotides can be combined with the assembly of DNA fragments
into a vector. We also demonstrated that the overlaps needed for DNA
assembly can be synthesized  during the assembly.
By combining these two approaches, we could assemble, in a one-step
reaction, two genes flanking a  built-up sequence. This technique is also advantageous for individual constructs when  sequences have to be constructed that are too large
to be introduced in a primer. For example, with our technique, a secretion
signal of 30 amino acids or more can be easily synthesized in a one-step
cloning reaction. By exchanging only individual oligonucleotides,
mutations can be introduced in the amino acid sequence to investigate
their effect on the phenotype. The  synthesis
of overlaps has multiple
applications. First, it can be used to subclone dsDNA fragments with
the versatility of one-step isothermal assembly cloning while omitting
the need for any PCR reaction. Another application is in the generation
of libraries for expression screening in which two genes need to be
cloned in many vectors while varying the order of the genes, the promoters,
and optimized RBS sites. The order of the genes can be easily changed
in the  assembly of the overlaps by exchanging
only the overlapping oligonucleotides. In the same way, a set of RBS
sites can be screened or new promoters can be tested. Compared to
a standard cloning, the advantages of this technique become greater
with increasing sample numbers because oligonucleotides can be reused
between constructs. The construction of combinatorial libraries using
the isothermal assembly mixture have been described earlier. However, this and other approaches depend on
common linker sequences between the assembled parts, which are unnecessary
in our approach. Unfortunately, we were not able to test our approach
for the simultaneous assembly of a library in a single reaction mixture
similar to that described by Ramon and Smith. We evaluated the error rates and location of errors for a
small
subset of the cloned library. The error rate per base pair for the
synthesized stretches is about 1 order of magnitude larger than the
error rate reported for the underlying technique by Gibson et al. Although we cannot directly explain this, it
is worth noting that the oligonucleotides used came from a different
vendor then in the original study (Sigma in our case and IDT in the
case of Gibson et al.). We have
generated a library of 42 fusion genes in single-step reactions
using a new approach on the basis of the one-step isothermal assembly
cloning technique. This avoids a large number of PCR amplifications
and multiple intermediate cloning steps. We show that sequences between
30 and 255 bp can be synthesized during the assembly of a vector with
a PCR fragment of the size range between 500 and 2700 bp. The design
and assembly of the constructs was very easy compared to other state-of-the-art
methods and is compatible with automation. Therefore, we anticipate
that this simple approach, when combined with rigorous screening methods,
can be easily implemented in many applications and could be widely
used in both molecular and synthetic biology. Schematic workflow and oligonucleotide design. (a) General
workflow.
dsDNA fragments and a linearized vector are obtained. Subsequently,
the fragments, the vector, and the oligonucleotides are added to the
one-step isothermal assembly master mix. (b) Distribution of the oligonucleotides
on the construct for the assembly of importin-α (1.6 kb) and
importin-β (2.6 kb) genes into the pCDF-Duet vector. A 156 bp
spacer was synthesized in between them, which was composed of a T7
promoter and a modified RBS. The overlap between the individual oligonucleotides
and the vector and DNA fragments is 20 bp. The vectors were linearized
by inverted PCR or with a restriction enzyme (EcoRV-HF, New England
Biolabs). PCR fragments were amplified using either Phusion (Finnzymes)
or Kod (Merck Millipore) high-fidelity polymerases. A list of all
primers used to generate PCR fragments and the amplified sequences
can be found in the . Vector and inserts were purified using the Qiagen MinElute Kit
or Gel Purification Kit following the instructions of the manufacturer. Supporting Information Tables 1, 2, and 3 All oligonucleotide sequences and their combinations as well as
the vectors used in this study are summarized in . The oligonucleotides
were ordered from Sigma as desalted (desalt) or reverse-phase purified
(RP). The pJET 1.2 vector was obtained as part of the CloneJET PCR
Cloning Kit (Thermo Scientific no. K1231) Oligonucleotide Design
for De Novo Synthesis All oligonucleotides
were designed to be around 60 bp, with a 20 bp overlap to the next
oligonucleotide, a dsDNA fragment, or the vector. Properties like
melting temperature or secondary structure were ignored for the design
process, as described earlier. If the
length of the synthesized stretch made it necessary, then individual
oligonucleotides were designed shorter or longer than 60bp, and the
overlapping region was extended. A list of all oligonucleotides can
be found in . The isothermal assembly mixture was either
prepared in house as previously described or purchased from New England Biolabs (no. E2611S). The assemblies
were performed using a modified version of the protocols previously
described or using the manual for the Gibson Assembly Master Mix available
at neb.com. Briefly, oligonucleotides were mixed in
water in equimolar ratios from a 100 μM stock. Then, the mixture
was heated at 95 °C for 5 min and slowly cooled to 4 °C
with a ramp of 0.1 °C/s. The oligonucleotide mixture was diluted
to a concentration of 900 nM, and 1 μL was added to a master
mix for isothermal assembly, resulting in a final concentration of
45 nM of each oligonucleotide. The PCR fragments were added
either in equimolar amounts or as a 2-fold excess of the vector (50–100
ng). Unless otherwise stated, stitching oligonucleotides were also
added to a concentration of 45 nM, in a final volume of 20 μL,
as previously described. The stitching oligonucleotides
were not annealed before assembly. In contrast to the original protocol,
the isothermal assembling was performed at 45 °C for 2 h instead
of 50 °C and 1 h. This modification is based on previous observations
reported that an incubation at 45 °C for 1 h increases the efficiency
of the assembly compared to 50 °C and that an incubation at for
2 h at 50 °C also yields more clones than that at 1 h and 50
°C. We confirmed the assumption that
2 h at 45 °C are superior to 1 h or 2 h at 50 °C by a pilot
experiment (data not shown). The combinations of oligonucleotides
and PCR fragments for each construct are listed in . The assemblies for thegeneration of overlaps from oligonucleotides were
performed in triplicate. Top 10
(Life Technologies)
or DH5α  cells made competent
with Z-Competent Kit (Zymo Research) were used for the transformations
following the instructions of the manufacturer. The first transformation
round for assembling one double-stranded insert and the de novo synthesis
of a sequence between 30–255 bp was done with DH5 cells in
combination with the Z-Competent Kit. The manufacturer gives a transformation
efficiency for these cells of 10–10 transformants/μg of plasmid DNA. The second round was performed
with Top 10 cells that have a transformation efficiency of 10 transformants/μg of plasmid DNA. In the third round,
Top 10 cells were also used, but the assembly reaction mixture was
purified by a MinElute column (Qiagen) before transformation, and
5 μl of the elution was used for transformation. The removal
of PEG8000 and various proteins increases the yields of colonies significantly. The transformations for all other described experiments were done
by adding 1 μL of the assembly master mix to Top 10 cells following
the instruction of the manufacturer. The transformation for the  generation of overhangs experiments were split in
half after recovery in SOC medium (half plated on ampicillin- and
the other half on kanamycin-containing plates). Otherwise, selection
on LB plates was performed with the antibiotic required by the vector. Screening for Full-Length Inserts Assembled from Oligonucleotides
and Nonoverlapping dsDNA Fragments To screen for the successful
assembly of our constructs, we performed colony PCR. In the case of
the fusion library, we picked eight colonies from each transformation
and screened using the primers Fwd Screen Puro and Rev Screen Puro.
For each positive construct, four colonies were picked and prepared
using the Millipore Montage Plasmid Miniprep HTS 96 Kit. If fewer
than four colonies were positive in colony PCR, new unscreened colonies
were selected, and the plasmid was purified. All purified plasmids
were sequenced by Sanger sequencing (GATC, Germany). The assembly
in the pCDF_Duet Vector was screened by PCR with the primers used
to generate the inserts. Colonies giving a positive signal for the
inserts were purified using a Qiagen Miniprep Kit and sent for sequencing.
All primer sequences used for screening are listed in . The constructs
were designed using the Gene Designer software and the CLC Main workbench..