Synthetic biology is a nascent interdisciplinary research field that leverages
rational design approaches based on engineering principles. Synthetic biology distinguishes
itself from traditional genetic engineering in several ways: (1) synthetic biology
takes advantage of de novo DNA synthesis technologies, rather than relying on the
existing natural templates; (2) synthetic biologists use standardized genetic parts
not only to facilitate the assembly of novel sequences, but also to more predictably
construct the biological system based on the characterization of individual
parts;
and (3) similar to other engineering disciplines, computer-assisted designers (CADs)
and mathematical modeling are instrumental in synthetic biology to effectively help
synthetic biologists navigate the design space. Although synthetic biology is still in an early stage, several breakthroughs in the
past decade have already demonstrated its great potential for society; for instance,
Keasling’s group used a synthetic biology approach to engineer the baker’s yeast
 to produce artemisinin, an important
antimalarial drug. Lu and Collins engineered bacteriophage for an antibiotic
therapy and, more recently, also developed a paper-based cell-free
methodology to rapidly detect Ebola viruses. The enabling technology for synthetic biology is the development of a suite of
advanced DNA synthesis and assembly methods, such as Golden Gate assembly, Gibson
assembly, circular polymerase extension cloning (CPEC),
transformation-assisted recombination (TAR) cloning, and PaperClip
assembly (for a comprehensive review on DNA assembly methods, refer to
Ellis et al.). Collectively, these technologies open up the possibility to
redesign and resynthesize DNA at the genome scale. Poliovirus cDNA was synthesized
without a natural template in 2002 by Cello et al. Itaya’s group pioneered the
combination of two genomes in one cell in vivo. The J. Craig Venter Institute
chemically resynthesized a bacterial genome and developed the genome
transplantation technology to reboot the cell with the synthetic bacterial
genome. Together with several other groups across the world, our group
is part of the international synthetic yeast consortium (), which aims to redesign and resynthesize the
world’s first eukaryotic genome. We recently reported the completion of the first
synthetic yeast chromosome arm and the first fully synthetic
eukaryotic chromosome. As a safety measurement and responsible innovation in
synthetic biology, efficient biocontainment technologies have been developed to
restrict the viability of engineered microbes to prevent the dual use of synthetic
biology technologies. Traditional liquid handling technology has enabled increased throughput of many Life
Sciences (Lowell, MA) protocols and assays by (1) increasing operational speeds, (2)
reducing working volumes (down to a microliter range), and (3) reducing the need for
a generally error-prone human handling, and ultimately contributed to substantial
workflow cost savings. Despite an already big “leap forward,” the demand for further
protocol miniaturization continues to increase, in particular in
ultra-high-throughput screening (uHTS). Traditional tips/nozzles-based
robotic platforms struggle to precisely dispense liquid droplets below the
microliter threshold. Pin tools can be used to transfer nanoliter to microliter
liquid from source plates to destination plates; however, because they are contact
based, the pin tools usually require washing and drying between transfers to avoid
cross-contamination. Also, the delivery volume of pin tools is difficult to control,
as it is due to a combination of many factors, such as the shape of the pin, the
diameter of the pin, the coating of the pin, and the speed of dipping and removing
of the pin. Finally, pin tools are usually made in 96, 384, and 1536 formats, which
limits their flexibility of usage, e.g., in setting up different reaction volumes in
the same plate. Another technology allowing reaction miniaturization is the
microfluidic chip technology. Kong and others have
successfully used microfluidic chips to synthesize DNA sequences up to 1
kb,
and Tewhey et al. used microfluidic chips to run 1.5 million PCRs in
parallel. The main disadvantage of the microfluidic chip approach is that
the master molds and the control layer need to be custom designed and fabricated for
different reactions; however, the de novo DNA synthesis using microfluidic chips is
very complementary with the miniaturized assembly methods described in this
paper. First described in 1927, the acoustic droplet ejection (ADE) phenomenon utilizes
acoustic energy to rapidly move low-volume nanoliter to picoliter droplets without
any physical contact. Before it reached the laboratory setting in the 2000s, the
drop-on-demand technology was first exploited in a number of other fields, including
the ink-jet printing industry. Today, Labcyte, Inc. (Sunnyvale, CA) is pioneering
the acoustic dispensing technology for Life Sciences, with its Echo series robotic
platforms being able to transfer multiple 2.5 or 25 nL droplets from the 384- and
1536-well sources to the various (inverted) destination plates. Unlike traditional
robotic liquid transfer methods, laboratory acoustic dispensing has been shown to be
highly precise at the nanoliter volume range (as demonstrated by its low
coefficients of variation), therefore enabling the desired further miniaturization
of current protocols and assays. The acoustic dispenser is flexible enough to set up
any-to-any configurations between the source plate and the destination plate, and
the reaction volumes can vary from well to well in the same reaction plate. Here, for the first time, we report yet another exciting acoustic dispensing
application: nanoliter-scale DNA assembly. The majority of assembly expenses are
enzymes, including DNA polymerases, Therefore, downscaling the reaction volume from
the microliter to the nanoliter scale while maintaining high assembly efficiency,
will make DNA synthesis and assembly more accessible to synthetic biologists. Conventional endpoint PCR is instrumental in making synthetic DNA. To test the
minimal volume of regular PCR using Echo, we set up PCRs of various volumes. The
plasmid HcKan_P vector (120 ng/µl) was used as the DNA template, and a pair of
primers YCp2214 and YCp2215 were designed to amplify a targeted DNA fragment of
1378 bp (; all primers used in this paper are listed in ). The GoTaq Green Master Mix (Promega, Madison, WI) was used
in the PCR. Five reaction volumes ranging from 50 to 1000 nL were set up (),
and each reaction was performed in four replicates. All PCRs were set up using
the following cycling conditions: preheat the PCR machine and then put in the
PCR plate, 2 min at 95 °C, 32 cycles of 10 s at 95 °C, 30 s at 50 °C and 2 min
at 72 °C, 7 min at 72 °C, and hold at 4° C. GoTaq Green Master Mix (35 µL) and
double-distilled water (ddHO; 30 µL) were added separately to source
plate 1, which was an Echo 384-well polypropylene plate (Labcyte). YCp2214 and
YCp2215 (10 µL each) and template DNA (10 µL) were added separately to source
plate 2, which was an Echo 384-well low-dead-volume plate (Labcyte). The
destination plate used in this paper was MicroAmp EnduraPlate (Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). PCR setup by Echo. ) A pair of primers was designed to
amplify a fragment of 1.3 kb, and PCRs of various volumes were set up by
the Echo machine. () Gel electrophoresis confirms that PCR
can work at the 250 nL scale. 10.1177_2211068215593754-table1 First described in 2009, the Gibson DNA assembly method belongs to a group of
overlap-directed DNA assembly techniques such as CPEC, SLiCE, and
SLIC assemblies. The Gibson assembly method is one of the most
used in synthetic biology, and it can assemble DNA sequences up to small genome
sizes from overlapping DNA fragments in an isothermal one-pot reaction. The
advantage of Gibson assembly is that it is sequence independent and generates
scarless final assembled DNA products. Typically, the Gibson assembly requires
about a 40 bp homologous region between two adjacent DNA fragments, and these
homologous regions are usually added to the fragments by a high-fidelity PCR.
Briefly, the assembly reaction takes place in a cocktail of enzymes (termed
Gibson master mix) at 50 °C for 60 min: (1) First, T5 exonulease chews back the
DNA in a 5′ to 3′ direction from the homologous terminal ends to reveal reverse
complementary single-stranded sequences between two adjacent fragments. (2)
While the 5′ to 3′ DNA digestion proceeds, a high-fidelity DNA polymerase fills
in the single-stranded DNA region. (3) Finally, Taq DNA ligase seals the nicked
DNA strands, which yields the final assembled product. Two pairs of primers (YCp2391 and YCp2392 for fragment 1, YCp2393 and YCp2394
for fragment 2) were designed to amplify two fragments with 40 bp end
homology from a red fluorescent protein (RFP)–containing plasmid pPC025,
thus allowing subsequent Gibson reassembly of the plasmid. The two
homologous junctions were placed within the ampicillin resistance gene and
the RFP open reading frame (ORF) to reduce the overall false positive rate
and to allow phenotypic screening for successful assembly isolates,
respectively. In contrast to Golden Gate assembly (see below), here RFP
serves as a positive screen for correct assemblies. PCR products were gel
purified using the QIAquick gel extraction kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). The
standard 15 µL Gibson assembly master mix was prepared as described in the
original Gibson assembly paper. Gibson master mix (40
µL) was added to source plate 1, which is an Echo 384 polypropylene plate
(Labcyte). Each DNA fragment (10 µL) was added to source plate 2, which is
an Echo 384 low-dead-volume plate (Labcyte). One-pot Gibson assembly was
incubated at 50 °C for 60 min in a preheated PCR thermal cycler (). 10.1177_2211068215593754-table2 The Golden Gate DNA assembly method utilizes a combination of a TypeIIS
restriction enzyme and a ligase to assemble the DNA fragments. TypeIIS
enzymes (e.g., BsaI and BsmBI enzymes) are endonucleases that cut outside their
recognition sites, creating 4 bp DNA overhangs. By carefully designing the 4 bp
overhangs, one can use the Golden Gate reaction to directionally assemble DNA
fragments. The Golden Gate DNA assembly reaction starts with a given TypeIIS
endonuclease DNA digestion, leaving behind staggered cuts in the backbone and
the fragment DNA. The design-imposed DNA complementarity allows annealing of the
resulting “sticky ends,” creating the desired plasmid construct. In the final
reaction step, the T4 DNA ligase repairs the nicks to complete the DNA
construction phase. Golden Gate Reaction Setup by Echo The HcKan_P plasmid (2.8 kb, diluted to 10 ng/µl) was used as the acceptor
vector. This plasmid carries a KanR selectable marker, along with a RFP
cassette flanked by a pair of outward-facing BsaI sites. We amplified the
promoter  (500 bp) directly from yeast BY4741 (MATa,
) genomic DNA with primers
YCp2395 and YCp2396 and added a pair of inward-facing BsaI sites to flank
the promoter part (). The PCR product was purified using a
PureLink PCR purification kit (Life Technologies) and diluted to 20 ng/µl.
The 4 bp overhangs were designed in such a way that the promoter can be
efficiently assembled into the acceptor vector. Bacteria carrying the
residual RFP plasmid will give a bright red pigment, which would facilitate
the visual identification of correct assembled clones (white colonies; see
). The Golden Gate master mix was made of 35 µL T4 ligase (2000 U/µl, New
England Biolabs, NEB), 35 µL BsaI-HF (NEB), 52.5 µL 10× T4 buffer (NEB), and
25 µL 200× BSA (NEB). Golden Gate assembly reactions were set up using the
following cycling conditions: 15 cycles of 5 min at 37 °C and 10 min at 16
°C, 5 min at 50 °C, 10 min at 80 °C, and hold at 4 °C. Five reaction volumes
arranging from 50 to 1000 nL were set up (), and each
reaction was performed in triplicate. A manual positive control reaction of
7.5 µL was also set up to confirm the fidelity of the reagents. Golden Gate
master mix (30 µL) was added to source plate 1, which is an Echo 384
polypropylene plate (Labcyte).  PCR product (10 µL)
and HcKan_P vector (10 µL) were added to source plate 2, which is an Echo
384 low-dead-volume plate (Labcyte). Gibson assembly reaction setup by Echo. () The pPC025
plasmid was split into two overlapping fragments at the middle of
the ampicillin resistance gene and the RFP ORF. Two fragments were
generated with 40 bp overlap at both ends and then assembled by the
Gibson assembly reaction. () Gel electrophoresis
confirming the successful PCR amplification of both fragments.
() Successful Gibson assembly product gives rise
to red bacterial colonies. The assembly efficiency was so high that
no background colonies (white) were observed. Negative control
reactions, which had only one fragment in the reactions, yielded no
colonies. () Sequencing verification of both assembly
junctions shows 100% assembly accuracy. ()
Cost-effectiveness and assembly efficiency comparison of different
reaction volumes for Gibson assembly. Golden Gate Assembly Reactions. 10.1177_2211068215593754-table3 super
Optimal Catabolite repression (SOC) As the assembly reactions set up by Echo were at the nanoliter scale, it is
difficult to take out the assembled DNA using pipets and transform them into
bacterial competent cells. Instead, bacterial competent cells were added to each
well containing an assembled product. Competent  (20 µL; MAX Efficiency DH5α, Life Technologies) was added to
each well of the reaction plate. The PCR plate was incubated on ice for 20 min
and then placed in a heat block at 42 °C for 45 s. The plate was placed back on
ice to incubate for 5 min, before adding 200 µL of room temperate  medium to each well. The plate
was incubated at 37 °C with shaking at 200 rpm for 1 h. A multichannel pipet was
used to slowly drip 40 µL of each transformation mixture onto an omnitray
containing selective solid agar medium (LB—Kan). Alternatively, 100 µL of
transformation mixture was plated on individual petri dishes with selective
solid agar medium (Golden Gate assembly, LB—Kan; Gibson assembly, LB—Amp).
Plates were incubated overnight at 37 °C until single colonies appeared. Gel electrophoresis was performed to analyze the PCR products (120 V, 30 min; 1%
w/v agarose in Tris-acetate-EDTA (TAE) buffer with 1× SYBR Safe DNA stain). Each
PCR product was first diluted with ddHO to a final volume of 5 µL
when the PCR volume was smaller than 5 µL. A BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Life Technologies) was used to
verify the DNA assembly clones according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and
the Sanger sequencing reactions were carried out by Edinburgh Genomics. We used the Echo machine to set up PCRs in total volumes ranging from 50 nL to 1 µL
( and
). Starting from 250 nL, a band of the correct size could be detected
in the gel electrophoresis. Because we diluted the PCR product to 5 µL in order to
run the gel electrophoresis, it is possible that PCRs at 50 nL scale were
successful, but the gel electrophoresis was not sensitive enough to detect the
signal. Alternatively, it would be possible to use the Caliper Labchip GX instrument
that can detect DNA concentrations as low as 5 ng/µL. Downsizing the PCR from 50 µL
or higher to 250 nL already effectively cuts the reagent cost by 200-fold.
Miniaturized PCR is ideal for diagnostic purposes such as fast genotyping and
colony-screening PCR, but it is less suitable for applications requiring use of the
PCR product for downstream procedures, such as cloning, because the yield of
double-stranded DNA may not be sufficient. Gibson assembly worked extremely well in this experiment. Correct assembly was
observed from as low as the 250 nL reaction volumes, and at 500 and 1000 nL the
assembly efficiencies are comparable with or better than the manual control of the
20 µL reaction, but with a significant standard deviation. This allows us to cut the
reagent cost by 20-fold or more. Even more encouraging, we observed no background
()
and 100% correct assembly through Sanger sequencing across the assembly junctions
(six red colonies were sequenced; ), and this will be highly beneficial for future
automation plans, as it will greatly reduce the colony screening effort. With Golden Gate assembly, we successfully assembled DNA at a 50 nL reaction volume
(typically 15 µL reactions when performed manually), and at the 250 and 500 nL
scales the assembly efficiencies are higher than those of the manual control. This
leads to at least a 30-fold reduction in reagent use when performing Golden Gate
reactions using Echo. We did observe vector background in the assembly (red
colonies, as shown in ). There are several ways we can overcome this problem.
First, instead of using RFP for screening, we can use the toxic ccdB gene, which
cannot give rise to background colonies in a nonpermissive transformation host.
Second, we can add a higher concentration of the BsaI enzyme in the Golden Gate
master mix to further digest the residual acceptor vector. Finally, we may be able
to reduce the background by extending the BsaI digestion step in the incubation. With further optimization, it should be possible to downsize the reaction volume even
further. For instance, in this paper, individual components were shot off to the
destination well one by one (in the case of 50 nL PCRs, only 1 droplet of primer was
shot), and it is possible that some components were not sent into the reaction pool
due to slight misalignment of the acoustic dispenser, meaning the reactants simply
didn’t mix. In this case, it would be of advantage to premix as many components as
possible and then shoot more droplets altogether. We also suggest dispensing the
master mix using a bulk dispenser or liquid handler, so that the destination well
has a larger liquid surface to uptake the incoming droplet and minimize chances for
the droplets hitting the well wall. It is always a good practice to centrifuge the
PCR plate when appropriate before putting it into the PCR thermal cycler to start
the reaction. To prevent the nanoliter droplet from evaporating before the chemical
reaction starts, we always preheat the PCR machine before putting in the reaction
plate. Finally, it is more economical to use low-dead-volume plates as the source
plate for expensive reagents such as enzymes and polymerases. In the world of laboratory automation, efficiency and robustness are as important as
cost saving. With this in mind, we overlaid the number of correct assemblies
(efficiency) with standard deviation (robustness) in the same plot with the cost of
reactions for the Gibson assembly () and the Golden Gate assembly (). The
intersections of the two curves indicate the “sweet spots” for choosing desired
reaction volumes, which are of high efficiency, low standard deviation, and
relatively low cost. It should be noted that our cost calculation did not take into
account the dead volume of reagents, and logically it can be assumed that the
dead-volume cost per reaction would decrease as more reactions are set up by Echo in
one experiment. Whenever possible, low-dead-volume plates should be used for
expensive reagents to save cost. Conversely, we did not include the tip cost in the
manual control experiments, which increase substantially when the number of
reactions is scaled up. Continuously monitoring DNA assembly efficiency along with
the assembly cost is critical to successful operation of a large DNA synthesis and
assembly automation facility, such as the UK DNA foundries. The acoustic dispensing has great potential in automating other molecular biology
operations. We also used the Echo to purify single colonies from bacterial and yeast
cultures, which is traditionally challenging to automate. As Echo is capable of
dispensing nanoliter droplets with high precision, it is also ideal for generating
high-density assembly libraries through combinatorial assembly methods. In
conclusion, the work described here is the first report on use of the acoustic
dispenser in the area of synthetic biology, and we envision that this technology
will be instrumental in lab automation, in particular in the era of DNA
foundries. Golden Gate assembly setup by Echo. () A promoter pMBP1 was
amplified from the yeast genome to add appropriate Golden Gate sequences
(BsaI recognition sites + 4 bp overhangs). The acceptor vector HcKan_P
plasmid carries a RFP cassette, which is flanked by corresponding Golden
Gate sequences to uptake the pMBP1 part in the Golden Gate reaction.
() Gel electrophoresis indicates successful amplification
of pMBP1. () Left: Successful assembled DNA gives rise to
white colonies, while the residual acceptor vector yields red colonies.
Right: Negative control, which contained only the acceptor vector in the
Golden Gate reaction, yielded only red colonies. () Sequencing
verification of both assembly junctions shows 100% assembly accuracy.
() Cost-effectiveness and assembly efficiency comparison
of different reaction volumes for Golden Gate assembly. DS_10.1177_2211068215593754.pdf.