Implementation of reliable feedback
and control in engineered circuits is a continuing challenge in synthetic
biology. Though positive and negative feedback systems are an essential
feature of natural biological networks, synthetic circuits more commonly
rely on library-based screening to find optimal expression levels.
Not only are the resulting systems sensitive to relative concentrations
between components, but each time the circuit is expanded, the network
of regulatory sequences must be reoptimized to account for increased
load on cell machinery. More importantly,
this type of open loop approach only optimizes for a single set of
environmental parameters, and inherently does not accommodate stochastic
cell-to-cell variation, changes due to cell growth cycles, or changes
in cell loading from other circuit modules. Closed loop systems provide regulation of individual components
that is robust with respect to environmental disturbances. Negative
feedback is a common feature of natural pathways and has been shown
to decrease transcriptional response time, to provide stability and reduce fluctuations, and to be necessary for oscillatory behavior. Active feedback in biological systems has
been previously considered
at various levels. Recent studies have designed and studied an RNA-based
rate regulating circuit with two opposing negative feedback loops, a system utilizing an RNA binding protein to
repress translation of its own mRNA, and
analysis of noise in transcriptional negative feedback. There have also been demonstrations of an  closed loop system, in which a computer measured
fluorescence output and automatically modulated the activity of a
photosensitive transcription factor. In
that study, the negative feedback occurred in the software control
system outside of the cell. In this work, we present an  protein concentration
tracker circuit. To our best knowledge, this is the first demonstration
of dynamic molecular tracking entirely within the cell environment.
This circuit contains a single negative feedback loop implemented
with scaffold proteins and operates on the time scale of one cell
cycle. We show that negative feedback implemented through sequestion
results in “tracking” behavior: the proportional modulation
of one protein concentration (the ) relative
to that of the reference protein (the ) over
a range of reference induction levels. Scaffold-Based
Circuit Design and Implementation Previously,
Whitaker et al. designed a scaffold-dependent
two-component system in which the phosphotransfer was mediated by
a synthetic scaffold protein consisting of small protein–protein
binding domains. They demonstrated that weak natural cross-talk between
a noncognate histidine kinase and response regulator pair could be
artificially amplified via colocalization onto the scaffold. By fusing
the kinase to the Crk SH3 domain and the response regulator to half
of a leucine zipper, both would be recruited in the presence of a
scaffold protein consisting of the SH3 ligand and the other half of
the leucine zipper. Forcing the kinase and response regulator into
close proximity greatly enhances the level of phosphotransfer and
thus the level of downstream expression. The kinase–regulator
pair of Taz and CusR was chosen because of measured low levels of
cross-talk upon long incubations of purified proteins. Building upon this scaffold-dependent
two-component system, we designed a negative feedback circuit by introducing
an antiscaffold molecule that competitively inhibits scaffold function.
The  molecule consists of a leucine zipper
domain (LZX) linked to the SH3 ligand via flexible glycine–serine
repeats (Figure ). The two-component system
is composed of the chimeric kinase Taz linked to four SH3 domains
and the response regulator CusR linked to a single leucine zipper
(LZx) domain (Figure A). The presence of the
scaffold recruits the HK Taz and RR CusR into close proximity by forming
a ternary complex, resulting in the phosphorylation of CusR. The phosphorylated
CusR becomes an active transcription factor, binding to its natural
promoter (P) and activating expression of the  protein (Figure B).
The antiscaffold consists of the complementary LZx and SH3 ligand
domains, which allow it to competitively bind to and consequently
sequester the scaffold protein ( = 6
nM for the leucine zipper and  = 100
nM for the SH3 domain). This prevents further phosphorylation
of the response regulator, and halts further production of the antiscaffold.
In the absence of any scaffold protein, no activated response regulator
activity is observed (Supplementary Figure S2, ). We implemented the circuit in a ΔCusS ΔCusR  knockout strain. In the absence of CusS, the native bifunctional histidine kinase/phosphatase
partner for CusR, activated CusR proteins remain phosphorylated. Accordingly,
we reintroduced a CusS(G448A) mutant behind an inducible promoter
to tune response regulator deactivation. The G448A mutation disrupts
the ATP binding site, eliminating kinase autophosphorylation without
affecting phosphatase activity. This created a tunable
phosphate sink in our circuit and ensures tight coupling between present
scaffold and activated response regulator concentrations. The negative
feedback circuit with the antiscaffold is referred to as the . As a control, we also built an , in which instead of P-driven
expression of the antiscaffold only the antiscaffold reporter is expressed. We constructed the circuit as a three plasmid system, in which
the kinase is constitutively expressed and the scaffold, response
regulator, and phosphatase were cloned behind the inducible promoters
P, P, and P, respectively.
Dynamic tracking behavior was visualized by adding medium strength
ssrA degradation tags (C-terminal, RPAANDENYAAAV) to the scaffold–red
fluorescent protein (RFP) and antiscaffold–yellow fluorescent
protein (YFP) fusion proteins. The fluorescent
reporters mCherry RFP and Venus YFP were chosen on account of their
similar maturation times (∼5 and 15 min, respectively). Overview of circuit design. (A) The circuit takes an input
that
sets the reference value. The input proportionally modulates activity
of a two-component signaling system that then produces an output.
The output triggers a negative feedback response. The negative feedback
is the mechanism that generates real-time tracking behavior. (B) The
specific implementation of the circuit is shown. The circuit regulates
the production of the amount of target protein (antiscaffold–YFP)
with respect to the amount of reference protein (scaffold–RFP).
Expression of the target is dependent on the amount of free scaffold.
The target contains domains that sequester free scaffold creating
a negative feedback loop. Scaffold, response regulator, and phosphatase
concentrations are induced via P, P, and
P, respectively. Modeling Dynamics and Steady State Circuit Behavior The
circuit was modeled using differential equations with all chemical
reactions between species explicitly defined. The model omits transcriptional
activity and accounts only for protein level behavior. With the exception
of the antiscaffold production term, all other terms are derived from
mass action kinetics. A basic model of the circuit was previously
published. Here, we have expanded the
model by adding the phosphatase species and all accompanying reactions.
The 25 species arise from combinations of scaffold (Sc), response
regulator (RR), histidine kinase (HK), antiscaffold (AS), and phosphatase
(Ph) binding complexes. In total, the model consists of 80 reactions,
25 differential equations, and 26 parameters (See  for a complete list of chemical reactions).
Many parameters (Table ) were selected from
experimental values found in the literature, and others
were estimated within a physiologically reasonable range. Model reactions can be classified
into five categories: production
and degradation, phosphorylation, scaffold complex formation, activation,
and irreversible sequestration. Phosphorylated species are denoted
with a subscript p (e.g., RR), and complexes are denoted
with a colon separating the participating species (e.g., Sc:AS). Though
the possibility of modeling the scaffold as an enzyme-like species
was considered, we could not assume that either the kinase or the
response regulator would always be in excess, a requirement of the
substrate in a Michaelis–Menten reaction. Therefore, Michaelis–Menten
kinetics were deliberately avoided. The production rate, β,
of the scaffold, histidine kinase,
response regulator, and phosphatase are determined by user input of
the total steady state value (in nanomolar) multiplied by the degradation/dilution
rate, γ. This ensures constant concentration of these species
in solution. The degradation rate γ is applied universally for
all species and is estimated based on a cell division time of 30 min. The phosphorylation reactions describe
the autophosphorylation
of HK and dephosphorylation of RR. Key reactions that
describe this process are The phosphatase forms a complex with the RR prior
to
dephosphorylation. We model both phosphorylation and dephosphorylation
with a two-step reaction model, an approach consistent with previous
models. Rate constants for kinase phosphorylation
and dephosphorylation of the response regulator were chosen based
on cognate and noncognate phosphorylation rates measured for natural
two-component systems and occur on the order of seconds. The following equations show phosphorylation
in the absence and presence of scaffold: Reaction rates for scaffold complex formation were based on
the
kinetics of the protein–protein interaction domains SH3 domain/ligand
and LZX/LZx. SH3 domain/ligand binding has an estimated association
affinity  of 0.1 μM, while leucine
zippers have a  of approximately 0.01
μM. Here we have examples of histidine kinase and response
regulator binding to scaffold via SH3 and LZX binding, respectively: A phosphorylated response regulator becomes an active transcription
factor. We considered all possible complexes with RR as
possible activators (shown as RR). Since the response
regulator, CusR, dimerizes upon phosphorylation, the total rate of
AS production, , is modeled as a second-order
Hill function:where RR = RR + Sc:RR + Sc:HK:RR + Sc:HK:RR + Sc:RR:AS. The negative feedback component
comes about through the irreversible
sequestration of the scaffold once it has bound to the antiscaffold.
We made the assumption that the individual SH3 and LZX domains on
the antiscaffold bind independently, at the same rates as HK and RR
binding. However, once either the SH3 or LZX component of the AS has
bound to the Sc, this results in a local concentration of the free
domain that is substantially higher than the . Therefore, we assume that the other domain quickly displaces
any competing species and sequesters the entire Sc. The effective
irreversibility comes about through steric hindrance of competing
HK and RR species, both of which only have one compatible binding
domain to the Sc: The validity of the model was tested
by comparing the open and
closed loop circuits. In the open loop circuit, the negative feedback
binding reactions are set to zero (Table ).
Experimentally, this was done by replacing the antiscaffold with a
fluorescent reporter alone. Figure A shows
simulated steady state values for antiscaffold (or fluorescent reporter)
output over a range of scaffold concentrations (0–1000 nM),
with either 0 or 100 nM of response regulator. In the cases with no
response regulator, the circuit does not function and production of
output is solely due to simulated leaky antiscaffold production (β). When response regulator molecules are present, the open
loop circuit output decreases significantly with increasing scaffold.
Though it is not intuitive, this can be explained as the scaffold
single occupancy effect, where an overabundance
of free scaffold leads to binding of only kinase or response regulator
but not both. When we examine the prevalence of these intermediate
species (Sc:HK, Sc:RR) in simulation, we can see that when the total
concentration of singly bound scaffold increases, decrease in output
is indeed observed (Figure S1A, ). The same effect also occurs in the closed loop circuit, but much
higher concentrations of scaffold are needed, since the antiscaffold
sequestration lowers the effective number of free scaffold molecules
in solution (Figure S1B, ). Experimental data for the circuit closely recapitulated
the model
predictions (Figure B). First, without induction
of RR for both open and closed loop circuits, there is no output YFP.
Second, the open loop circuit shows the single scaffold occupancy
effect at lower concentrations of scaffold. In the case of no scaffold
induction, the open loop circuit has about three times more background
than the closed loop circuit. This is due to leakiness in scaffold
production in the absence of anhydrotetracycline (aTc). In the closed
loop circuit, leaky production of scaffold is subdued by the negative
feedback, while in the nonregulated open loop, we see significant
production of YFP. All data was normalized to the autofluorescence
of a control  strain (Figure S2, ). We compared protein expression
to fluorescence output to verify
the use of fluorescence traces as a proxy for protein concentration.
Western blot quantification was done with an analogous circuit containing
a bicistronic scaffold (3×FLAG)/RFP and antiscaffold–GFP
(3×FLAG) (Figure S3, ). mCherry is expressed from its own RBS instead of tethering directly
to the scaffold (12 kDa) to provide a substantial size difference
from the antiscaffold (44 kDa). Quantification of band intensities
show good agreement between antiscaffold expression and measured fluorescence
output (Figure S4, ).
These results served to validate both the model and the use of synthetic
scaffolds as a tunable mechanism for negative feedback. leaky promoter activity (1% of total induction) degradation for ssrA-tagged proteins Hill coefficient for antiscaffold activation phosphatase mediated dephosphorylation Decay constant
for diffusion of inducer Forward and Reverse
Reaction Rates noncognate HK-RR phosphorylation scaffold binding to HK with 4 SH3 domains scaffold
binding to RR with 1 LZX domain Closed Loop Antiscaffold
Interactions scaffold
binding to antiscaffold antiscaffold binding to Sc:RR complex antiscaffold binding to Sc:HK complex Parameters estimated from the
literature are cited. Note: In the open loop circuit there is no antiscaffold,
so the closed loop antiscaffold interaction rates are all zero. Open loop versus closed loop. (A) Model
predictions of scaffold
circuit with and without negative feedback. Solid lines show antiscaffold
output over a range of scaffold concentrations (0–1000 nM)
for open and closed loop circuits with constant response regulator
(100 nM). Dotted lines show lack of output in the absence of response
regulator. Open loop circuit shows scaffold single occupancy effect
at lower levels of scaffold. (B) Steady state experimental data of
open and closed loop circuits with and without response regulator
matches model predictions. Both sets of experimental data were normalized
by the autofluorescence of a control  strain
(Figure S2, ). Characterization
of Step Response We characterized
circuit response time by testing the closed loop response to step
inputs. Using a programmable microfluidic plate (CellAsic) under a
microscope, step induction of the scaffold protein was achieved by
flowing in 0, 37.5, or 75 nM of aTc (Figure A) after 30 min of growth in normal media. Cellular production of
response regulator and phosphatase was preinduced by incubating cells
with arabinose and salicylate. Microscopy analysis methods are described
in Figure S5, . Growth
curves for all the conditions are in Figure S7, . In all conditions, expression of scaffold–RFP
(Figure B) began about 30 min after induction
and occurred almost simultaneously with that of antiscaffold–YFP
(Figure C). Although we had selected mCherry
and Venus-YFP on account of their similar maturation times, Venus
still matures faster than mCherry (5 and 15 min, respectively). We
believe that although there is a delay in mCherry maturation, the
scaffold is immediately functional, leading to the near overlap of
RFP and YFP expression. In order to better visualize the fold change,
fluorescence output is normalized by the maximum value of the lowest
step input. Response times ()
for fluorescent
detection of scaffold (RFP) and antiscaffold (YFP) were quantified.
In control theory, response time is the amount of time needed for
an output signal to increase from 10% to 90% of its final steady state.
As cells reach stationary phase, circuit expression gradually turns
off, and no steady state in fluorescence output is maintained. The
0 nM aTc case shows basal expression of the fluorescent proteins.
We observed that scaffold induction, regulated by a P promoter, has a 4-fold expression increase between 37.5 nM (Figure C) and 75 nM (Figure D)
induction, but only a 2-fold increase in response time (from 50 to
100 min). Antiscaffold output, regulated by the scaffold concentration,
shows a 2.5-fold increase in maximum expression and a 3-fold increase
in response time (from 40 to 120 min). This step input characterization
revealed that scaffold and antiscaffold
fluorescence could be observed almost simultaneously about one cell
cycle (30 min) after aTc induction of scaffold transcription. Following
induction of the circuit, the response time to maximum expression
increases in a linear-like fashion with increasing scaffold induction. Step induction of closed loop circuit. (A) aTc induction of Sc-RFP
began 30 min after start of experiment and continued for the rest
of the experiment. (B) scaffold–RFP/OD measurements for no
induction (left), 37.5 nM induction (middle), and 75 nM induction
(right). Response time () is quantified
by finding the time needed for fluorescence to increase from 10% (gray
dotted line) to 90% of the maximum value (blue dotted line). A 2-fold
increase in aTc results in a 4-fold increase in scaffold expression
and a 2-fold increase in response time. The insets show growth curves
for each condition. (C) AS-YFP/OD measurements show 2.5-fold increase
between the two inputs and a 3-fold increase in response time. Fluorescent
measurements are normalized such that the maximum of the middle column
(37.5 nM aTc) is 1 au to better visualize fold change. Circuit Closely Follows Three Step Induction Following
step input characterization, we investigated circuit response to multiple
step-up inputs. Figure  shows the results
of a three step scaffold induction experiment with 1 h steps corresponding
to 50 nM increases of aTc inducer. Growth curves are shown in Figure
S8, . The single negative
feedback loop in the circuit represses overproduction of antiscaffold,
but there is no mechanism for feedback in the case of an excess of
scaffold or antiscaffold. As such, the model predicts that increases
in inducer will lead to immediate increases of scaffold followed closely
by the antiscaffold but once induction is turned off, degradation
of proteins depends on the endogenous ClpXP degradation machinery
(Figure A). Additionally, the upward slope
of each curve should overlap until induction ceases. Step-up induction was performed on cells preincubated
in arabinose
and salicylate, activating expression of response regulator and phosphatase,
respectively. As shown in Figure B, experimental
results for a three step induction are consistent with model predictions
and show overlapping curves during the ascent, with each individual
curve dropping off slowly as induction ceases. The chemical induction
of the scaffold produces a much smoother output curve compared with
the response regulator-modulated antiscaffold. Due to high levels
of leaky expression, the open loop circuit did not respond to multistep
inductions (Figure S8, ). Multistep induction of
tracker circuit. (A) Simulation results
for a three step induction show overlapping response times with each
curve decreasing based on degradation rate after induction ceases.
Upper panel shows aTc induction pattern with 1 h steps increasing
in 50 nM increments starting 30 min after start of experiment. (B)
Experimental time traces for Sc-RFP show overlapping fluorescence
output, with each curve decreasing at a time proportional to the number
of steps. Corresponding antiscaffold–YFP data show similar
overlaps and proportional decreases. Fluorescent measurements are
normalized such that the maximum value of the one step curve is 1
au to better visualize fold change. Growth curves are shown in Figure
S8, . Two pulse induction of circuit. (A) Model results for a range of
inducer decay constants from 2.8 × 10 to
10 s. Fast diffusion (left)
shows two independent pulses, intermediate diffusion (middle) results
show some overlapping protein from first and second pulses, and slow
diffusion (right) shows large amounts of overlapping protein from
the first to the second pulse. (B) Experimental data for zero, one,
and two pulses of 50 nM aTc. Data are normalized by maximum of single
pulse induction (middle column). (C) Simulations with improved inducer
diffusion rates ( = 2 × 10 s). Inducer Diffusion Rates Contribute to Cumulative Effect of Sequential
Pulses We observed in our model that variations in inducer
diffusion rate would greatly affect the outcome of sequential pulses
(Figure A). The removal of aTc from the cytoplasm
and surrounding media is not instantaneous, and induction does not
go to zero. Growth curves are shown in Figure S9, . Given two sequential 30 min pulses
spaced 1 h apart, the diffusion constant determined whether two independent,
identical outputs occurred or an additive effect would take place.
Essentially, if the first pulse of inducer is not given sufficient
time to diffusion out of environment, aTc molecules from the first
pulse are still present when the second pulse occurs. We modeled inducer
diffusion following a pulse with an exponential decay term, β = β(−). Figure A shows two pulse
simulation results when the default decay constant ( = 2.8 × 10 s, middle
column) is increased or decreased by 10-fold. When we tested
two pulse induction  (Figure B), we ran simultaneous experiments with zero, one, and two
30 min pulses of aTc (50 nM). The single pulse fluorescence maximum
(Figure B, middle column) was normalized to
1 au. It is clear from the two pulse fluorescence output data that
the diffusion rate of aTc after a pulse  was
actually much slower than expected . In
fact, so much of the scaffold from the first pulse remained that there
was almost a 2-fold increase in maximal expression during the second
pulse. This was an effect that had not been apparent previously during
the multistep inductions, where we showed sequential increases in
inducer concentration. These data show that modulation of pulse frequency,
but not concentration, can result in the same additive effect as increasing
inducer concentration. We then sought to improve our model by
tuning the inducer decay
constant (Figure C), generating outputs that
demonstrated the nearly 2-fold increase observed . Although the optimized decay rate ( = 2 ×
10 s) better captured gene
expression during log phase, we consistently observed a rapid decrease
in fluorescence as cells approached stationary phase. We believe this
is due to upregulation of ClpX and other ssrA machinery in stationary
phase. This resulted in improved model
performance when simulating dynamic circuit behavior. Model-Informed
Exploration of Parameter Space Circuit
limitations were explored . Specifically,
we investigated the effects of tuning response regulator and phosphatase
concentrations on the ability of the antiscaffold output to track
the scaffold reference. Response regulator and phosphatase concentrations
are easily accessible parameters via inducible promoters in our experimental
system. In Figure A, a scan of input–output
response curves is shown over a range of response regulator and phosphatase
concentrations (See Figure S10, , for explicit values). For each curve in the grid, the scaffold
concentration in which the single occupancy drop-off occurs was found,
and the slope of the curve up to that concentration was found with
a linear fit. The maximum scaffold occupancy limit is the concentration
of scaffold molecules at which each scaffold molecule only has either
a response regulator or histidine kinase. The slope of the curve up
to that point represents the antiscaffold to scaffold ratio that can
be achieved by the circuit. In the case where the single occupancy
limit does not appear, the last concentration is used. Data shown
in Figure B indicates that increasing response
regulator values result in a greater AS/Sc ratio (up to 1.5-fold increase),
while increasing phosphatase serves to bring down that ratio. The
effect of increasing phosphatase is apparent when the maximum scaffold
occupancy limit is examined (Figure C). Furthermore,
the simulations show that some minimal amount of phosphatase is necessary
for a sufficiently high response regulator turnover rate so as to
approach a 1:1 ratio. As phosphatase concentration increases, active
response regulators are quickly dephosphorylated, decreasing the efficacy
of the scaffolds, lowering the maximum occupancy concentration, and
making the drop-off more steep. Based on experimental outputs of our
circuit, however, we believe the actual achievable dynamic range of
the circuit is limited to the lower left corner of the parameter space.
The qualitatively estimated induction range is shown with the black
and gray rectangles in Figure B,C. By modulating response regulator and phosphatase concentrations,
a range of maximal expression levels for scaffold and antiscaffold
can be achieved. Figure A,B shows steady state
circuit response to varying levels of response regulator induction
in both the model and experimental circuit. Increasing RR concentrations
increases the gain of the system by increasing the number of available
active transcription factors for the AS promoter. In simulation data
(Figure A), we see that the scaffold occupancy
effect is mitigated by higher levels of response regulator. This is
consistent with our previous explanation, since more regulator means
almost all free scaffold molecules will exist as Sc:RR. Experimental
data for tuning response regulator concentration via 10-fold increases
of arabinose (Figure B) do not extend the
scaffold levels far enough to show the occupancy effect, but the increasing
output gain is evident. The presence of phosphatase in
the circuit modulates the amount
of time that phosphorylated response regulator is active. Hence, tuning
phosphatase concentrations changes RR ↔ RR cycling
time. Early versions of the circuit did not include the phosphatase
species, and we were unable to observe
dynamic behavior due to buildup of RR. Using the model,
we explored the effects of adding a phosphatase prior to testing . Figure C,D shows steady
state responses across a range of phosphatase concentrations. Simulation
results show that increasing phosphatase decreases overall circuit
output (Figure C) by decreasing the average
time RR is active. Experimental results (Figure D) support model predictions and show this suppression
of output with increased induction via salicylate. In Figure E,F, these experimental steady
state data are analyzed using the same techniques shown in Figure . Figure E shows antiscaffold
to scaffold ratio and scaffold occupancy limit as calculated based
on RFP/YFP fluorescence data with 10-fold increases in response regulator
induction with no phosphatase present. Similar to the analysis used
in the model, if the single occupancy drop is not observed, the highest
scaffold concentration is taken. Figure F
shows the same metrics with 10-fold increases in phosphatase induction
with constant response regulator (0.001% arabinose induction). Experimental
data is presented as a function of fold change from background fluorescence,
so it cannot be compared directly with model data (presented in nanomolar).
However, the overall trends are in agreement. Because response regulator
increases, we see a significant increase in antiscaffold to scaffold
ratio and little change in the occupancy limit. With increasing phosphatase,
we see a slight decrease in AS/Sc ratio and scaffold occupancy limit.
We believe these data show us that our experimental range occupies
only a small fraction of that shown by our model (Figure B,C) and that these limitations are due to the limited
dynamic range of the inducible promoters (P-RR, P-Phos, Figure S11, ). Model-based
exploration of parameter space. (A) Simulations of
scaffold to antiscaffold inputs and outputs over a range of phosphatase
(100–5100 nM, 500 nM increments) and response regulator (10–1510
nM, 150 nM increments) concentrations. Enlargement shows the scaffold
single occupancy limit concentration and curve fitting for each curve.
Red dotted lines show curve fits; the slope represents the antiscaffold
to scaffold ratio. (B) Heat map showing antiscaffold to scaffold ratio
for each curve shown in part A. Increasing response regulator results
in greater AS/Sc ratios. Gray box represents estimated experimental
phosphatase induction range. Black box estimates experimental response
regulator induction range. (C) Heat map of maximum scaffold occupancy
limit. Higher concentrations of phosphatase result in decreased maximum
scaffold occupancy limit. Steady state experimental tuning of response
regulator and phosphatase.
(A) Simulation data of input–output curves with increasing
response regulator concentrations (0–1000 nM). Increasing response
regulator increases the scaffold occupancy limit as well as overall
AS/Sc ratio. (B) Experimental data of steady state scaffold to antiscaffold
curves with 10-fold increases in response regulator induction (0–0.01%
arabinose). There was no additional induction of phosphatase (0 nM
salicylate). (C) Simulation data of input–output curves with
increasing phosphatase concentrations (0–5000 nM) with constant
response regulator concentration of 100 nM. Increasing phosphatase
decreases the scaffold occupancy limit and overall AS/Sc ratio. (D)
Experimental data of steady state circuit behavior with 10-fold increases
in salicylate. Response regulator concentration is constant (0–100
μM salicylate). (E) Ratios of YFP/RFP from part B as a proxy
for As/Sc ratios with increasing response regulator. Scaffold occupancy
limit was not observed in response regulator experiments. (F) Ratios
of YFP/RFP and scaffold occupancy limit values from part D with increasing
phosphatase. All experimental data was normalized by baseline autofluorescence
values. Scaffold-Based Circuits for Rapid Feedback We have
designed a novel negative feedback tracker circuit using modular synthetic
scaffold proteins and a two-component system with scaffold-dependent
phosphorylation. The use of scaffold proteins for negative feedback
could potentially be a robust way of linking modules and ensuring
constant performance despite intrinsic and extrinsic noise. Scaffold
proteins have been shown to be powerful hubs for organization of regulatory
feedback in natural networks, usually by colocalization of phosphorylation
machinery. Previous studies have rewired
the naturally occurring Ste5 scaffold in the yeast MAPK cascade to
redirect signals, to modify delays in signaling time, and to introduce
ultrasensitivity. The modular scaffold proteins
used in this study were previously used to control phosphotransfer
to noncognate response regulators, building a synthetic signaling
pathway. Here we have
taken those same scaffolding modules and built an entirely synthetic
feedback circuit. The system allows for tunable control of output
gain and cycling time. Most importantly, the proportional antiscaffold
tracking of the scaffold is maintained over a range of component concentrations. After we designed the circuit framework, we constructed and then
experimentally validated an ODE-based mathematical model. Through
selection of parameters and reaction rates based on the literature,
we obtained a model able to reasonably predict circuit behavior. Comparisons
between simulation and experimental data confirmed the presence of
scaffold-mediated negative feedback, and we used the model to scan
the parameter space in a way that would have been time and resource
intensive to explore . We found that steady
state circuit gain can be tuned by changing response regulator concentrations
and cycling time is controlled by varying phosphatase levels, observations
that were supported by experimental data. Following initial step induction
system characterization of step input response time, expression of
both the reference (Sc-RFP) and output (AS-YFP) protein was shown
to be fast and responsive to multistep inputs. Finally, we found that
pulse-modulated induction could result in additive circuit response,
leading to improvement of the model through more accurate inducer
diffusion parameter values. A scaffold-based biomolecular tracking
circuit has potential applications
in active regulation of component expression in synthetic circuits.
The relatively small size (approximately 60 AA) of the scaffold and
antiscaffold proteins facilitates attachment to larger proteins, represented
in this work by mCherry-RFP and Venus-YFP. Rather than open loop tuning
of regulatory sequences and large-scale screening, scaffold-based
negative feedback could be utilized. By attaching the scaffold to
a native protein, it may also be possible to tie synthetic circuit
inputs to naturally occurring cycles . It
is well-known that many natural cell processes such as developmental
segmentation, circadian clocks, and stem cell multipotency involve
oscillatory gene expression. Furthermore,
response to signal transduction may be modulated not
by amplitude, but by frequency. We have
shown that the scaffold-modulated protein tracker follows changes
in both amplitude and frequency and exhibits good agreement with a
mass-action model. Future iterations of this design may improve tracking
fidelity by including reverse feedback loop to compensate for overexpression. The circuit was implemented in
the  cell strain WW62, a variant of BW27783
(CGSC 12119) with knockouts of EnvZ, OmpR, CusS, CusR, CpxA, and CpxR.
All cell culture was done in optically clear MOPS EZ Rich defined
medium (Teknova, M2105), with 0.4% glycerol instead of 0.2% glucose.
The use of glycerol as a carbon source was done to prevent interference
with the arabinose induction of the P promoter. Tested arabinose induction levels were 0, 0.0001%, 0.001%, 0.01%,
and 0.1% (20% stock solution). Anhydrotetracycline (aTc) was diluted
in media at concentrations of 0, 5, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120, and 150 nM.
Sodium salicylate was resuspended at a stock concentration of 100
mM and diluted 1:1000 in media for experiments. Plasmids used in this study were derived from
those used in Whitaker et al. The plasmid
encoding the SH3-ligand–LZX–mCherry scaffold (pVH001)
has a high copy backbone (ColE1) with ampicillin resistance. The CusR–LZx
response regulator and SH3-domain–LZx–VenusYFP antiscaffold
plasmids (pVH003 for closed loop, pVH009 for open loop) are on a medium
copy backbone (pBBR1) with kanamycin resistance. The 4SH3-domain–Taz
histidine kinase and CusS-G448A phosphatase are on a low copy plasmid
(p15A) with chloramphenicol resistance. Detailed plasmid maps are
shown in Figure S11, , and a complete list of plasmids and strains can also be found in
the . Plate reader data were collected
on a Biotek H1MF machine using the kinetic read feature. Cell were
grown in two consecutive overnight cultures in MOPS EZ rich media.
On the day of the experiment, overnight cultures were diluted 1:40
and grown to OD ≈ 0.1 prior to the start of the experiment.
Cells were incubated in the plate reader at 37 °C and shaken
at 800 rpm between reads. Measurements were taken every 5 min. Cells
were grown in clear bottomed 96-well microplates (PerkinElmer, ViewPlate,
6005182) and sealed with breathable clear membranes (Sigma-Aldrich,
Breath-Easy, Z380059). mCherry was read at excitation/emission of
580/610 nm at a gain setting of 140, Venus was read at 500/540 nm
at a gain setting of 100, GFP was read at 488/525 nm at a gain setting
of 75. Analysis of the data was done by taking fluorescence
readings at late log phase for each independent well. Experimental
conditions were done in triplicate and repeats were averaged. Fluorescence
per OD was normalized by the fluorescence of a control strain (lacking
mCherry/YFP/GFP) such that the cell autofluorescence equals 1 au (Figure
S2, ). Error bars shown
are standard error of the mean. Cultures were grown for 5 h in a deep-well
microplate at 37 °C with a range of aTc from 0–120 nM.
Arabinose was kept constant at 0.001%. No salicylate was used. After
5 h, OD600, RFP, and GFP were measured in a plate-reader. Western
blot samples were collected and spun down. Because aTc concentration
can affect growth rates, the volume spun down was calculated based
on OD to ensure consistent cell mass. Pellets were resuspended in
lysis buffer and boiled for 10 min. Samples were run on 4–20%
tris-glycine gels (Novex, 150 V for 1 h), and a semidry transfer apparatus
was used (Bio-Rad, 15 V for 20 min) to transfer onto a PVDF membrane.
Monoclonal anti-FLAG M2-peroxidase (HRP) antibody was diluted 1:88,000
in 5% milk. Blot imaging was done using the Chemi Hi Resolution setting
on a BioRad ChemiDoc MP imager. Quantification of band intensity was
done using Image Lab 5.0 (BioRad). Step
induction data were taken using the
CellAsic ONIX microfluidic perfusion system for bacteria (B04A). The
microscope is an Olympus IX81-ZDC enclosed in a custom heater box.
Images were taken using a 100× oil immersion phase objective.
Fluorescence filters are 580/630 nm for mCherry (Chroma 41027) and
510/560 nm for YFP (Chroma 31040 JP2). Microscope media was augmented
with oxidative scavengers Trolox (200 nM) and sodium ascorbate (2
mM). Overnight cultures were then diluted 1:500 in media containing
arabinose (0.01%) or salicylate (100 μM) or both 4 h prior to
loading in the CellAsic plate. This is to ensure steady state concentrations
of response regulator and phosphatase prior to aTc induction of the
scaffold. Cells were diluted 1:10 again before loading. Microscopy
movies were taken inside a temperature controlled environment set
at 37 °C, and images were taken at 10 min intervals. Exposure
time was 10 ms for brightfield and 500 ms for mCherry and YFP fluorescent
channels. Analysis of microscope movies was done using custom
algorithms
in ImageJ and MATLAB. For each frame, the phase image is converted
to a binary mask of the cell colony. The mask is then used to find
total mCherry and YFP fluorescence in the frame. After subtraction
of background fluorescence, the total fluorescence is normalized by
the total cell area (fluorescence intensity per pixel). For step induction
experiments, fluorescence is normalized such that the maximum fluorescence
of the lowest concentration induction is equal to 1 au. Figure S5, , shows the microscopy analysis
workflow. Error bars shown in microscopy time trace data are the standard
error of the mean between analysis of different positions ( = 7–10) on the same experimental plate. The model was implemented using
the Simbiology toolbox in MATLAB and the ode15 solver (See  files for MATLAB code)..