Current Opinion in Biotechnology This review comes from a themed issue on http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/09581669/24/6 For a complete overview see the  and the Available online 20th March 2013 0958-1669/$ – see front matter, © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2013.02.024 Biopharmaceuticals are indispensable in modern medicine. The estimated market value is $70 to 80 billion (depending on the definition) and annual growth rates between 7 and 15% are expected . This is another major reason for the worldwide focus of pharmacy and biotechnology on biopharmaceutical development and production. By definition, the term ‘biopharmaceutical’ refers to recombinant therapeutic proteins and nucleic acid based products and in the broader sense also to engineered cell or tissue-based products . Vaccines, interferons and hormones like insulin, human growth hormone (hGH) and erythropoietin (EPO) are examples for protein biopharmaceuticals. Antibodies (including fragments like Fabs, scFvs and nanobodies) represent the biggest group of protein biopharmaceuticals . bib0010 bib0020 bib0025 bib0030 Therapeutic proteins are typically produced in mammalian cell lines and . While bacterial systems exhibit fast and robust growth in bioreactors using simple media, mammalian cells resemble their human counterparts more closely in terms of typical eukaryotic post translation modifications (PTMs) like glycosylation . However, mammalian cell culture processes are relatively slow, require complex media, and are susceptible viral contaminations (). Using yeasts enables to combine robust growth on simple media (in large scale bioreactors) with easily achievable genetic modifications and the introduction of the desired PTMs . The ‘classic’ yeast  is one of the best studied eukaryotes and has been used as expression host for biopharmaceuticals since the early days of genetic engineering and recombinant protein production . Recently, the first biopharmaceutical produced in the methylotrophic yeast  has been approved by the FDA (Kalbitor by Dyax Corp., a Kallikrein inhibitor) .  features all favorable traits of yeasts mentioned and has successfully been used to produce high titers of numerous heterologous proteins . Additionally,  is suitable for high cell density cultivations, reaching more than 150 g dry cell weight per liter  and has high secretory capabilities for heterologous proteins, while secreting only low amounts of endogenous proteins () . In this review we focus on new opportunities for biopharmaceutical production by reengineered  employing new tools, (semi-) synthetic parts and PTM pathways (see ). We also summarized already published approaches to identify regulatory elements and to reengineer promoters for bottom-up regulatory circuit design. Recent developments in synthetic biology have extended the toolset of classical genetic engineering . Tailor-made expression systems have been created by modifying transcription, translation, PTMs and designing synthetic regulatory networks . The majority of therapeutic proteins contain post-translational modifications, with glycosylation being the most common and at the same time the most complex PTM . Yeasts can perform typical eukaryotic PTMs, but final glycosylation patterns of yeasts and humans differ significantly. Hypermannosylation and terminal α-1,3-mannose linkages associated with glycoproteins from , can result in poor serum half-life or even immunogenic effects of therapeutic proteins . Thus, there have been efforts to humanize yeast glycosylation which has been accomplished in  (see  for reviews). Also hypermannosylation is less pronounced in  and terminal α-1,3-mannose linkages are not observed . Here, we focus on recent developments of glycoengineering in  and highlight the synthetic biology approaches and the heterologous and chimeric enzymes used for this purpose. Achieving humanized glycosylation in yeast required on the one hand the elimination of hyperglycosylation by deleting the appropriate yeast genes, but on the other hand also the introduction of additional glycosidases and glycosyltransferases, including missing biosynthetic pathways and transporters for sugars not present in yeast, for example, sialic acid. In the case of galactose, UDP-glucose was converted to UDP-galactose in the Golgi by providing the respective epimerase activity . In addition to simple expression of these genes, correct spatial positioning along the secretory pathway in the ER and Golgi is essential, as the sequential activity of one enzyme produces the substrate for the next. To achieve the suitable positioning of the required factors along this cellular assembly line in , synthetic glycobiology  approaches were used. bib0095 bib0105 bib0110 bib0115 bib0120 bib0125 Tailor-made glycosyltransferases and glycosidases with the desired catalytic properties and localization characteristics were created . The strategy was based on the knowledge, that eukaryotic glycosyltransferases and glycosidases are type II membrane proteins, consisting of an N-terminal cytoplasmic tail, a membrane anchor domain, a stem region and a C-terminal catalytic domain (see ) . The C-terminal catalytic domain is active independently of the localization conferring N-terminal part, which is also termed ‘CTS’ (cytoplasmic, transmembrane, stem). Fusions of catalytic domains to CTS fragments allowed the creation of semi-synthetic glycosyltransferases and glycosidases. A combinatorial library approach paired with a high-throughput screening was used to create and evaluate these proteins . Rational design led to similar results , but eventually input from combinatorial libraries was also used . Notably, the initial publications of the combinatorial libraries  contained barely any information on their composition and how the chimeric glycosyltransferases were designed. More recently, a comprehensive report about the catalytic domains, the CTS fragments, and how they were fused was published . The authors had not only started from a large set of 33 catalytic domains from different eukaryotes (e.g. fungi, worm, fruit fly, mouse, rat, human) and 66 fungal leader sequences, but also tested fusions of various lengths of both the catalytic domain and the CTS. Up to 600 variants were screened for optimal desired activity and localization along the generated artificial glycosylation pathways in  (see ). An essential milestone was achieved in 2006 by introduction of nine synthetic genes and deletion of six endogenous genes enabling the production of complex terminally sialylated glycoproteins in  . In the last five years, -glycosylation site occupancy has been increased from 75–85% to 99%  and undesired β-linked mannose residues have been removed by creating a  quadruple knock-out devoid of all four endogenous β-mannosyl transferases . Furthermore, the production processes using glycoengineered  strains have been optimized , antibody production in glycoengineered strains reached the g/l scale  and glycoengineered strains have also been established for surface display applications . In addition to human like microbial glycosylation such heterologous synthetic pathways allow direct control of the intricate glycosylation process. Thereby, tailor-made glycoforms of a protein can be produced which can exhibit moderately differing pharmacodynamics. For example an antibody expressed in glycoengineered  with a uniform, single glycoform showed improved antibody-mediated effector functions, compared to mammalian cell culture derived glycoforms with variable glycosylation patterns . Therefore, better than nature glycoengineered  strains pave the way for the creation of synthetic, supernatural glycoform preparations with altered properties compared to naturally occurring variants. Efficient transcription is a critical step in gene expression. Therefore strong and controllable promoters are an essential tool for high titers in recombinant protein production . In addition to natural promoters there has been a growing interest in synthetic promoters driving enhanced expression, improving folding or showing tailor-made regulatory profiles . In , up to 22 g/l intracellular protein and 15 g/l secreted protein have been obtained with the most frequently applied, tightly controlled, strong and methanol inducible  promoter (P) . As result, this promoter was the starting point for creating synthetic variants with increased promoter strength and altered, methanol free regulation, as the use of toxic and flammable methanol can cause a considerable safety risk in industrial processes. bib0205 bib0215 bib0220 bib0225 One semi-rational approach to create synthetic P variants relied on an  analysis for putative conserved eukaryotic transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) in P. Subsequently, the respective short sequence stretches were deleted . These deletion variants showed both increased and decreased reporter gene expression levels spanning 6–160% of wildtype P driven expression. Alternative approaches relied on the systematic deletion of larger adjacent fragments of almost the entire promoter . Surprisingly, some small deletions and point mutations resulted in altered regulation as these variants were moderately active when glucose was depleted, without requiring the inductor methanol . This derepression effect was further optimized by combinations of deletions and insertions of important sequence stretches. Such altered induction properties now enable the consecutive induction of coexpressed proteins such as chaperons and the therapeutic protein of interest. Putative TFBS of P were also fused to natural core promoter fragments to create short semi-synthetic variants, which again showed altered regulation and surpassed the full-length wildtype promoter in certain applications especially when multiple copies of the expression cassettes were integrated . Also the constitutive promoter of the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene (P) of  has been engineered by a random mutagenesis approach  showing the potential of additional promoters for expression fine tuning or the generation of new regulatory circuits. Bio-process strategies for biotechnologically relevant enzymes have been improved by employing these synthetic promoters  and similar effects can be expected for biopharmaceuticals. Furthermore, multiple positive and negative factors involved in P regulation have been identified since this initial semi-rational promoter engineering (see  for a recent review), opening the way for the design of novel synthetic regulatory circuits for gene expression and pathway design. Molecular toolbox for synthetic biology in bib0205 bib0210 bib0215 bib0220 Synthetic biology applications require efficient tools for strain engineering. For example, the creation of  strains providing a fully humanized glycosylation pattern necessitated in the first place the development of suitable genetic strategies to knock out and introduce multiple genes . Efficient strategies for gene replacements and marker recycling have now become available for . Namely, systems based on new counter selective markers , a Cre/loxP strategy  and an advanced flipper cassette application  have been reported and applied. The recombinase based strategies  allow active excision of the marker gene used in a deletion cassette and to thereby recycle markers and perform sequential rounds of deletions. This is achieved by designing a deletion cassette, in which the marker gene and the recombinase are flanked by two recombinase recognition sites and the recombinase is placed under the tight control of the methanol inducible  promoter (see ). Näätsaari   applied such a strategy to generate a new platform of  expression strains and Marx .  boosted riboflavin production in  by subsequently overexpressing all six genes of the riboflavin biosynthetic pathway by inserting the strong constitutive  promoter upstream of these genes. Coupling such approaches with synthetic promoter variants  might support the transcriptional fine tuning of individual enzyme activities of biosynthetic pathways. Site specific integration and knock-out strain generation rely on endogenous homologous recombination. While in  HR is working highly efficiently, non-homologous end joining is the preferred pathway in most other filamentous fungi and yeasts, including . HR occurs at less than 1% and up to 30% of all integration events, depending on the length of the homologous targeting sequence . For example during glycoengineering of  only 5 out of 460 clones showed the desired gene replacement . Targeted integration and deletion should become more efficient in the future by employing a  deletion strain with increased rates of HR . By the deletion of a Ku70 homologue, a protein involved in NHEJ, HR rates of up to 100% were achieved (see ). The Δ strain did not show genetic instability, but the growth rates were 10–30% lower than those of the wildtype (depending on the carbon source) and the strain showed a decreased survival rate under UV light. This hints an increased susceptibility to DNA damage and complementing the wildtype  gene after completion of strain engineering was recommended . In addition to precise deletions, site specific integration, and marker recycling, new cloning techniques facilitate the construction of the respective gene expression and deletion constructs. Efficient  recombination methods such as Gibson assembly  enable flexible restriction free cloning and library generation allowing the simple testing of libraries of promoters, artificial or natural expression enhancers and signal-sequences or other targeting sequences. Although, bottom up approaches to design individual parts for  strain reengineering and expression cassette constructions are ongoing, there is no systematic synthetic biology parts collection for this yeast so far. Bioinformatics tools complete the toolbox for synthetic biology applied in . High-quality genome sequences  and metabolic models  of  have recently become available. This comprehensive new background knowledge enables research towards systems wide understanding of the  expression system and provides the basis for reengineering this host using synthetic parts and pathways to improve biopharmaceutical production. For example, recent studies in  have hinted an interconnection of both the carbon metabolism  and the cellular redox state  with protein production and secretion. Thus, similar to  , a systems biology view on secretion coupled with a synergistic use of metabolic engineering and synthetic biology approaches  promise coming improvements for biopharmaceutical production by . Over the last two decades,  has been established as one of the most frequently used expression systems in both industry and academia. Beside a large number of various enzymes, many human proteins and biopharmaceuticals were also efficiently produced by . The adaptation of the yeast high-mannose type glycosylation to the complex humanized glycosylation was a major achievement and resulted in uniform glycoforms from microbial production. Synthetic promoter variants with altered regulatory profiles and expression levels surpassed their natural counterparts for enzyme production. Equally, these variants can be used to optimize and fine-tune the expression of therapeutic proteins. Also other new key methodologies for synthetic biology such as efficient gene deletion and assembly strategies, metabolic models and strains with altered recombination properties have become available. Together with milestones such as the FDA approval, these new tools and techniques have a high potential to boost the production of biopharmaceuticals and for efficient metabolic engineering (see ). Altered and new biosynthetic pathways for posttranslational modifications such as precise glycosylation are enabling techniques giving access to new therapeutics with uniform and excellent quality. Synthetic biology will certainly not only further improve industrial enzyme production, but also stimulate and facilitate innovative approaches for biopharmaceutical production in . References and recommended reading Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as:.