Two-component circuits are the
most prevalent mechanism by which bacteria sense, respond, and adapt
to external stimuli. These systems mediate responses to a wide range
of environmental conditions such as nutrient availability, ambient
temperature, or external osmolarity. They
also facilitate multiorganism phenomena such as quorum sensing, biofilm
formation, and host–pathogen interaction. In addition, they control essential environmental and agricultural
processes such as chloroplast synthesis and root nodule formation. Therefore,
development of a synthetic method for stimulus-independent modulation
of these circuits is highly desirable because particular physiological
or developmental processes could be controlled and characterized for
biotechnological purposes without the need to identify the stimulus
itself. A canonical circuit consists of a membrane-spanning
sensor histidine
kinase (SHK) and a cytoplasmic response regulator (RR). The largest group of SHKs possesses a periplasmic
or extracellular domain responsible for stimulus perception. Subsequent
signal transmission to the cell interior occurs via the adjacent transmembrane
domain. Within the cytoplasm, most SHKs
participate in both the phosphorylation (kinase activity) and dephosphorylation
(phosphatase activity) of their cognate RR. For bifunctional SHKs,
the extent of input stimulus controls the ratio of these activities,
thereby governing the intracellular level of phosphorylated RR. Phosphorylation of the RR modulates the activity
of the covalently attached output domain, which usually interacts
with DNA to control transcription of genes appropriate for mediating
a response to the perceived stimulus. A vast amount of genetic, biochemical, and structural information
has been recently integrated into a “regulated unfolding”
model of intraprotein signaling by modular proteins, including SHKs. This model proposes that modular proteins are
composed of individual folding domains that contribute distinct functionalities.
In the case of SHKs, it was suggested that the effector domain is
maintained in an inactive confirmation by a rigid connection between
the stimulus perception and effector domains. Upon perception of stimulus,
this structurally labile connection is disengaged, which, in turn,
allows the effector domain to adopt an active conformation. Therefore, the regulated unfolding model suggests
that the transmembrane (TM)–HAMP junction would be a suitable
region to target with site-directed mutagenesis with the aim of destabilizing
the coupling between the periplasmic stimulus-perceiving domain and
any downstream signaling domains (Figure ).
Other results more explicitly support targeting this region connecting
TM to the HAMP domain, which is colloquially referred to as a “control
cable”. We elected to focus on the aromatic residues found at the boundary
of the control cable because they are conserved in many SHKs, which
suggests that results generated here may be directly applicable to
other membrane-spanning receptors. To test the aromatic tuning approach
within a well-characterized
SHK, we have targeted the EnvZ/OmpR osmosensing circuit responsible
for porin regulation within . EnvZ is a canonical SHK that responds to changes in the extracellular
osmolarity of inner-membrane impermeable compounds by modulating the
intracellular level of phosphorylated OmpR (Figure A). Subsequently, phospho-OmpR regulates the transcription of a number
of genes, including those encoding two outer membrane porins, OmpF
and OmpC. At low intracellular levels of phospho-OmpR (OmpR-P), transcription
of  is upregulated, whereas at higher levels
of OmpR-P, transcription of  is repressed and
transcription of  is activated. This results
in a predominance of OmpF at low osmolarity and OmpC at higher osmolarity
(Figure B). The easily controllable
nature of the input stimulus and the well-characterized transcriptional
output makes the EnvZ/OmpR osmosensing circuit an ideal choice for
examining aromatic tuning within an SHK. Aromatic tuning of EnvZ demonstrated
that repositioning the Trp-178/Lue-179/Phe-180
triplet located at the TM-HAMP junction was sufficient to modulate
signal output. We found that these tuned osmosensing circuits retained
the ability to respond appropriately to additional external osmolarity,
which demonstrates that the tuned EnvZ receptors possess altered steady-state
signal output but were not locked in a single conformation. We also
noted that osmosensing circuits containing aromatically tuned receptors
became more sensitive to changes in EnvZ levels than their wild-type
counterpart, pointing to a new way of studying the mechanisms underpinning
receptor concentration-dependent robustness within two-component circuits.
We conclude by discussing the general applicability of aromatic tuning
to a wide-range of two-component circuits and the advantages of this
strategy compared to those previously aimed at stimulus-independent
modulation of signal output. This is highly desirable because particular
biological processes could be controlled in the absence of stimulus
identification. Synthetically
tuning signal output from SHKs. In a canonical SHK,
stimulus is perceived by the periplasmic domain (peri) and transmitted
through the transmembrane (TM) and HAMP domains to the catalytic ATPase
(CA) and dimerization/histidylphosphotransfer (DHp) domains. One potential
example of employing aromatic tuning, i.e., repositioning the aromatic
residues commonly found at the TM–HAMP junction, would be to
assign downstream phenotypes to particular SHKs. Within an organism
of interest, each SHK could be individually subjected to aromatic
tuning (red boxes) and subsequently monitored for the phenotype of
interest. If the appearance of the phenotype (filled box) correlated
with aromatic tuning of a particular SHK, then this would suggest
that the desired phenotype was governed by the aromatically tuned
SHK. The EnvZ/OmpR osmosensing
circuit of  was subjected to
aromatic tuning. The phosphorylated and unphosphorylated
forms of EnvZ and OmpR are in equilibrium. EnvZ is a bifunctional
SHK that phosphorylates and dephosphoryates its cognate RR, OmpR.
Osmotic pressure (Osm), due to the presence of small inner-membrane-impermeable
solutes, alters the ratio of these activities resulting in a net increase
of intracellular OmpR-P. In this study, osmotic pressure (red) was
induced by growing cells in the presence of sucrose. (B) The intracellular
level of OmpR-P governs transcription (Txn) of  (yellow) and  (blue). Here, transcription was
monitored by employing strain MDG147 that contains a transcriptional
fusion of  to  and of  to . This allows intracellular
levels of OmpR-P to be estimated by calculating the CFP/YFP ratio. Measurement of Steady-State
Signal Output from the EnvZ/OmpR
Osmosensing Circuit To analyze steady-state signal output
from EnvZ/OmpR osmosensing circuits containing aromatically tuned
receptors, the two-color fluorescent reporter strain MDG147 was used. MDG147 is a derivative of strain K-12
MG1655 that possesses transcriptional fusions of  to  and of  to  within its chromosome (Figure B). Quantifying the ratio of CFP to YFP fluorescence provides a rapid
and sensitive measure of the ratio of  to  transcription, which estimates the intracellular level
of phosphoylated OmpR. MDG147 cells harboring the control vector pEB5 were grown in glucose minimal medium containing
increasing amounts of sucrose to increase signal output from the EnvZ/OmpR
osmosensing circuit. As previously reported, MDG147 cells exhibited
an increase in  transcription, as indicated by
increased CFP fluorescence, and a decrease in  transcription, shown by decreased YFP fluorescence (). These
results confirm that the ratio of CFP to YFP fluorescence (CFP/YFP)
can be used to estimate the intracellular phospho-OmpR levels (). Strain EPB30 is an  derivative
of MDG147 that is suitable to assess the effects of plasmid-based  expression. EPB30 cells were complemented with plasmid
pEnvZ or pRD400, a derivative expressing
a V5-epitope tagged version of EnvZ. pRD400 maintains the IPTG-based
induction of pEnvZ while adding a previously used heptaresidue linker
of Gly-Gly-Ser-Ser-Ala-Ala-Gly and the V5 epitope tag to the C-terminus
of EnvZ. The wild-type
and epitope-tagged versions of EnvZ were induced by addition of a
wide range of IPTG concentrations, and the steady-state signal output
of the various osmosensing circuits was analyzed. Comparisons of CFP
fluorescence, YFP fluorescence, or the CFP/YFP ratio of plasmid-complemented
EPB30 cells grown under the low (0% sucrose) or high (15% sucrose)
osmolarity regimes demonstrated that an intermediate range of IPTG
concentrations was required to maintain steady-state signal output
when either wild-type or the epitope-tagged version of EnvZ was present
(). Under either the low and high
osmolarity regimes, steady-state signal output, as defined by CFP/YFP
in EPB30/pRD400 cells, was similar to that of MDG147/pEB5 cells when
EnvZ-V5 was induced by addition of between roughly 10 and 50 μM
IPTG (). Immunoblotting
against the V5 epitope was performed to gain a quantitative
understanding of the composition of osmosensing circuits containing
EnvZ-V5 (). When grown under either
the low or high osmolarity regimes, osmosensing circuits within EPB30/pRD400
cells could tolerate a roughly 10-fold range in EnvZ-V5 levels while
retaining steady-state signal output similar to MDG147/pEB5 cells
(Figure ). It is important to note that EnvZ-V5
levels outside this range resulted in changes of CFP fluorescence
but not YFP fluorescence, as previously reported (). Steady-state signal output
from osmosensing circuits possessing
increasing amounts of EnvZ-V5. Under the low (A) or high (B) osmolarity
regimes, osmosensing circuits in EPB30/pRD400 (open circles) cells
possess steady-state signal output similar to that of MDG147/pEB5
over a broad range of receptor levels. The receptor level was determined
by comparison to a control band within each lane on an immunoblot
(see ). Error bars represent standard
deviation of the mean with a sample size of  ≥
3. The transparently shaded area represents the mean of the steady-state
signal output within MDG147/pEB5 cells with a range of one standard
deviation of the mean ( ≥ 3). Aromatic Tuning Modulates Steady-State Signal
Output from the
EnvZ/OmpR Circuit To determine whether the steady-state signal
output from osmosensing circuits was altered upon aromatic tuning,
we created a series of EnvZ-V5 receptors in which the Trp-178/Leu-179/Phe-180
triplet was repositioned (Figure ). This series
of receptors was expressed over a large range of IPTG concentrations,
and immunoblotting techniques similar to those described in  were used to estimate the extent of
receptor expression. During our analysis, we assessed
whether osmosensing circuits containing
the aromatically tuned variants possessed normal levels of CFP fluorescence,
YFP fluorescence, and CFP/YFP ratios. We also assessed whether these
values were constant regardless of the amount of tuned EnvZ-V5 present.
When EPB30 () cells are grown under the low or high osmolarity regime and express
untuned or aromatically tuned EnvZ-V5 from pRD400, the CFP/YFP ratio
can be used to estimate the intracellular level of phosphorylated
OmpR (). In the uppermost panels of Figure , we
illustrate that osmosensing circuits tolerate a broad range of EnvZ-V5
levels (same data as that in Figures  and ). When EPB30/pRD400 cells were grown under
the low osmolarity regime, steady-state CFP fluorescence was attained
between EnvZ-V5 levels of 0.1 and 1.0. Likewise, when these cells
were grown under the high osmolarity regime, steady-state CFP fluorescence
was maintained between EnvZ-V5 levels of 0.1 and 0.9. In contrast,
steady-state YFP fluorescence was observed over the entire range of
EnvZ-V5 levels examined. CFP/YFP ratios were dependent on attaining
steady-state CFP fluorescence, so the range of EnvZ-V5 required for
reaching steady-state was the same as that for CFP fluorescence alone.
Trendlines are provided over the ranges of EnvZ-V5 levels where normal
signal output was attained. These trendlines were subsequently replicated
within the other panels to aid in comparison. We began by comparing CFP/YFP
ratios from circuits containing an
aromatically tuned variant to the circuit containing the untuned EnvZ-V5
(left panels in Figure ). It is noteworthy
that circuits containing the aromatically tuned variants of EnvZ-V5
did not show the expected decrease in CFP/YFP at higher levels of
EnvZ-V5; therefore, all data points above EnvZ-V5 levels of 0.1 were
included during calculation of subsequent trendlines. Under the low
osmolarity regime, circuits containing the minus series of receptors
(WLF-5 through WLF-1) achieved steady-state output at least equal
to that of circuits containing the untuned receptor, as indicated
by a CFP/YFP ratio of approximately 0.30–0.35 (compare the
light green and light gray trendlines in the left panels of Figure ). However, within certain circuits, such levels
of signal output were attained only at higher EnvZ-V5 levels. This
can be observed as the light green trendline passing through the light
gray trendline. Circuits containing the plus-series of receptors (WLF+1
and WLF+2) failed to attain normal signal output. In these cases,
the light green trendline never passes through the light gray trendline.
When EPB30/pRD400 cells were grown under the high osmolarity regime,
we observed similar results. All circuits, with the exception of those
containing the WLF+1 or WLF+2 variant, possessed a CFP/YFP that equals
or exceeds signal output from those containing the untuned variant
(i.e., a CFP/YFP ratio of ∼2.5–3.0.) Again, this was
usually observed at higher receptor levels (compare solid green and
black trendlines in the left panels of Figure ). The steady-state output of several circuits exhibited large changes
in CFP/YFP ratio that were dependent on EnvZ-V5 level. To facilitate
a more quantitative comparison between circuits, we have calculated
the slope () of each trendline (). Of the circuits that attained normal steady state-signal
output, changes based on EnvZ-V5 level were notable for those containing
the WLF-4 ( = +4.5), WLF-3 ( =
+4.5), and WLF-1 ( = +18) variants and to a lesser
extent for circuits containing the WLF-5 ( = +1.5)
variant. To gain a further understanding of steady-state signal
output from
these circuits, we compared changes in the extent of CFP or YFP fluorescence
individually (center and right panels of Figure , respectively). When cells were grown under the low osmolarity regime,
the absolute CFP fluorescence for circuits containing all of the minus
series of receptors (WLF-5 through WLF-1) achieved steady-state signal
output greater than that from circuits containing untuned EnvZ-V5,
and again, this usually occurred at higher receptor levels (compare
light cyan and gray trendlines in the center panels). Cells containing
circuits with WLF+1 and WLF+2 did not attain normal steady-state CFP
fluorescence, even at higher receptor levels. When cells were grown
under the high osmolarity regime, only circuits containing the WLF+1
or WLF+2 variants did not approach normal steady-state levels of CFP
(compare solid cyan and black trendlines in the center panels). We
also observed that circuits containing several tuned variants appeared
to be sensitive to the level of EnvZ-V5 present under the low osmolarity
regime. This included circuits containing the WLF-5 ( = +35), WLF-4 ( = +32), WLF-3 ( = +62), and WLF-1 ( = +78) variants. Under the
high osmolarity regime, the WLF-5 through WLF-2 variants resulted
in levels of CFP fluorescence similar to that of circuits containing
the untuned variant. Circuits containing WLF-1 remained elevated compared
to that of the untuned variant. Interestingly, the WLF+1 variant resulted
in a slight decrease in CFP fluorescence at high expression levels,
and, in a similar manner to the low osmolarity regime, the WLF+2 variant
never resulted in normal levels of CFP fluorescence. When grown
under the low osmolarity regime, circuits containing
the WLF-5 variant were the only circuits that approximated YFP fluorescence
from circuits containing the untuned receptor (compare the light yellow
and gray trendlines in the right panels). Those containing the WLF-4
( = −90), WLF-3 ( = −18),
and WLF-1 ( = −91) variants exhibited a sharp
decrease in YFP fluorescence as increasing levels of the tuned variant
were present. This is in contrast to circuits containing the WLF-2
( = +60) and WLF+1 ( = +77) variants,
which produced slightly greater than normal YFP fluorescence as the
receptor levels increased, while circuits containing WLF+2 never attained
normal YFP fluorescence. The observed trends were similar when cells
were grown under the high osmolarity regime, with the exception of
circuits containing WLF+1 not exhibiting greater than normal levels
of YFP fluorescence (compare solid yellow and black trendlines in
the right panels). Primary sequence of the C-terminal end of TM2 from the
aromatically
tuned EnvZ variants. A Trp-Leu-Phe triplet was repositioned, and the
minus series of receptors has the triplet repositioned in the N-terminal
direction while the plus series of receptors has the Trp-Leu-Phe triplet
repositioned in the C-terminal direction. EnvZ WLF 0 is the wild-type
receptor. Residue positions within EnvZ are provided above the primary
sequences. Steady-state signal output
from osmosening circuits containing
the WLF series of tuned EnvZ receptors. CFP/YFP ratio (left panels),
CFP fluorescence (center panels), or YFP fluorescence (right panels)
are presented for osmosensing circuits containing one of the aromatically
tuned receptors. The amount of receptor present is determined as described
in . Osmosensing circuits containing
the untuned receptor are presented at the top of the figure (WLF 0).
Data from EPB30/pRD400 cells grown under the low (open circles) and
high (filled circles) osmolarity regimes are shown. These trendlines
are present in all charts for comparison to the results from circuits
containing the aromatically tuned variants. Trendlines for cells grown
under the low osmolarity regime are presented as light gray lines,
while those from cells grown under the high osmolarity regime are
shown as dark lines. CFP fluorescence was steady between EnvZ-V5 levels
of 0.1 and 1.0 when cells were grown under the low osmolarity regime
and between EnvZ-V5 levels of 0.1 and 0.9 when grown under the high
osmolarity regime. This is in contrast to YFP, which remains steady
over the entire range of EnvZ-V5 levels. CFP/YFP was affected by the
reduction of CFP fluorescence at either end of the spectrum. However,
no reduction in CFP or CFP/YFP was observed at higher levels of the
tuned EnvZ-V5 variants. Thus, when determining the trendlines for
CFP fluorescence or CFP/YFP for circuits containing the tuned variants,
only EnvZ-V5 levels above 0.1 were considered. For circuits containing
the tuned variants, the light and dark green lines represent CFP/YFP
ratios for EPB30/pRD400 cells grown under the low and high osmolarity
regimes, respectively. Likewise, CFP and YFP fluorescence are represented
as light and dark blue and yellow trendlines, respectively. Correlation between the Surface of TM2 the
Aromatic Residues
Reside upon and Signal Output One manner in which to compare
these trends is to plot them along the abscissa of the schematic in
Figure B in order to estimate the intracellular
level of phospho-OmpR. However, analyzing the data in this manner
does pose an issue as the absolute CFP and YFP levels supported by
some variants change based on their level of expression. In essence,
the further the slope () in  is away from 0, the less tolerance a circuit possesses
for changes in EnvZ-V5 level. Therefore, we have selected receptor
concentrations of 0.2, 0.5, and 0.8 based on the results from circuits
containing untuned variants. In Figure , we
plot data for cells grown under the low and high osmolarity regimes.
By plotting the data in this manner, we are able to estimate the steady-state
intracellular level of phospho-OmpR while taking into account three
parameters: the effect of aromatic tuning, any concentration-dependent
effects (i.e., robustness), and the role of osmolarity on modulating
EnvZ signal output. Under the low osmolarity regime, most circuits containing
little
tuned EnvZ-V5, i.e., an [EnvZ-V5] of 0.2, possessed signal output
similar to that of wild-type circuits. The exception is those containing
the WLF+2 variant, which exhibits essentially no CFP or YFP fluorescence
regardless of the amount of receptor present. Circuits containing
the WLF-2 and WLF+1 variants exhibited decreasing signaling output
as the amount of receptor present is increased, which manifested as
increasing YFP fluorescence ( = +62.57 and +20.42,
respectively). The other tuned variants, e.g., WLF-5, WLF-4, WLF-3,
and WLF-1, all result in increased signal output as the amount of
receptor present is increased, i.e., a slope of CFP/YFP trendline
> 0. In most cases, this was observed as increased levels of CFP
fluorescence
( > 0) and decreased levels of YFP fluorescence
( < 0), with the WLF-1 variant exemplifying this
phenotype (). Under the high osmolarity
regime, a similar pattern is observed, except that the mutants are
shifted toward the right end of the curve, as expected (Figure ). In summary, the majority of osmosensing
circuits containing aromatically
tuned receptors resulted in increased in signal output as EnvZ-V5
levels increased, with the exception of those containing the WLF-2
or WLF+1 variants, which resulted in decreased signal output. Circuits
containing the WLF+2 variants always possessed the lowest signal output. These results suggest that aromatic tuning is sufficient to modulate
EnvZ signal output in a manner that correlates with the surface of
TM2 that the residues are placed upon. One interpretation of this
data would be to suggest that the movement of the aromatic residues
destabilizes the TM–HAMP junction in manner that mimics signal
output; however, additional experimentation would be required to confirm
this hypothesis (). Although the
aromatic residues were repositioned, other residues substitutions
occurred, which may also contribute to changes in signal output. One
possible example would be the loss of the Arg-182 from the WLF+2 variant.
We did not explicitly examine the change in the charge density, but
we do address it indirectly below. To ensure that aromatic tuning
was not restricted to these particular
residues (Trp-Leu-Phe), another series of aromatically tuned EnvZ
receptors was created. However, this time a Trp-Tyr-Ala triplet was
employed at the same initial residue positions of 178–180 (). In this case, the Trp and Tyr residues
were selected because they were previously moved within the aspartate
chemoreceptor of  (Tar). However, in order to keep the changes as similar as possible between
these sets of aromatically tuned receptors, i.e., moving a triplet,
an alanyl residue was also repositioned (Trp-Tyr-Ala). We employed
the same techniques (), and the
data is consistent with the TM2 surface being critical (), but additional experimentation is
required to demonstrate whether this is due to steric repulsion between
individual helices at the cytoplasmic end of the TM domain. In addition,
the data from the WYA+2 variant demonstrates that Arg-182 is not essential
for EnvZ function, suggesting that maintenance of change density in
this region is not critical. Comparison of signal output from osmosensing circuits
containing
the various aromatically tuned EnvZ receptors. Steady-state signal
output from circuits containing the WLF series of aromatically tuned
variants expressed in EPB30/pRD400 cells grown under the low (upper
panel) or high (lower panel) osmolarity regime is shown. The intracellular
levels of phospho-OmpR are estimated through use of the antisymmetrical
reporter system presented in Figure B. Signal
output at low (open circles), medium (gray circles), and high levels
(filled circles) of EnvZ-V5 expression (0.2, 0.5, and 0.8, respectively)
is presented for comparison. The extent of sensitivity to changes
in the amount of EnvZ present is also summarized as robustness. In
this column, N/A represents not applicable, as in there is no reasonable
amount of signal output, whereas REV indicates reversed, where a decrease
in activity is observed as the level of EnvZ-V5 increases. This evaluation
of robustness correlates with the slope () in . Advantages of Employing Aromatic Tuning To
Modulate SHK Signal
Output We believe that employing aromatic tuning to facilitate
stimulus-independent modulation should be applicable to other SHKs
because previously published alignments of primary sequences demonstrate
that the majority of SHKs in  possess aromatic residues at the cytoplasmic polar/hydrophobic interface. In addition, the majority of aromatically tuned EnvZ variants retain
the ability to respond to stimulus (Figures  and ), suggesting that their signal
output is biased but not locked in either a stimulus-deprived or -saturated
conformation. In this regard, aromatic tuning is advantageous compared
to deletion of entire SHKs or substitution
of the conserved His residue involved in autophosphorylation and phosphotransfer
because such methods may result in complete loss of kinase or phosphatase
activity. Complete loss of activity has been shown to result in nonphysiological
cross-talk between various two-component signaling pathways within
a cell. On the basis of our results, we propose
that aromatic tuning could be used to rapidly assign downstream physiological
and developmental processes to particular SHKs (Figure ). Using Aromatic Tuning To Study Receptor Concentration-Dependent
Robustness Increased sensitivity to changes in SHK levels
was seen for all osmosensing circuits containing an aromatically tuned
EnvZ variant. A previous kinetic model predicted that the steady-state
output of the EnvZ/OmpR osmosensing circuit should be insensitive
to fluctuations in the concentration of EnvZ. A related model that predicts a stronger form of robustness with
respect to the regulatory proteins was also recently analyzed. In both cases, the steady-state signal output
of the signaling circuit should be independent of the level of SHK,
which was observed when wild-type EnvZ or EnvZ-V5 was present within
the circuit (Figures  and ). This robustness was observed previously within
the intact EnvZ/OmpR, PhoQ/PhoP, and CpxA/CpxR circuits.
Here, for each aromatically tuned variant, a different relationship
between steady-state signal output and receptor level was observed,
apparent as a change in the slope of the CFP/YFP trendlines that are
summarized in , suggesting that
the ratio of kinase to phosphatase activities was different within
each receptor and always different than wild-type EnvZ (Figures  and ). Therefore,
we propose that further biochemical examination of this series of
aromatically tuned receptors will provide insight into the precise
mechanisms underpinning receptor concentration-dependent robustness
within two-component signaling circuits. strain
MC1061 [F139 Δ()7696 Δ()X74 2(r m) 1 ] was used for all DNA manipulations. Strain MG1655
(F λ50 1) was used to control for light scattering
and cellular autofluorescence. Strains MDG147 [MG1655 Φ(-) Φ(-)] and EPB30 (MDG147 ) were used for analysis of the steady-state
signal output from osmosensing circuits. To analyze steady-state
signal output from osmosensing circuits, plasmid pRD400 was made by
adding an in-frame coding sequence for a seven-residue linker (GGSSAAG) and a C-terminal V5 epitope tag (GKPIPNPLLGLDST). PCR amplification was employed to create a product
with a 5′-terminus containing a II site
corresponding to the internal site within  and
a 3′-terminus encoding the linker, epitope tag, and a I restriction site. This product was subsequently cloned
into pEnvZ with II
and I, resulting in the removal of an approximately
800 bp region between the previous stop codon in  and the I site. This strategy was used to retain
similar IPTG-based induction of EnvZ and EnvZV5
from pEnvZ and pRD400, respectively. A previously described plasmid,
pEB5, served as an empty vector control
that did not express . Analysis of Steady-State
Signal Output from Osmosensing Circuits Analysis was performed
as described previously with slight modification.
Briefly, MDG147 or EPB30 cells were transformed
with pEB5, pEnvZ, or pRD400 as required. Fresh colonies were used to inoculate
2 mL overnight cultures of minimal medium A supplemented with 0.2% glucose. Ampicillin, sucrose, and IPTG were
added where appropriate. Cells were grown overnight at 37 °C
and diluted at least 1:1000 into 7 mL of fresh medium. Chloramphenicol
was added to a final concentration of 170 μg/mL to inhibit protein
synthesis when the cultures reached an OD ∼
0.3. Fluorescent analysis was immediately conducted with 2 mL of culture,
while the remainder was centrifuged and stored at −80 °C
for immunoblotting. All fluorescence measurements were performed with
a Varian Cary Eclipse (Palo Alto, CA). CFP fluorescence was measured
by using an excitation wavelength of 434 nm and an emission wavelength
of 477 nm, while YFP fluorescence was measured by using an excitation
wavelength of 505 nm and an emission wavelength of 527 nm. These values
were corrected for differences in cell density by dividing the fluorescent
intensities by OD and for light scattering and
cellular autofluorescence by subtracting the CFP and YFP fluorescence
intensities determined for MG1655/pEB5 cells. Protein Quantification
of EnvZ-V5 Pellets from cells
expressing EnvZ-V5 were analyzed on 12% SDS/acrylamide gels. Standard
buffers and conditions were used for electrophoresis and immunoblotting. Anti-V5 (Invitrogen) and anti-β-lactamase
(Abcam) primary antibodies were used. Peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse
IgG (Sigma) was used as the secondary antibody. Bands were visualized
with the ECL advance western blotting detection kit (GE Healthcare).
Digitized images were acquired with a Lumi-Imager F1 workstation (Roche)
and analyzed with Image Gauge v4.22 software (Fujifilm). Intensities
of the β-lactamase bands served as an internal control for cell
density and sample loading..