Oscillations
in nature have
been observed for eons. The underlying mechanistic basis has long
been of interest, and the fundamental roles of feedback, amplification,
and phase shift (delay) are well-known from feedback control theory.
The theoretical and experimental literature on oscillations is enormous
and is reflected in the following selection of recent reviews that
provide an excellent treatment of various aspects of the field. Considerable progress has been made in identifying and characterizing
the component parts of genetic oscillators; however, the nonlinear
interaction among components is sufficiently complex that mathematical
models are required to elucidate their elusive integrated behavior.
Although common circuit architectures are found in all oscillators,
there are numerous differences in their realization and in their cellular
milieu that are poorly understood. There are several factors that
complicate their study and that may or may not be critical to their
operation. Utilizing synthetic biology to uncover basic principles
of simpler circuits is a way to advance understanding of natural circuits,
including those implicated in circadian clocks and rhythms (e.g.,
refs (−)). Our strategy
in pursuit of this goal is facilitated by a novel methodology that
provides the foundation for this article. Mathematical modeling
has become an important step in the synthesis
of biologically inspired systems. Although analytical methods may
contribute in some limited cases, the complex nonlinear nature of
most models typically necessitates reliance on numerical methods.
The typical strategy entails the following series of steps: (1) formulating
a mathematical model based on available knowledge, (2) establishing
a nominal parameter set on the basis of experimental data or estimated
values, (3) performing local analyses of the model having the nominal
parameter set, and (4) exploring the global behavior of the model
through sampling of parameter space and bifurcation analysis to identify
boundaries between regions that allow a classification of the different
dynamic behaviors. Each of these tasks is a challenge in its own right.
For example, the parameter values of most biological systems are largely
unknown and thus there are many degrees of freedom that remain unresolved
and that undermine confidence in the parameter estimates. Once a parameter
set is estimated, the model’s global behavior is often explored
through sparse sampling of multiple parameters; however, even with
a moderate number of parameters this becomes severely limited by the
intractable number of samples required for a representative survey
of parameter space. Our strategy differs fundamentally from
the typical strategy outlined
above and entails the following series of steps: (1) formulating a
mathematical model based on available knowledge, (2) identifying the
global repertoire of model behaviors, (3) performing local analyses
of the individual behaviors by an analytical treatment of simplified
nonlinear models, and (4) exploring the behavior of the full model
numerically in focused areas of parameter space that are of particular
interest. There are important advantages to this departure from the
traditional approach of model analysis. The global repertoire of model
behaviors is first established by dividing the entire parameter space
automatically into a finite number of large chunks, each associated
with a specific behavior; this greatly diminishes the sampling problem.
Analysis of specific behaviors is greatly simplified by our ability
to identify the associated and tractable nonlinear submodels. Together,
these allow us to characterize particular behaviors of interest by
performing detailed and focused analyses with conventional numerical
methods. The system design space methodology at the foundation
of our strategy
provides three innovations that are described in detail elsewhere: a rigorous definition of phenotype, a procedure for deconstructing
complex systems into qualitatively distinct phenotypes, and a graphical
representation for interrelating genotype, environment, and phenotype.
Here, the key terms are briefly defined, and the  subsection of the  will provide a more detailed outline of the procedures
that rigorously define these concepts and their use. A phenotype is
defined as the set, or sets, of concentrations and fluxes corresponding
to a valid combination of dominant processes functioning within a
system. A qualitatively distinct phenotype is defined as the characteristic
phenotype that exists throughout the bounded region in parameter space
defined mathematically by a valid combination of dominant processes.
The phenotypic repertoire is the collection of qualitatively distinct
phenotypes for a system. These concepts allow for the deconstruction
of complex systems
into tractable subsystems based on qualitatively distinct phenotypes
rather than the traditional approaches based on differences in space, time, or function. The qualitatively distinct phenotypes are integrated into the system
design space, which provides a means of graphically illuminating the
relationship between genotypically determined parameters, environmentally
determined variables, and qualitatively distinct phenotypes of a system,
considered by many to be one of biology’s grand challenges. To illustrate the relationships among these three properties, we
typically choose to plot a genotypically determined parameter on the  axis, an environmentally determined variable on the  axis, and a phenotypic trait of interest as a heat map
on the  axis. This approach is quite general and
has been applied to a number of natural biological systems. However, there are cases for which it is instructive to plot two
environmental or two genetic parameters on the  and  axes. Indeed, in this article we plot on the  and  axes the regulator lifetimes, which can be
varied by adjusting the environmental concentration of two gratuitous
ligands that are typically used to “tune” synthetic
oscillators (e.g., ref ()), and we plot, as a heat map, on the  axis the
dynamic trait of the phenotype (monostability, bistability, and limit-cycle
stability), which is of most interest for an oscillator. We use carefully
controlled comparisons to ensure that each alternative has the maximum
potential for robust sustained oscillation. Here, we address
the following questions: What are the implications
of different architectures and combinations of molecular modes of
transcriptional control for the phenotypic repertoire of genetic oscillators?
Are there designs that are more realizable or robust? We analyze and
compare alternative designs for a synthetic oscillator that involves
one of three basic architectures for gene circuits with one activator
and one repressor and with alternative implementations for promoters
controlled by both activator and repressor. Our goal is to contrast
generic implications of these specific designs for synthetic constructs
employing transcriptional regulators for producing sustained oscillations . The results provide insights applicable to several
designs that have been constructed and studied experimentally as well
as the prediction of a best design that has yet to be constructed. Although we have a generic concept of genotype provided by the
detailed DNA sequence, there has been no corresponding generic concept
of phenotype. Without a comparable concept of phenotype, there can
be no rigorous framework for a deep understanding of the complex nonlinear
systems that link genotype to phenotype. The concept of phenotype must ultimately be grounded in the underlying
biochemistry, and it remains a challenge to obtain a global perspective
on the behavioral repertoire of complex biochemical systems. In this
article, we utilize a method for deconstructing complex systems into
nonlinear subsystems, based on mathematically defined phenotypes,
that are then represented within a system design space that allows
the repertoire of qualitatively distinct phenotypes of the complex
system to be identified, enumerated, and analyzed. This method efficiently characterizes large regions of
system design space and quickly generates alternative hypotheses for
experimental testing. Here, we outline the strategy in general terms
and refer the interested reader to a detailed treatment given elsewhere. We start with a
conceptual model for
gene circuitry, such as those represented in Figure . This is converted to a mathematical model that typically
involves ordinary differential equations with rational function nonlinearities
for mRNA synthesis and linear functions for the other processes. The
rational functions for regulation involving both activator and repressor
represent the competition between formations of two mutually exclusive
DNA loops. For the particular case of
a model such as that in Figure CThe interpretation of the symbols is as follows.  and  represent
the concentration of activator and repressor mRNA, respectively;  and  represent
the concentration of activator and repressor protein, respectively;  and  represent
the concentration of immature forms of activator and repressor, respectively;
α and α are maximum rates of transcription,
the other α’s and the β’s are first-order
rate constants, μ is the first-order rate constant for dilution
due to exponential growth, ρ = α/α and ρ = α/α are the regulatory
capacities, the ’s are kinetic orders representing
the cooperativity of repression or activation, and the ’s are concentrations of regulator for half-maximal binding
to control sequences in the DNA (these concentrations for binding
near their own promoter regions are given by  and  and for binding near the
other promoter region are given by  and ). Three architectures and
two modes for the molecular control of
transcription manifested by two-gene circuits with an extra first-order
process involved in the maturation of the functional form for each
regulator. Architectures: (a) Negative feedback loop, (b) positive
and negative feedback loops, and (c) positive and nested negative
feedback loops. Combinations of two modes of molecular control: (d)
activator-primary and (e) repressor-primary. The symbols are the following:
NA, nucleic acid precursors; mRNA, messenger RNA; A, activator; R,
repressor. For purposes of illustration,
we shall use nominal parameter values based on information for the
wild-type  operon of . The cooperativity for induction is 2; the capacity for regulation is about 100; the rate constant for mRNA decay is 20.8 h; the rate constant for loss due to dilution μ has a value of
(ln 2)/ h in cells growing exponentially
with a doubling time of  hours, and the ratio of
protein to mRNA, , is about 30. The basal rate of the wild-type  promoter yields
approximately 10 molecules of β-galactosidase per cell. With ρ = 100, the maximum rate would yield
approximately 10ρ/30 molecules of β-galactosidase mRNA
per cell. For a rational function with  =
2 and ρ = 100 and linear functions for the other processes,
a 10-fold increase in the rate constant for loss of the repressor
causes a 100-fold change from basal to maximal level of expression;
a 10-fold increase yields expression that is the geometric
mean between basal and maximal expression, which will become important in the normalization below. If we assume
that the cells are growing with a doubling time  = 1 h and regulatory proteins are tagged to reduce their chemical
half-life to 2/3 h, then we obtain the
following nominal values for the parameters in eqs – and, with the exception of
kinetic orders, denote them with the superscript ():  = 2 for the kinetic order
parameters, ρ = 100 for the regulatory capacities,
μ = ln(2) = 0.693 for the rate of loss due to dilution,
β = 20.8 h and β = 1.5 ln(2)10 = 3.29 h for the
rate constant parameters of mRNA and tagged proteins at midlevel expression,  = 30 μ/(β + μ) = 5.22 for the ratios of regulator to mRNA,
and α/(β + μ) = 33.3 mRNA molecules per cell. We also will examine various
nominal values for the rate constants associated with maturation of
the immature proteins, β and β. Nominal values for several of the other parameters
are unknown. However, their values can be used in a normalization
process that eliminates these parameters from the resulting equations,
which still retain the essential character of the original equations.
This is a well-known general technique that simply scales the values
of the system’s variables, and if the values of the parameters
used in the normalization were to become known, then one could readily
reconstruct the behavior of the original variables. Parameters
without the superscript are equal to the corresponding
parameters with the superscript at a given nominal steady state. Parameters
without the superscript are allowed to vary only in determining global
tolerances of the systems at a given nominal steady state. It is important
to realize that in the determination of global tolerances the corresponding
superscripted parameters involved in the normalization are not allowed
to change. Mathematically Controlled
Comparisons The
variables in eqs – are normalized by
making use of the steady state and the nominal parameter values in
the previous subsection: The concentrations of the mRNAs are normalized
with respect to the geometric mean of the expression extremes [α/(β + μ) and [α/(β + μ)]/ρ] at the nominal steady state,  = ((β + μ)(ρ)/α). The concentrations
of the immature forms of the activator and repressor are normalized
with respect to their respective steady-state values,  = [(β + μ)(β + μ)(ρ)/(αα)] and  = [(β + μ)(β + μ)(ρ)/(αα)]. The concentrations of the regulators
are normalized with respect to their effective DNA dissociation constant
near the promoter region for their own transcription,  = /. We assume the same
pair of binding sites for the repressor-DNA looping and the same pair
of binding sites for activator-DNA looping at both promoters in the
reference system (see ), i.e.,  =  and  =  in the reference
system. Moreover, given the values above for  and ρ, the two binding constants for the reference
system are related as followsor  ≈ 10 when  ≪ 100 μ/(β + μ). The value of  is a free parameter
that maximizes the
regions of oscillation when assigned a small value such as 0.5 molecules
per cell. This normalization places the steady-state value at
the geometric mean of the regulatable region for each rational function
(see ), which maximizes
the region of potential oscillation. Conversely, operation on the
plateau of either function at either the basal or maximal level of
expression greatly diminishes, and in most cases eliminates, the potential
for sustained oscillation. As a necessary condition for limit-cycle
oscillations the fixed point at the geometric mean should be an unstable
focus. For systems that involve only two variables, an unstable focus
provides a necessary condition for Hopf bifurcation and a stable limit
cycle. This can be extended to systems
with additional variables by satisfying well-known conditions. Although systems exhibiting sustained oscillation may have
variables
that operate only on the regulatable regions of the rational functions, this need not be the case. Indeed, as we will
see, dynamic excursions into the regions of saturation can limit the
growing oscillations from an unstable focus and supply the sufficient
conditions for a stable limit cycle. A normalized version of
eqs –, but generalized
to account for the variations in
design that are the focus of this article, is the followingwhereandThe steady-state solution
for eqs – is
given byThe following
binary parameters are used to
denote the various designs that will be analyzedIn the  section, we refer to eqs – with various values for the parameters
δ, δ, π, and
π. The result is still a system of nonlinear
ordinary differential
equations that is analytically intractable. Although there are various
local methods for analytically examining particular fixed points and
numerical approaches as well, each system is typically treated in
an ad hoc fashion, and it remains a challenge to obtain a global perspective
on the behavioral repertoire of such systems. However, we use a novel
method of phenotypic deconstruction that greatly facilitates identification
of the system’s qualitatively distinct phenotypes, which can
then be examined in more detail with conventional methods. The first step in the phenotypic
deconstruction of these nonlinear models is to recast them into a
generic form known as a generalized mass action (GMA) system in which the exponents need not be the small
integer values of mass action systems but can be real numbers, including
those with negative values. The system of ordinary differential eqs – can be recast exactly
into an equivalent GMA system of differential-algebraic equations
by simply defining the denominator of each rational function as a
new variable, in this case  and .This form provides the basis for a rigorous
definition of phenotype and a method for deconstructing the original
system into a collection of simpler nonlinear subsystems. In any given
steady state, one term in each sum of a given sign has a larger value
than the others in that sum. The dominant terms are retained, the
nondominant terms are neglected, and the result is a unique subsystem
(S-system) that defines a qualitatively distinct phenotype of the
system. The subsystem is a valid approximation of
the full system if the conditions for term dominance are satisfied. As an example, suppose the dominance involves the second term in
eqs  and , the third
term in eq , and the first term in eq . The resulting set of equations when the other
terms are neglected is then the followingThis nonlinear S-system combines the advantages
of capturing essential nonlinear behavior locally while remaining
analytically tractable. The explicit solution of eqs – gives the complete relationship
between the steady-state values of the dependent state variables on
the one hand and the values of the independent variables and parameters
of the system on the other. The independent variables may be thought
of as those that are determined by factors outside the system of interest,
the environmentally determined variables. The parameters, which characterize
the relatively fixed aspect of the system itself, may be thought of
as genetically determined parameters. There are a large number
of combinations of potentially dominant
terms and steady-state solutions for the corresponding S-systems.
The total number of combinations is equal to the product of the number
of terms of a given sign in each of the equations; in this case, the
total is 5184. However, not all combinations of dominant terms are
valid. To be valid, a particular combination must meet two requirements.
First, the resulting S-system must have a steady-state solution. Second,
given that solution, all of the other terms in a given sum must be
smaller than the presumed dominant term. For example, if the second
positive term in eq  is dominant, as was assumed
above, then Finding the valid combinations is a tractable linear programming
problem that involves solving the S-system equations
(set of linear equations in log space) along with the dominance conditions
(a set of linear inequalities in log space). The
resulting solutions provide a rigorous mathematical definition of
the boundaries between regions of qualitatively distinct behavior
for the system. These boundaries involve all of the environmentally
determined variables and all of the genetically determined parameters
of the system. Once the boundaries have been determined for
all the valid combinations
of dominant terms, the results are integrated into a system design
space. This space, with axes that represent the environmentally determined
variables and the genetically determined parameters of the system,
consists of space-filling irregular polytopes. Each point in this
gene-by-environment space defines a distinct phenotype of the system
that can vary quantitatively from one point to another. A qualitatively
distinct phenotype is defined mathematically as the characteristic
phenotype of the system that exists throughout a region of design
space defined by the validity conditions, and the collection of qualitatively
distinct phenotypes defines the full phenotypic repertoire of the
system. For convenience in illustrating the relationships among genotype,
environment, and phenotype, we typically choose to plot one of the
genotypically determined parameters on the  axis,
one of the environmentally determined variable on the  axis, and one of the phenotypic traits as a heat map on the  axis. Such a choice represents a particular “slice”
through the fixed polytopes of the system design space. However, as
noted in the , for the class of
oscillator designs considered here it is instructive to plot the rate
constants for the functional inactivation of the regulators on the  and  axes. The growth rate dominates
regulator loss (by dilution) whenever it is greater than the rate
of functional loss (greater protein stability). For this reason, we
plot values of β and β relative
to the nominal growth rate μ and consider only positive
ratios (see , Figures –). The system
representation for each qualitatively distinct phenotype
is always a simple S-system for which determination of its nonlinear
behavior reduces to conventional linear analysis. Thus, these phenotypes are completely determined, they can be analyzed
in detail, and their relative fitness can be compared on the basis
of relevant performance criteria. The properties and behaviors of
a qualitatively distinct phenotype, e.g., local dynamics and steady-state
behavior, are referred to as phenotypic traits. It must be emphasized
that the boundaries are not arbitrary but are uniquely defined by
the structure of the original equations. This provides an efficient
and objective way of decomposing parameter space into a finite number
of regions representing qualitatively distinct phenotypes, which greatly
diminishes the sampling problem encountered with the conventional
strategy described in the . The
boundaries determined in this manner tend to be conservative in that
they provide regions in which necessary but not sufficient conditions
exist for the realization of a specific phenotypic trait. Numerical
simulations focused on these regions can then be used to determine
whether the sufficient conditions are met. This combination of (1)
deconstruction to focus the global exploration and (2) numerical simulation
to refine experimental tests greatly facilitates the global characterization
of the systems. To the best of our knowledge, there are no alternatives
with these advantages. Mathematically Controlled Comparisons The comparisons
in the  section utilize
the method of mathematically controlled comparison, which consists
of several steps that are described in detail elsewhere. (1) The alternatives being compared
are restricted to having differences in a single specific process
that remains embedded within its natural milieu; this is the biological
equivalent of a single mutation in an otherwise isogenic background.
(2) The values of the parameters that characterize the unaltered processes
of one system are assumed to be strictly identical with those of the
corresponding parameters of the alternative system. This equivalence
of parameter values within the systems is called internal equivalence.
It provides a means of nullifying or diminishing the influence of
the background, which in complex systems is largely unknown. (3) Parameters
associated with the changed process are initially free to assume any
value. This corresponds to the creation of extra degrees of freedom
(think mutation). (4) The extra degrees of freedom are then systematically
reduced (think selection) by imposing constraints on the external
behavior of the systems; e.g., by insisting that the steady state
be the same in the alternative systems. In this way, the two systems
are made as nearly equivalent as possible in their interactions with
the outside environment. This is called external equivalence. (5)
The constraints imposed by external equivalence fix the values of
the altered parameters in such a way that arbitrary differences in
systemic behavior are eliminated. Functional differences that remain
between alternative systems with maximum internal and external equivalence
constitute irreducible differences. (6) When all degrees of freedom
have been eliminated and the alternatives are as close to equivalent
as they can be, then comparisons are made by mathematical and computer
analyses of the alternatives. The establishment of external
equivalence is critically important in comparing nonlinear systems.
It is used to establish the same nominal state for the systems being
compared, i.e., to have the systems operating with the same values
for their concentrations and fluxes. Failure to have the systems in
the same nominal state can lead to an erroneous understanding of the
results from the comparison. For example, in an amino acid biosynthetic
pathway regulated both by repression at the genetic level and inhibition
at the enzyme level (Figure a), a mutant with
loss of feedback inhibition can exhibit oscillatory instability (Figure b). This might lead to the conclusion that the role
of this feedback inhibition is ensuring stability of the system. However, for many feedback-resistant mutants,
not all, the flux through the pathway can be much greater than that
in the wild type; this leads to saturation of an enzyme downstream
of the pathway (the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase), and it is this saturation
that can cause instability of an otherwise stable system. Once there
is such an uncontrolled difference in the state of the nonlinear systems,
such as the gross difference in pathway flux in this case, all bets
are off. There can be secondary effects elsewhere in the system that
can completely obscure the difference one is trying to understand. A mathematically controlled comparison in this case would involve
the equivalent of selecting a specific feedback-resistant mutant from
the large class of such mutants. The parameters of this mutant enzyme
would be altered to reflect not only loss of the recognition site
for the end product of the pathway but also a reduced molecular activity
such that pathway flux is the same as that in the wild-type organism
(Figure c). That is, one of the constraints
imposed by external equivalence to maintain the same nominal state
of the systems being compared is that pathway flux be the same in
the two systems. In such a well-controlled comparison, the downstream
enzyme is not saturated, and there need be no oscillatory instability. For a mathematically controlled comparison of alternative
designs
for a two-gene oscillator, we must consider changes in all of the
parameters influencing the two transcription processes. The two critical
constraints for external equivalence in this context are ensuring
(a) that the alternative systems have the same nominal state and (b)
that the nominal state is centered in the dynamic range of expression
so as to maximize the potential for the oscillatory phenotype. For convenience, and without loss of generality, the reference
system selected for the normalizations and comparisons in this article
has the following set of parameter values: δ = δ = π = π = 1. The constraints
for external equivalence in making the mathematically controlled comparisons
with the other cases are then the followingwhere the parameters unique to the alternative
designs are shown with a circumflex, and all other parameters are
those of the reference system shown with the superscript . There are changes among the unique parameters of the alternative
designs, other than  and , that one might consider; however,
these are not able to satisfy the two critical constraints for external
equivalence that are necessary for fair comparisons. For example,
one might consider changes in α̂ and α̂, the maximal rates of regulator transcription, among the
alternatives. However, these changes allow one to ensure only (a)
that the alternative systems have the same nominal state but not (b)
that the nominal state is centered in the dynamic range of expression. Importance
of external equivalence for a mathematically controlled
comparison. (a) Wild-type circuit for a stable amino acid biosynthetic
system with repression at the gene level and end-product inhibition
at the enzyme level. (b) A feedback-resistant mutant with loss of
the binding site for the end product and an elevated (deinhibited)
flux, an elevated concentration of product, saturation of the last
enzyme (aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase), and oscillatory instability. (c)
A feedback-resistant mutant with loss of the binding site for the
end product and a concomitant reduction in molecular activity of the
feedback-resistant enzyme. The resulting flux and concentration of
product are identical to those of the wild type, and the system remains
stable despite the loss of end-product inhibition. We constructed
and analyzed the
system design space using the Design Space Toolbox for MATLAB 1.0 and extensions that are currently under development.
All MATLAB computations were performed using MATLAB 7.8 (R2009a). Routh Criteria for Local Stability A linear system
of differential equations in  variables has  Routh criteria of a given sign that can be calculated
automatically. The number of sign changes
starting with the first criterion, which is positive, and progressing
through the sequence from the first to the th criterion
indicates the number of eigenvalues with positive real part. If there
are no sign changes, then the system is monostable. As parameters
change and the system is becoming unstable, the first two criteria
that change sign are the penultimate criterion and the last criterion; for this reason, these are called the critical criteria. As the
penultimate Routh criterion changes from positive through zero to
negative, the system undergoes a Hopf bifurcation to an unstable focus, a necessary condition for stable oscillation.
As the last Routh criterion changes from positive through zero to
negative, the system undergoes a saddle-point bifurcation to an unstable node, a necessary
condition for bistability. Applications of Routh criteria specifically
in the context of gene circuitry can be found in refs (−, , and ). Computer simulations of the full
nonlinear systems are performed with the SUNDIALS stiff solver, CVODE. Global tolerances of the oscillatory phenotype
are determined by numerical continuation in combination with a discrete
fast Fourier transform using the numpy.fft algorithm in the NumPy
library version 1.6.2. We use the system design space methods to
analyze gene circuits
with three different architectures and various combinations of molecular
modes for control of transcription. As with all of the systems analyzed
to date, each of these variations in gene circuit design exhibits
a unique phenotypic repertoire, much like a fingerprint. The three architectures that we
shall analyze are shown schematically for a two-gene circuit in Figure . The architecture of a single negative feedback
loop in which the first regulator is an activator and the second is
a repressor is shown in Figure a. The architecture
with a single negative feedback loop and a single positive feedback
loop in which the first regulator also activates transcription of
the first gene is shown in Figure b. The architecture
with a single positive feedback loop in which the first regulator
activates transcription of the first gene and a nesting of two negative
feedback loops in which the second regulator represses transcription
of both the first and the second gene is shown in Figure c. Dual Modes of Molecular Control It is important to
note that there are dual modes for realizing molecular control of
the same physiological function. Regulation Involving Either Activator or
Repressor The  operon and the  operon
of  carry out the same physiological
function, namely, inducible catabolism of their substrate. They both
encode inducible disaccharidases, and yet the regulation of one is
realized with a repressor and the other with an activator. It was
once thought that these different modes of molecular control were
the result of historical contingencies and that they conferred no
functional differences upon the systems. It is now clear that the
alternative modes exhibit functional differences that are accounted
for by demand theory. In brief, positive control tends to be selected when expression
of the regulated genes is in high demand, and negative control, when
expression of the regulated genes is in low demand. Regulation
Involving Combinations of Activator and Repressor The abstract
diagrams in Figures a–c,
and most others found in the literature that are similar or simpler,
do not distinguish between combinations of these dual modes for control.
The depiction of regulatory interactions in these diagrams must therefore
be refined to account for the different combinations. For example,
there are alternative combinations for the control of the first gene
in Figure b,c and the second gene in Figure c. In the first combination, which we call activator
primary, the promoter is quiescent in the absence of both regulators.
The activator is the primary regulator necessary to increase expression
from the promoter; the repressor in this case is the secondary regulator
that “antagonizes” the activity of the activator to
bring about repression of an otherwise activated promoter (Figure d). In the second combination, which we call repressor
primary, the promoter is fully active in the absence of both regulators.
The repressor is the primary regulator necessary to reduce expression
from the promoter; the activator in this case is the secondary regulator
that “antagonizes” the activity of the repressor to
bring about activation of an otherwise repressed promoter (Figure e). Could these generic differences in molecular
interaction have an impact on the phenotype of otherwise equivalent
gene circuits? And might the choice be at least partially responsible
for differing degrees of experimental success in realizing synthetic
constructs? We will address these questions in the analyses that follow.
In each case, we follow the strategy as outlined in the Introduction.
First, a mathematical model is formulated and represented graphically,
panel a of Figures –, that summarize our results. Second, the qualitatively distinct
phenotypes are identified and enumerated by construction of the system
design space, which represents each of these phenotypes by a colored
region, panel b of Figures –. Third, a particular trait of each phenotype (here
the number of eigenvalues with positive real part for the corresponding
subsystem in each region, with two providing a necessary condition
for limit-cycle oscillation) is plotted as a heat map on the  axis of the system design space, panel c of Figures –. Finally, the dynamics
of the full model are examined numerically in regions of interest
to determine if the necessary conditions for oscillation are also
sufficient and a representative example of the dynamics is plotted,
panel d of Figures –. It is important to note that the necessary conditions
established
in step 3 are obtained from the Routh criteria (bifurcation analysis)
for the subsystem in the region with potential for limit-cycle behavior
and not from the full model. It is only with a focused analysis of
the full model in step 4 that the sufficient conditions are established.
A detailed comparison of bifurcation analysis involving a full model
and its relevant subsystems is provided elsewhere. Single Negative Feedback Loop (S.1) A conventional
model for the circuit with this architecture (Figure a) involves rational
function nonlinearities for mRNA synthesis and linear functions for
the other processes, and it is described in the  section (eqs –, , and , with δ = 0, δ = 0, π = 0, and
π = 1). The system design space for this circuit
exhibits 5 qualitatively distinct phenotypes with valid regions radiating
from the region at the origin (Figure b).
Each phenotypic region corresponds to a unique subsystem with unique
traits, such as signal amplification factors. For example, the amplification
factor between an input signal (represented by changes in activator
lifetime) and an output signal (represented by the repressor concentration)
has a different functional form in different phenotypic regions. The
amplification factor in the region indicated by case number 3 (subsystem
given by the first positive term in eqs , , and  and by the second
positive term in eq ) is an inverse quadratic
function, whereas that the region indicated by case number 4 (subsystem
given by the first positive term in eqs  and  and the second positive term in eqs  and ) is a zero-order function. The qualitatively distinct phenotypes can be compared on the basis
of other traits, such as the dynamic behavior about their fixed points.
All of the peripheral regions correspond to phenotypes that have a
monostable trait, whereas the region at the origin has the possibility
of representing a sustained oscillatory trait, provided the critical
conditions for an unstable focus are met (e.g., all Routh criteria
satisfied except the penultimate one [see  section]). Indeed, the Routh criteria provide necessary conditions
for identifying simple and higher-order Hopf bifurcations in -dimensional systems. Given the
nominal parameter values in the  section
with delays for both activator and repressor maturation approximately
equal to the protein lifetimes, the necessary Routh conditions are
met for a small region (Figure c). However,
it must be stressed that detailed analysis of the full system in this
region shows that the potential is overestimated and the sufficient
conditions for limit-cycle oscillation are not satisfied. Therefore,
the circuit fails to exhibit sustained oscillations (e.g., Figure d). Gene circuit with a single negative feedback. (a) Circuit
architecture
with repressor-only control of activator transcription and activator-only
control of repressor transcription. (b, c) System design space with
the effective rate constant for inactivation of the activator, β, represented on the horizontal axis and that for the repressor,
β, on the vertical axis. (b) Enumeration of the
qualitatively distinct phenotypes identified by color, where the color
bar represents the case number for each of the qualitatively distinct
phenotypes. (c) The phenotypic trait represented as a heat map on
the  axis of the system design space is the number
of eigenvalues with positive real part. The color bar in this case
represents the value of the phenotypic trait: blue for zero eigenvalues
with positive real part (monostability), red for one eigenvalue with
positive real part (bistability), and yellow for two complex eigenvalues
with positive real part (unstable focus). (d) Temporal behavior of
the full GMA system at the nominal operating point (●) within
the region having the potential for sustained oscillation. Single Positive and Negative Feedback Loops:
Activator-Only
Control of Repressor Transcription Relaxation oscillators
have more complex feedback circuitry involving coupled positive and
negative feedback interactions. Such coupled feedback circuitry is
abundant in nature from bacteria to humans. The principle examples,
which have been treated extensively, are circadian circuits and cell cycle circuits. There also has been
a long prior history of their analysis in electronic circuits such
as the famous Van der Pol oscillator. Again, the critical last two Routh conditions play an important role in characterizing the fixed points
of such systems. Unlike the circuit in the previous section, in which
a single regulator is involved in the control of each transcriptional
unit, there are alternative realizations of the circuits in this section. Activator-Primary
Control of Activator Transcription (S.2) The model involving
rational function nonlinearities for the activator-primary
control of activator transcription (Figure a, left) is presented in the  section
(eqs –, , and , with δ = 1, δ = 0, π = 1 and
π = 1). The system design space of the activator-primary
circuit consists of a number of qualitatively distinct phenotypes
that are valid within nonoverlapping as well as overlapping regions
(Figure b, left). This circuit has the potential
for realizing phenotypes with all three of the dynamic traits suggested
by theory. Other than the phenotypic
regions with a monostable trait, this circuit is dominated by a phenotypic
region with the potential for sustained oscillation, sandwiched between
regions with a bistable trait. Given the nominal parameter values
in the  section with delays for both
activator and repressor maturation approximately equal to the protein
lifetimes, the critical Routh conditions are met essentially for the
entire region with potential for oscillation (Figure c, left). Detailed analysis of the full system in this region
shows that this circuit does indeed exhibit sustained oscillations
over a large portion of the region (e.g., Figure d, left). Gene circuits with one positive and one negative feedback
loop.
Activator-only control of repressor transcription and (Left panel)
activator-primary control of activator transcription or (Right panel)
repressor-primary control of activator transcription. See caption
of Figure  for a description of panels a–d. Repressor-Primary Control
of Activator Transcription (S.3) The model involving rational
function nonlinearities for the repressor-primary
control of activator transcription (Figure a, right) is presented in the  section
(eqs –, , and , with δ = 1, δ = 0, π = 0, and
π = 1). The system design space of the repressor-primary
circuit consists of a number of nonoverlapping as well as overlapping
phenotypic regions, and this circuit is also capable of realizing
all three of the dynamic traits. Again, other than the qualitative
phenotypes that have a monostable trait, this circuit is dominated
by a phenotypic region with the potential for sustained oscillation,
sandwiched between regions of bistability (Figure b, right). Given the nominal parameter values in the  section with delays for both activator and
repressor maturation approximately equal to the protein lifetimes,
the critical Routh conditions for sustained oscillations are met essentially
for the entire region of potential oscillation (Figure c, right). Detailed analysis of the full system in this region
shows that this circuit also exhibits sustained oscillations throughout
(e.g., Figure d, right). Note that the
region of potential sustained oscillations for the repressor-primary
circuit (Figure c, right) is larger than that
for the activator-primary circuit (Figure c, left). Moreover, unlike the circuitry in Figure A, the circuitry in this section can achieve sustained oscillations
essentially throughout the region of potential limit-cycle oscillation.
This is a measure of the increase robustness of relaxation oscillators
(see also , Figure ). Positive and Nested Negative Feedback Loops:
Activator-Primary
Control of Repressor Transcription There are two fundamentally
different classes of circuitry when the transcription of both activator
and repressor involves both activator and repressor control, depending
on the primary mode of control for repressor transcription. In one,
the repressor is controlled by an activator-primary mechanism, the
class considered in this section. In the other, which is treated in
the following section, it is controlled by a repressor-primary mechanism. Activator-Primary
Control of Activator Transcription (S.4) The architecture
in this case involves rational function nonlinearities
for the activator-primary control of both transcripts (Figure a, left). The equations for this circuit, which
provide the arbitrary reference in our comparisons, are presented
in the  section (eqs –, , and , with δ = 1, δ = 1, π = 1, and π = 1).
The system design space for this circuit exhibits several nonoverlapping
monostable phenotypic regions surrounding a band of three regions
composed of one potential oscillatory region and two bistable regions
(Figure b, left). The sustained oscillatory
phenotype would require that the critical conditions be met (i.e.,
all Routh criteria satisfied except the penultimate one). Given the
nominal parameter values in the  section
with additional delay for repressor maturation but not activator maturation,
the critical Routh conditions are met for a slice of the region (Figure c, left). Detailed analysis of the full system in
this region shows that this circuit exhibits sustained oscillation,
as shown in Figure d, left. Repressor-Primary
Control of Activator Transcription (S.5) The architecture
in this case involves rational function nonlinearities
for the activator-primary control of the repressor transcript and
repressor-primary control of the activator transcript (Figure a, right). The equations for this circuit are presented
in the  section (eqs –, , and , with δ = 1, δ = 1, π = 0, and π = 1).
The system design space for this circuit exhibits several nonoverlapping
monostable phenotypic regions surrounding a potential oscillatory
region (Figure b, right). The sustained oscillatory
phenotype would require that the critical conditions be met. Given
the nominal parameter values in the  section with delay for repressor maturation but not activator maturation,
the critical Routh conditions are met for a slice of the region (Figure c, right). Detailed analysis of the full systems
in this region shows that this circuit also exhibits sustained oscillation,
as shown in Figure d, right. Gene circuits with one
positive and nested negative feedback loops:
activator-primary control of repressor transcription. (Left panel)
Activator-primary control of activator transcription or (Right panel)
repressor-primary control of activator transcription. See caption
of Figure  for a description of panels a–d. Positive and Nested Negative
Feedback Loops: Repressor-Primary
Control of Repressor Transcription As noted in the previous
section, there are two fundamentally different classes of circuitry
when the transcription of both activator and repressor involves both
activator and repressor, depending on the primary mode of control
for repressor transcription. In this section, we examine the class
in which repressor transcription is controlled by a repressor-primary
mechanism. Activator transcription can be controlled by either an
activator- or repressor-primary mechanism. Activator-Primary Control
of Activator Transcription (S.6) The model involving rational
function nonlinearities for the activator-primary
control of the activator transcript and repressor-primary control
of the repressor transcript is shown in Figure a, left. The equations
for this circuit are presented in the  section (eqs –, , and , with δ = 1, δ = 1, π = 1, and
π = 0). The system design space for this circuit
exhibits several nonoverlapping monostable phenotypic regions surrounding
a band consisting of a region representing a potential oscillatory
phenotype and two representing bistable regions (Figure b, left). The sustained oscillatory phenotype would require
that the critical conditions be met (i.e., all Routh criteria satisfied
except the penultimate one). Given the parameter values in the  section with delay for repressor maturation
but not activator maturation, the critical Routh conditions are met
for a slice of the region (Figure c, left).
Detailed analysis of the full system in this region shows that this
circuit is capable of exhibiting sustained oscillations, as shown
in Figure d, left. Repressor-Primary Control
of Activator Transcription (S.7) The architecture in this
case involves rational function nonlinearities
for the repressor-primary control of both transcripts (Figure a, right). The equations for this circuit are presented
in the  section (eqs –, , and , with δ = 1, δ = 1, π = 0, and π = 0).
The system design space of the circuit with repressor-primary control
of activator transcription consists of several nonoverlapping monostable
regions surrounding a region with oscillatory potential (Figure b, right). The sustained oscillatory trait would
require that the critical conditions be met. Given the parameter values
in the  section with delay for repressor
maturation but not activator maturation, the critical Routh conditions
are met for a slice of the region (Figure c, right). Detailed analysis of the full system in this region shows
that this circuit also is capable of exhibiting sustained oscillations,
as shown in Figure d, right. Gene circuits with one
positive and nested negative feedback loops:
repressor-primary control of repressor transcription. (Left panel)
Activator-primary control of activator transcription or (Right panel)
repressor-primary control of activator transcription. See caption
of Figure  for a description of panels a–d. The
method of mathematically controlled
comparison ensures that the circuits analyzed in the previous sections
are in the same nominal steady state at the geometric mean of their
operating range to allow the maximum potential for cooperativity to
manifest a stable limit cycle (see ). All of the circuits have the same steady-state concentrations
of and fluxes through the mRNA and regulator pools. The concentrations
of the immature proteins will necessarily differ with the magnitude
of the delays; however, the systems being compared with the same delay
all have the same nominal steady state. The comparisons also are controlled
for number of kinetic steps and values of the parameters. Nevertheless,
there are generic differences that remain regarding requirements for
specific delays and the magnitudes of global robustness for the oscillatory
phenotype, and the results of careful comparison suggest a best design
among the alternatives. A Hopf bifurcation to oscillation is indicated, in the case of an th-order negative
feedback system analogous to that in Figure a, when all  Routh criteria are positive, excepting
a negative penultimate criterion. The factors that influence these
mathematical conditions are the effective strength of the net negative
cooperativity, the number of processes in the feedback loop, and differences
in values for the kinetic parameters of these processes. The conditions
favoring oscillations are strong cooperativity, many intervening processes,
and similar values for the kinetic parameters of the processes. There is a trade-off in the critical condition
for oscillatory instability between the number of temporally significant
processes (the effective number of processes with the smallest comparable
eigenvalues), which is related to the extent of delay in the feedback
loop, and the effective cooperativity, which is related to the amplification
in the feedback loop (Figure a). Although the net cooperativity is 4 for the circuit
in Figure A, the lifetimes of the mRNAs are
30 times shorter than those of the proteins, which reduces the number
of temporally significant processes in the feedback loop to ∼2.
Thus, from the trade-off curve in Figure a,
the threshold for sustained oscillations could be reached by effectively
adding two temporally significant processes in the loop. This might
be achieved in several ways, by increasing the growth rate (which
decreases the turnover time of the stable regulators) or tagging proteins
for active degradation, which would tend
to make four lifetimes more similar on the scale of mRNA turnover
time. Alternatively, physically adding two linear processes with time
constants (1/rate constants) comparable to protein turnover time would
tend to make four lifetimes more similar on the scale of protein turnover
time without changing the net cooperativity. In all of these cases,
the time-scale separation would be reduced, and the number of temporally
significant processes in the feedback loop, increased. In fact, all
of our circuits include the possibility of an additional first-order
process in the synthesis of both activator and repressor. Even
though the comparisons have been controlled for number of
kinetic steps, parameter values, and cooperativity, it is not possible
for all of the circuits to be compared with the same values for the
additional delays and still exhibit sustained oscillations. Therefore,
if we are to allow the alternatives to manifest their maximum potential
for sustained oscillation, then we must allow them to differ with
regard to the delays associated with the maturation of activator and
repressor. The only way that the circuit in Figure A might exhibit sustained oscillations is when the
number of temporally
significant processes for this circuit is increased to four and the
circuit crosses the threshold for oscillatory instability (arrow in
Figure a). This occurs when the two additional
time constants are similar to those for protein turnover (■
in Figure b). Only then does this circuit
exhibit the potential for sustained oscillations. However, detailed
analysis of the full system (S.1) shows that this potential is overestimated
and there is only damped oscillation (Figure D). The circuits with positive and only one negative feedback
(S.2
and S.3) exhibit robust sustained oscillations over a much wider range
of delays (Figure c). Indeed, sustained oscillations
are produced even when the delays associated with the additional first-order
processes are eliminated (▼ in Figure c). The only way to eliminate sustained oscillations in these circuits
is to have the rate constant for repressor maturation very large and
that for the activator maturation very small (upper left portion of
Figure c). The circuits with positive
and nested negative feedback (S.4 through
S.7) cannot exhibit sustained oscillations when the additional delays
associated with the maturation processes are eliminated (▼
in Figure d). There are two reasons for this.
First, removing all feedback except for repression of activator transcription
would leave only two temporally significant processes, which can never
exhibit sustained oscillations. Second, adding autorepression
of repressor transcription produces an “inner” negative
feedback that mathematically controlled comparisons have shown to
be a stabilizing influence, making it even more
difficult to produce sustained oscillations. In fact, for these
circuits in which all message lifetimes (β = β = β), protein lifetimes
(β = β = β), and regulatory interactions ( =  =  =  = ) are identical, the
circuits are always stable because all the Routh criteria are satisfied for all combinations of values for these three classes
of parameters. Thus, there is no possibility of these circuits exhibiting
a sustained oscillatory phenotype, regardless of changes in growth
rate or changes in regulator cooperativity or lifetime. The only way
that these circuits can exhibit sustained oscillations is to ensure
that the additional delay for the repressor maturation process is
sufficiently long and greater than that for the activator maturation
process (◆ in Figure d). Influence of
delay on oscillatory potential and circuit robustness.
(a) Trade-off between number of temporally significant processes (delay)
and effective cooperativity of the feedback in a negative feedback circuit analogous to that in Figure A. The arrow represents changes discussed in the
text. (b–d) Comparison of regions representing potential for
sustained oscillation as a function of delay associated with the rate
constants for maturation of activator, β on the  axis,
and repressor, β on the  axis: (▼) both maturation
delays negligible, (▲) repressor maturation delay negligible
and activator maturation delay approximately equal to protein turnover
time, (■) both maturation delays equal to protein turnover
time, and (◆) activator maturation delay negligible and repressor
maturation delay greater than protein turnover time. The color bar
represents the value of the phenotypic trait: blue for zero eigenvalues
with positive real part (monostability), red for one eigenvalue with
positive real part (bistability), and yellow for two complex eigenvalues
with positive real part (unstable focus). (b) Circuit with a single
negative feedback, (c) circuits with one positive and one negative
feedback, and (d) circuits with one positive and nested negative feedbacks.
(e–h) Global tolerances for the oscillatory phenotype of the
full GMA systems with various designs: (S.1) activator-only control
of repressor transcription and repressor-only control of activator
transcription; activator-only control of repressor transcription and
(S.2) activator-primary control of activator transcription or (S.3)
repressor-primary control of activator transcription; activator-primary
control of repressor transcription and (S.4) activator-primary control
of activator transcription or (S.5) repressor-primary control of activator
transcription; repressor-primary control of repressor transcription
and (S.6) activator-primary control of activator transcription or
(S.7) repressor-primary control of activator transcription. Mean,
maximum, and minimum fold tolerances (excluding infinite values) are
given for the increase and decrease in the 14 parameters of systems
S.2 and S.3 and in the 15 parameters of systems S.4–S.7: (e)
both maturation delays negligible; (f) repressor maturation delay
negligible and activator maturation delay equal to protein turnover
time; (g) both maturation delays equal to protein turnover time; (h)
activator maturation delay negligible and repressor maturation delay
greater than protein turnover time. Global Tolerances of the Oscillatory Phenotype The
global tolerance to a change in phenotype caused by the change in
value of a system parameter or environmental variable is defined as
the maximum ratio of the value measured at the operating point and
at the boundary to an adjacent phenotypic region. The global tolerances with respect to regulator half-life
(which is readily tunable for regulators that have gratuitous activating
or inactivating ligands) are evident from the particular slice of
the system design spaces in Figures c–c. The global tolerances with respect to the other
parameters can be readily examined in a similar fashion by examining
other slices. Tolerances for the maturation rate constants of repressor,
β, and
activator, β, can be infinite. Thus, we exclude these parameters from
the graphical summary of the global tolerances given in Figures e–h for selected values of the two delays.
The results, which are then biased downward, apply only to the remaining
14 parameters of systems S.1 and S.2 and the 15 parameters of systems
S.4–S.7. When both additional delays have negligible
values (▼ in Figure b–d), the
only circuits capable of producing sustained oscillations are those
with activator-only control of repressor transcription and either
activator-primary (S.2) or repressor-primary (S.3) control of activator
transcription. In Figure e, the mean values
for their tolerances are 3.5- and 3.7-fold, respectively, and their
most critical parameter has a relatively low value of 1.3- and 1.3-fold,
respectively. The tolerances of the oscillatory phenotype for all
the other circuits (S.1 and S.4–S.7) are zero, since they are
incapable of oscillating without additional delay. The critical and
mean global tolerances for the alternative designs at the delays shown
in Figure  are compared in Table . To summarize, the circuit with repressor-primary
control of activator
transcription and activator-only control of repressor transcription
is the most robust design based on the results above. It is one of
the two options among the alternatives that exhibits sustained oscillations
under almost any combination of delays, or no additional delays at
all, involving maturation of activator and repressor. Furthermore,
under delays that allow sustained oscillations in one or more of the
alternatives, its average tolerance of the oscillatory phenotype is
typically greater as is the tolerance of the most critical parameter.
It also should be noted that in all cases the tolerances with respect
to the rates of regulator degradation are actually underestimated
compared to what would be expected if the concentration of the gratuitous
environmental ligand were plotted on the axes. This is because we
have assumed that the rate of regulator degradation is proportional
to these concentrations, when in fact it will require larger increases
in these concentrations as diminishing returns set in on the approach
to saturation. The lower bound on these tolerances is set by the growth
rate. Global Tolerance of the Oscillatory
Phenotype for Each System as a Function of Delays Associated with
Maturation of Activator and Repressor The table shows the mean/minimum
global tolerance for all the parameters of each system with the delays
that correspond to those in Figure . The dash
indicates the absence of an oscillatory phenotype. Circuits with and without
the Nested Negative Feedback Loop The mathematically controlled
comparison of the alternative circuitry
having activator-primary control of activator transcription with and
without the nested negative feedback uses the constraint in eq  to fix the value  in the circuit with activator-only regulation of repressor
transcription (see  section). When
this constraint is imposed, the two circuits have the same concentrations
and fluxes at the nominal steady state. A comparison of the results
for the alternative circuits having activator-primary control of activator
transcription, with and without the nested negative feedback (left
panels in Figures  and ), shows that the presence of the nested negative feedback is a stabilizing
influence that diminishes the size of the region with potential for
sustained oscillation. Indeed, for the circuits with nested negative
feedback, there are no stable oscillations unless the appropriate
delays are included (see Figure d). When considering
the maximum potential for sustained oscillation with the critical
delays included, the tolerances for the circuit with the nested negative
feedback (Figure h (S.4): mean = 3.1 fold)
are smaller than those for the circuit without this feedback (Figure h (S.2): mean = 5.4 fold), which indicates a loss
of global robustness. The results obtained for the alternative circuits
having repressor-primary control of activator transcription, with
and without the nested negative feedback, are shown in the right panels
of Figures  and .
The presence of the nested negative feedback is a stabilizing influence
that diminishes the size of the region with potential for sustained
oscillation. Again, there are no stable oscillations for the circuits
with nested negative feedback unless the appropriate delays are included
(see Figure d). When these delays are included,
the tolerances for the circuit with the nested negative feedback (Figure h (S.5): mean = 3.2 fold) are smaller than those
for the circuit without this feedback (Figure h (S.3): mean = 6.4 fold), which again indicates a loss of global
robustness. A mathematically controlled comparison of alternative
circuitry having repressor-primary control of repressor transcription
with and without the nested negative feedback cannot be made because
there is no circuit corresponding to Figure a, right, if the nested negative feedback is eliminated. Removal
of the “inner” negative feedback would leave the activator
with no influence over the constitutive expression of repressor transcription. Insights in the Context of Synthetic Projects Aimed at Realizing
Robust Oscillations The results for the negative feedback
circuit show that too much or too little delay and there is no potential
for sustained oscillations. The potential for sustained oscillations
occurs only when the maturation delays for both the repressor and
activator are similar to the turnover times of these proteins. Even
then, this circuit is incapable of sustained oscillation. These results
show that the pioneering synthetic construct of Elowitz and Leibler in  might
not have achieved sustained oscillations with the two-gene circuit
in our analysis. However, they did achieve sustained oscillations
with a three-gene (net-negative) circuit that also involved regulators
tagged to shorten their lifetimes. In this circuit, the effective
cooperativity would be 6, and the number of temporally significant
steps would be ∼6 on the time scale of protein turnover; thus,
the operating point of this circuit would be placed well above the
threshold for oscillatory instability in Figure a. Analysis in system design space demonstrates that robust
sustained oscillations are realized more easily in circuits with positive
as well as negative feedback compared with negative-only feedback
circuits, provided the comparisons are well-controlled. Moreover,
among the dual means of realizing the primary control of activator
transcription, repressor-primary control (mean global tolerances 6.4-fold)
is better than activator-primary control (mean global tolerances 5.4-fold)
because of the larger range of feasible values for the parameters.
These results for the activator-primary circuit (Figure a, left) suggest that the synthetic construct of Atkinson
et al. in , which produced robust oscillations that damped out after several
cycles, might have yielded sustained oscillations if it had been appropriately
tuned. However, the results also suggest that a more promising construct
would utilize repressor-primary (Figure a,
right) rather than activator-primary (Figure a, left) control of activator transcription. The results for
circuits with nested negative feedback loops demonstrate
that sustained oscillations are more difficult to achieve when there
is also a second negative feedback loop involving repressor transcription.
The combination of activator-primary control of activator transcription
and repressor-primary control of repressor transcription (S.6) is
the worst of the six possibilities that produce oscillations (mean
global tolerances 2.8-fold), whereas the combination of repressor-primary
control of activator transcription and activator-only control of repressor
transcription is the best of the six possibilities (mean global tolerances
6.4-fold). Thus, it is best not to include the second negative feedback
and to have repressor-primary control of activator transcription. As explained above, autorepression of repressor transcription reduces
the potential for sustained oscillations. However, if additional temporally
significant processes are incorporated into the positive and negative
feedback loops of the models, as in Figures  and , then the augmented circuits are capable
of generating sustained oscillations provided the delay is longer
in the negative feedback loop (Figure d).
With no delay (large rate constants for the additional processes in
both the negative (β) and positive (β) feedback loops) or equal delay
in both loops, there are no sustained oscillations. Only with a large
rate constant for the process in the positive loop and a small rate
constant in the negative loop does the system exhibit sustained oscillations.
In other words, if the delay in the positive feedback loop is sufficiently
long, then it tends to diminish the effect of additional delay in
the negative feedback loop. As long as there is more delay in the
negative loop than in the positive loop, then oscillator behavior
is facilitated. A circuit with architecture similar to that
in Figure a, left, with activator-primary
control of both
activator and repressor transcription, was constructed and studied
in mammalian cells by Tigges et al. Their
construct differs by the inclusion of an extra transcriptional unit
in the negative feedback loop and antisense RNA, rather then a repressor,
to realize the nested negative interactions. The requirement for longer
delay in the negative versus positive loop to facilitate oscillations
would naturally be favored by the additional processes in the negative
feedback loop of their construct. Although this model is not included
within the framework of our well-controlled comparisons, preliminary
analysis suggests similar results. Stricker et al. developed a construct
in  with a hybrid promoter exhibiting
a high basal rate of transcription. The basal rate of transcription
can be downregulated and is consistent with a repressor-primary mode
of control of both the activator and repressor (Figure a, right). However, the hybrid promoter can also be upregulated
from the basal rate and may inherit some of the properties of the
circuit with activator-primary control of both activator and repressor
(Figure a, left). The observed oscillations
were accounted for by including in their model processes such as protein
folding, multimerization, and DNA looping. As long as there is more
delay in the negative feedback loop than in the positive loop, then
oscillatory behavior is favored for either circuit (Figure d). This was the case in the model of Stricker et
al., as they explained, because dimerization
of AraC is faster than dimerization plus tetramerization of LacI. The strategy used for the analysis in this
article differs from the conventional strategy outlined in the  and offers a number of advantages.
Although the fist step of model formulation is the same, the strategies
differ fundamentally thereafter. In the second step, rather than performing
a detailed analysis of the full model at sparsely sampled point of
parameter space, our strategy automatically deconstructs the entire
parameter space into a finite number of regions with rigorously defined
boundaries (space-filling polytopes) that represent qualitatively
distinct phenotypes associated with nonlinear subsystems. This greatly
diminishes the sampling problem associated with the conventional strategy.
In the third step, the conventional strategy involves decisions concerning
which regions in parameter space to refine by a detailed analysis
to identify boundaries between regions of interest (e.g, typical bifurcation
analysis). In our strategy, this decision has already been made, and
a simpler analysis (often involving a single analytical treatment
that applies to an entire region) is used to characterize large chunks
of parameter space in an approximate fashion to identify regions of
interest. In the final step, the conventional strategy classifies
different dynamical behaviors associated with particular regions of
parameter space, whereas at this step, our strategy finally applies
conventional methods to examine the behavior of the full model in
detail, but it is focused only on regions already identified as being
of interest. In this article, we utilized a method of system
deconstruction based on differences in phenotype, rather than the
traditional approaches to deconstruction based on space, time, or
function. This also can be viewed as a novel method for model reduction.
The integration of phenotypes into a system design space allows the
qualitatively distinct phenotypes to be identified, enumerated, characterized,
and compared. The system design space provides an efficient means
to characterize system behavior over a broad range of parameter values,
and the landmarks in this space represent particular constellations
of parameters that define relevant design principles. These characteristics
facilitate the rapid generation of alternative hypothesis for experimental
testing; in particular, they identify designs that are more promising
because the range of realizable values for the parameters is larger
than that of the alternatives. This methodology provides an
efficient strategy for obtaining a
global perspective on the entire behavioral repertoire of a system
and differs fundamentally from traditional approaches that first and
foremost involve parameter estimation and sampling with no clear picture
of the overall landscape. Our strategy rapidly identifies regions
of system design space associated with each of the qualitatively distinct
phenotypes; those regions of particular interest can be further characterized
by an analytical treatment of the corresponding subsystems, and the
full system can be examined in greater detail to test quantitative
predictions as needed. This strategy provides key information regarding
the range of potential behaviors that a model can exhibit, both desirable
to be achieved as well as undesirable to be avoided. This allows for
a directed approach to obtaining parameter values and limits the computational
effort needed for a detailed analysis of system behavior. Here,
the method identified regions of potential limit-cycle oscillation.
Further characterization revealed the local region in which necessary
conditions for limit-cycle oscillation were met. Detailed analysis
of the full systems in the local region provided sufficient conditions
for sustained oscillations. Moreover, the detailed analysis showed
that although the size of the local region was overestimated, oscillatory
behavior, if it exists, can be found somewhere within the identified
region. This has been true in other applications as well. In this sense, the method tends to be conservative, overestimating
the potential such that relevant behaviors are not overlooked. Although
we made use of known parameter values in this application, knowledge
of specific parameter values is not necessary. Our strategy is able
to automatically identify a set of parameter values for each of the
seven circuit designs that will locate their nominal operating point
within a region of system design space having the potential for sustained
oscillatory behavior. There are, of course, obvious differences
in the cellular context
of all of the synthetic constructs. Aside from ad hoc differences
due to the complex intracellular milieu and the details of the molecular
elements in the constructs, our results reveal generic differences
in the designs that might also have contributed to the differences
in outcome. Comparison of the results for the seven different designs
suggests that constructs employing repressor-primary control of activator
transcription and activator-only control of repressor transcription
could more readily realize a robust oscillator. Finally, it should
be emphasized that the methods employed in this article are quite
general and could be used for the analysis and comparison of other
types of system as well as other gene circuit designs..