Synthetic biology aims at applying engineering principles to biological systems. But inherent complexity of living cells severely hampers the identification of simple and universally applicable design rules. For instance, synthetic circuits frequently lose their functionality when placed in different genetic backgrounds, even within the same species (,), showing that the behavior of regulatory parts strongly depends on cellular context. On a molecular scale there are numerous reasons for such failures, many of which are related to incomplete knowledge on how synthetic circuit components interact with the host organism, as reviewed, e.g., in (). In order to minimize such undesired cross-talk, in recent years orthogonal, that is, context-independent regulators were derived from natural systems, including dCas9 (), small transcription-activating RNAs (), translational riboswitches (), orthogonal transcription factors (), as well as extracytoplasmic function (ECF) σ factors (). While these regulators have a great potential for synthetic biology, they now need to be applied and thoroughly characterized in the context of synthetic circuit design to identify their features, advantages and potential limitations. Such comprehensive knowledge will be a prerequisite to establish them as standard building blocks in the field that can complement the limited number of well-established transcription factors used in most synthetic genetic regulatory circuits built to date, such as LacI, AraC or TetR (). In this study, we focus on ECF σ factors as building blocks for synthetic circuit design. These alternative σ factors are subunits of the RNA polymerase and are found in almost all bacterial species (). They regulate diverse processes and often respond to stress conditions. ECF σ factors share a characteristic protein domain architecture of only two of the four conserved regions of housekeeping σ factors, σ and σ, which are sufficient for both promoter recognition and core RNA polymerase binding (Figure ). Today we know more than 90 phylogenetically distinct ECF subgroups (), most of which recognize group-specific target promoters distinct from the housekeeping ones (Figure  and ). Their small and modular structure together with their ability to recognize distinct promoter sequences makes ECF σ factors ideal building blocks for developing multiple, orthogonal switches that can be simultaneously used in a heterologous host. Indeed, Rhodius  identified about 20 highly orthogonal heterologous ECF σ factors in  that specifically activated their target promoters – with little cross-activation of other native or heterologous ECF target promoters (). Despite these potential advantages for synthetic biology, ECF σ factors have rarely been used to construct insulated switches () or more complex circuits () , but, to our knowledge, no synthetic regulatory circuit comprising more than a single ECF σ factor has been constructed before. Hence, although the large diversity () and orthogonality between ECF subgroups suggests that multiple ECFs can be combined in a single cell, the scalability of the approach has never been studied. Moreover, it is currently unclear whether ECF σ factors can be used as orthogonal building blocks in organisms other than . Here, we explore the potential of ECF σ factors as orthogonal building blocks for synthetic circuit design in two of the most widely used and phylogenetically distant model bacteria –  and . In both organisms we implemented increasingly complex ECF σ factor circuits, and thereby systematically probed the scalability of this approach. Our results demonstrate the successful construction of ECF σ factor cascades featuring the functionality of ‘genetic timers’ – circuits that activate a series of ECF σ factor genes with characteristic time delays. With the help of a quantitative mathematical model we rationalized the  expression dynamics of a variety of timer circuits in  and , showing that ECF σ factors display orthogonality even in multi-layered regulatory circuits. However, we also find that signal propagation within these cascades critically hinges on precise fine-tuning of input- and output-dynamic ranges, as theoretically predicted for non-cooperative regulatory cascades without feedback (). These results unveil some of the fundamental strengths and limitations of ECF σ factors for synthetic circuit construction, suggesting that they are useful components for future work in synthetic biology. Taken together, this work broadens our understanding of ECF σ factors and provides insight into key design rules for synthetic ECF σ factor circuits in two phylogenetically diverse model bacteria. Extracytoplasmic function (ECF) σ factors as orthogonal building blocks for synthetic circuit design. () The σ and σ protein domains of ECF σ factors contact the −10 and −35 promoter regions, respectively, and thereby recruit RNA polymerase to specific target promoters (for a review see ()) as shown in the lower part of the panel for the ECF σ factors used in this study. Note that the highlighted −35 and −10 sequences are putative promoter elements and have not been experimentally verified in all cases. Also note that sequence of the ECF28 and ECF34 promoters are modified variants of the ECF group 19 and group 18 promoters, as described in (). () ECF σ factor groups found in  and the four species serving as donors of the ECFs used here, i.e.,  (ECF41 and ECFUG),  (ECF105),  (ECF32),  (ECF28) and  (ECF34). () The temporal dynamics of gene regulatory cascades, in which a series of  regulators  sequentially activate the expression of a downstream regulator , critically hinges on the quantitative dose–response characteristics of the involved promoters . For promoters regulated in a highly cooperative manner (e.g. for a Hill coefficient  = 10, ), the transcriptional activity displays an almost digital increase as soon as the concentration of the cognate regulator exceeds the activation threshold . In contrast, non-cooperatively regulated promoters (Hill coefficient  = 1, ) feature an analog increase of transcriptional activity with increasing regulator concentration. () Time-delayed response dynamics in a cascade of digital () and analog () regulatory switches. For further details, refer to the main text. Plasmid assembly & strain development All circuits for  were assembled using the Modular Cloning (MoClo) system (), which relies on Golden Gate cloning with type IIs endonucleases, the recognition sites of which are distal from their cut sites and thereby enable the directed assembly of multiple DNA parts in a simultaneous restriction/ligation reaction. Within the MoClo system multi-gene constructs can be assembled from libraries of defined genetic parts by using four sets of cloning vectors (Level 0, 1, M and P), which can be utilized in successive assembly steps. Different genetic parts (e.g. promoters, ribosome binding sequence, random DNA sequences, coding sequences and terminators) were PCR amplified and cloned in MoClo level 0 vectors, generating a library of level 0 modules (.1). These modules were used to assemble different transcription units (TU) in MoClo Level 1 destination vectors (.2). Finally multiple transcription units were joined to generate timer circuits in the medium copy number reporter plasmids pICH82094 (MoClo level P), its derivative pSVM-mc (MoClo Level M) or in plasmid pSV004 for chromosomal integration, as described below (see ). pSVM-mc was created by Gibson assembly using the primers GF078-GF089-GF080-GF081 to amplify the plasmid backbone from pICH82094, including the resistance cassette and the medium copy number origin of replication, and exchanging the MoClo fusion sites from level P to level M. The circuits assembled on these medium copy number plasmids were transformed in the  reporter strain SV01. SV01 is a derivative of  strain MK01 (), in which we removed the chloramphenicol cassette by expression of the Cre recombinase (). MoClo reactions were set up by pipetting in one tube 15 fmol of each DNA part (PCR product or plasmid), 1 μl of the required restriction enzyme (BsaI or BpiI), 1 μl of T4 DNA ligase (5 U/μl) and 2 μl of Thermo ligase buffer (10x) in a final reaction volume of 20 μl. The reaction was incubated in a thermocycler for 5 h at 37°C, 10 min at 50°C and 10 min at 80°C. 2 μl of the reaction mix were then added to 50 μl chemically competent DH5α cells, incubated for 30 min on ice and transformed by heat shock. 950 μl of liquid LB was then added to the transformation, and the cells were let to recover 45 min at 37°C. 40 μl of the transformation were plated on selective LB plates and then the colonies were tested by colony PCR and restriction digestion. All level 0 plasmids created as well as the final timer circuits were verified by sequencing. Chromosomal integration of timer circuits in  was achieved by site-specific recombination at HK022 phage attachment site using the conditional-replication, integration, and modular (CRIM) plasmids (). Using LCR assembly we adapted the plasmid pAH68 () to the MoClo standard by adding the fusion sites of the vector pAGM8031 and exchanging the resistance cassette from ampicillin to chloramphenicol, generating the plasmid pSV004. This plasmid was used as destination vector to assemble 1- and 2-step timers using the MoClo cloning protocol. Subsequently, chromosomal integration was performed as described previously (). Briefly 2 μl of the MoClo reaction were added to 50 μl chemically competent SV01 cells, carrying the CRIM helper plasmid pAH69, incubated for 30 min on ice and transformed by heat shock. 950 μl of liquid LB was then added to the transformation, and the cells were incubated at 37°C for 1 h and at 42°C for 30 min. 40 μl of the transformation were spread onto selective agar plates and incubated at 37°C. Colonies were tested by colony PCR using the primers P1–P2–P3–P4 (), purified once non-selectively and then tested for antibiotic resistance for stable integration and loss of the helper plasmid. All circuits for  were created using general cloning procedures and all plasmids are BioBrick RFC10 compatible except for pDP3Clux07. The relevant parts were generated by PCR (see ) and purified using HiYield PCR Gel Extraction/PCR Clean-up kit (Süd-Laborbedarf GmbH, Gauting, Germany). Restriction reactions of EcoRI, XbaI, SpeI and PstI as well as ligation reactions were performed using enzymes and buffers from New England Biolabs (NEB; Ipswich, MA, USA) accordingly to the supplier's protocol. Plasmids were isolated using HiYield Plasmid Mini-kit (Süd-Laborbedarf GmbH, Gauting, Germany) and confirmed by sequencing. The constructed plasmids () were introduced into  168 strain as previously described (). Integration of the plasmids into the chromosome was confirmed by colony PCR. Integration of pBS1K derivatives was confirmed by the inability to degrade starch while integration of pBS4S derivatives was confirmed through threonine autotrophy. A complete list of  and  strains can be found in , respectively. Microplate reader assays in  were performed as follows. For each strain a single bacterial colony was picked from selective plates and grown in liquid LB medium until stationary phase (37°C shaking at 250 rpm; 7-8 hours). The day-cultures were diluted 1:6000 into MOPS minimal medium (TEKNOVA Cat.No. M2106; 0.5% glycerol as carbon source) supplemented with appropriate antibiotics and grown over night (37°C shaking at 250 rpm) until they reached an optical density at 600 nm (OD) of 0.5–0.6. The cultures were then diluted to an OD of 0.05 in fresh MOPS minimal medium (see above, but without antibiotic selection) and 100 μl of culture were loaded in the wells of a black 96-well plate (GREINER catalog no.: 655097). Using a Tecan Infinite F200 pro microplate reader the plate was incubated for 7 h (37°C with shaking) and OD as well as luminescence were measured every 5 min. For switching cascades from the OFF to the ON state, after two hours of incubation cells were induced with indicated final concentrations of arabinose and incubation was resumed. For switching cascades from the ON to the OFF state, day-cultures were grown in the same medium as above, but supplemented with 10% arabinose, until they reached an OD of 0.5–0.6. Cultures were then washed, diluted to an OD of 0.05 in fresh arabinose-free MOPS minimal medium, and incubated in a microplate reader as described above. Microplate reader assays in  were performed as previously described (). Briefly, for each strain a single bacterial colony was picked from selective plates and grown overnight in liquid LB medium supplemented with the appropriate antibiotics (30C with shaking). The cultures were then diluted 1:500 in fresh LB medium and incubated for 4 hours (30C with shaking) until they reached an OD between 0.2 and 0.5, at which point they were diluted to an OD of 0.05 in pre-warmed LB and transferred to a 96-well plate. Using a BioTek Synergy™2 multi-mode microplate reader, the plate was incubated (30C with shaking), measuring OD and luminescence every 5 min for 3 h. For switching cascades from the OFF to the ON state, cells were induced after 1 h, from the beginning of the measurement, with indicated final concentrations of bacitracin. For switching cascades from the ON to the OFF state, cells were induced with 10 μg/ml bacitracin for 1.5 h, then washed and re-suspended in fresh, pre-warmed LB medium without bacitracin and then incubated for additional 4 h. The complete set of protein sequences in FASTA format was downloaded from UniProt () for the following organisms:  strain DSM 31,  strain DSM 13,  strain 168,  strain CFBP1430,  strain K12,  strain NCIMB 400. The proteomes were then submitted to ECFfinder () for ECF identification and classification. Supplementary Model Information The computational model developed in this study is detailed in the . Quantification and statistical analysis Figures , ,  and  all utilize statistical analysis, specifically the error bars around mean traces are computed as the standard deviation of experimental replicates. In all such plots, an experimental replicate refers to a separate experiment quantitated and executed in batch mode, using identical experimental parameters. The luciferase activity for each replicate in Figures ,  and  was determined as follows. First, the raw luminescence data obtained from microplate reader measurements was background-corrected by subtracting luminescence values obtained from a control well containing the growth medium alone. Then we corrected for luminescence bleed-through (i.e. light-scattering) from neighbouring wells on the microplate, by using a de-convolution algorithm that will be published elsewhere (Mauri, Vecchione and Fritz, unpublished). Last, the resulting values were divided by the (background-corrected) optical density at each time point during the course of the experiment, which yields the luciferase activity in relative luminescence units per OD (RLU/OD). The time delay in gene induction was defined as the difference between the time at which the luciferase activity first exceeded its average pre-induction value by 2-fold, and the time point of inducer addition. Time delayed response of synthetic ECF cascades in . () All circuits shown in the cartoons of (B–F) were introduced in  strain SV01 on medium copy plasmid pSVM-mc (). Panels (B–F) show the dynamical response of luciferase activity (shown in relative luminescence units normalized by the optical density measured at 600 nm) in synthetic ECF cascades featuring no (B), one (C, D) and two (E, F) ECF σ factors, after the addition of various concentrations of arabinose at t = 0 h (). The time delay of gene induction () is indicated for the highest arabinose concentration (10%) and was defined as the time when luciferase activity first exceeded the pre-induction value by 2-fold. Maximal fold induction is also indicated. The experimental response dynamics () was recorded during exponential growth, as described in Materials and Methods. The response dynamics of the computational model () was obtained by a simultaneous fit of all experimental data in (B–F), showing that the behavior of all five circuits can be explained with one self-consistent set of physiological parameters (see ). Here time delays in the computational model (as given for 10% arabinose) are: () 5 min, () 32 min, () 22 min, () 83 min and () 96 min. Gene regulatory cascades as biological timer circuits To explore the potential of ECF σ factors for synthetic circuit design, we aimed at building gene regulatory cascades of varying length (Figure ), where an inducible promoter  drives the expression of the first regulator , which then activates expression of the downstream regulator , etc., until the final target gene is activated. Such cascades serve as ideal test-bed to study whether multiple ECF σ factors indeed function as orthogonal regulators, and whether their quantitative characteristics are amenable to combining them into larger circuits. On a theoretical basis, it is well established that the dynamical response of such cascades can display a time delay between the inductions of individual genes (see e.g. ()). For instance, let us assume the simple case in which all promoters in the cascade  ( = 1, …,  display a digital response characteristic, for which the activity sharply switches from OFF to ON if the concentration of the regulator  exceeds a threshold value , as observed for cooperatively regulated promoters (Figure , black curve). Upon induction of the first promoter, each regulator  in the cascade will then take a finite time to accumulate from its basal value to the threshold  required for inducing the expression of the downstream regulator (Figure , top panel). This specific time delay depends on various parameters, such as protein production and decay rates or the activation thresholds  of each regulator. Interestingly, for these digital switches the overall time delay of the cascade scales linearly with the number of regulators included (Figure , top panel), much like for timers in digital electronics, where the serial connection of multiple timers additively contributes to the time delay of the composite circuit. Many biological switches, however, feature analog responses, for which the promoter activity increases gradually with increasing regulator concentrations (Figure , blue curve). For instance, alternative σ factors bind RNA polymerase as monomers, leading to non-cooperative regulation of target promoters with low kinetic order (i.e. a Hill coefficient  = 1) (). When combining multiple analog switches into a regulatory cascade, we thus expect that upon induction, rising regulator levels will cause a more gradual activation of target promoters, which may result in a temporal blur in the switching kinetics of individual stages in the cascade (Figure , bottom panel). However, similar to the digital timers above also the cascade of analog switches is predicted to display an increasing overall time delay with increasing cascade length, suggesting that such cascades can still perform the function of a biological timer (Figure , bottom panel). Closer inspection shows that in this case the time delay is no longer additive. Within our simple model this is caused by a decrease of the maximal protein levels from tier to tier, thereby reaching the activation thresholds only at later times. While the extent of signal loss may again sensitively depend on parameter values, such as protein expression and decay rates of individual regulators in the cascade, signal de-amplification is a general feature of non-cooperative regulatory cascades, as has been predicted theoretically for enzyme cascades with simple Michealis-Menten kinetics (,) and will be analyzed in greater detail further below. However, first we wondered whether ECF σ factor cascades would in fact show these hallmark features of analog regulatory cascades in an experimental setup. Performance evaluation of ECF switches in a new  setup For the experimental implementation of ECF switches and cascades, we then established a genetic system to assemble circuits from a library of DNA parts in a rapid and scalable way. To this end we leveraged the modular cloning (MoClo) system (), a Golden Gate-based vector system allowing for the hierarchical and modular assembly of transcription units into higher order circuits. Briefly, we generated a library of genetic parts (e.g. promoters, ribosome binding sites, coding sequences and terminators) in MoClo level 0 vectors, assembled them into transcription units (TUs) using MoClo level 1 vectors, which were finally combined into regulatory circuits in MoClo level M vectors (see Materials and Methods for details). To quickly test  circuit performance, we created a new MoClo level M vector pSVM-mc that directly serves as medium copy number expression plasmid in . The integration of all parts on one plasmid has the advantage of maintaining the stoichiometry between the copy number of all circuit components at any time. In order to insulate transcription units (TUs) against transcriptional read-through or other polar effects (), we placed neighbouring TUs in alternating orientations and introduced multiple terminators () as well as stretches of random, non-coding DNA between them, thereby abolishing any undesired cross-activation between neighbouring TUs (). Next, we focussed on the 10 ECF σ factors that previously showed the most desirable characteristics for implementation in higher order circuits, ., high activity, low cross-talk and little toxicity in  strain DH10ß () (). To assess the function of these ECF σ factors in our setup, we placed the ECF coding genes under the control of the arabinose-inducible P promoter and fused the ECF target promoters to a luciferase cassette from  (), which has proven to be a highly sensitive reporter system for  gene expression analyses ().  strain SV01, which constitutively expresses the arabinose permease  and carries a deletion of the  operon responsible for arabinose catabolism, was used to allow for a graded, arabinose-dependent induction of P() (see Materials and Methods and ). Finally, the functionality of the ECF σ factors was benchmarked by growing strain SV01 carrying plasmid-encoded ECF switches in defined minimal media (doubling time ∼150 min) and assaying luciferase activity for 4 h after the addition of arabinose. Overall, we found that all 10 ECF σ factors strongly activated their cognate target promoters (∼1000- to 10 000-fold over empty vector control) while displaying little toxicity (see ). This result demonstrates that our setup allows for highly sensitive monitoring of ECF target promoter activity. Among all ECF σ factors tested, ECF28, ECF32 and ECF34 displayed the highest fold-induction of the target promoter (between 20 and 100-fold) and had no detectable deleterious effects on cell growth (), leading us to proceed with those ECF σ factors for further analysis. Dynamical response of ECF switches and cascades in Thereafter, we studied the timing behaviour in the induction of ECF28, ECF32 and ECF34 switches. Toward this end, we measured the kinetic response in luciferase activity after the induction of strains carrying the different ECF switches with various arabinose concentrations (Figure ). In order to compare circuit dynamics between various ECF switches, we defined their response time as the time between the addition of the highest inducer concentration and the time at which luciferase activity first exceeds its pre-induction activity more than 2-fold. While the control strain harboring a P construct showed a rapid response time of 5 min (Figure ), the activation of the ECF28, ECF32 and ECF34 switches was delayed by 15–30 min (Figure ,  and ). This suggests that the ECF target promoter activity relies on the gradual accumulation of functional ECF proteins, which generates a time delay between inducer addition (up-regulation of  expression) and target promoter activation. In contrast, we did not observe a significant increase of luciferase activity in any of the negative control circuits, which either lack the ECF σ factor or the ECF target promoter (), showing that the delayed response is specific to the slow accumulation of ECF σ factors. Based on the observed time delay and the fact that each circuit involves the expression of one  gene, we refer to them as 1-step timer circuits from now on. Strikingly, when combining ECF32 and ECF28 into 2-step timer cascades in different permutations (Figure  and ), we found that the activation of the luciferase cassette by the second ECF in the cascade occurred with significantly longer delays of 100 min (Figure ) and 85 min (Figure ). This confirms our qualitative expectation that the time-delayed response that scales with the length of the ECF σ factor cascade (Figure ). Interestingly, the variability between time delays observed in independent biological replicates was less than 5 min (Figure ; horizontal error bars). While such a characteristic time delay on population average does not necessarily imply a homogeneous timing in all cells of the culture, it clearly suggests robust circuit performance at the bulk level. Despite reproducible timing, however, we also noted that the 1-step and 2-step timer circuits displayed a reduced output-dynamic range when compared to the P control strain (which we refer to as 0-step timer): while P showed a 2200-fold induction upon arabinose addition, this reduces to a 30-fold and 45-fold induction in the ECF28 and ECF32 1-step timers (Figure  and ), respectively, down to a 6-fold induction in both 2-step timers (Figure  and ). Here, the decreasing dynamic range is largely caused by an increased baseline activity of the 1-step and 2-step timers even in the absence of arabinose. Note that the negative control strains, not expressing the second ECF in the 2-step timer cascade, also displayed non-cognate target promoter activity, although about 1000-fold weaker than the regulation by the cognate ECF (), indicating that the increasing baseline activity in the 2-step timers is caused by the cognate ECF σ factor and not the other ECF σ factor of the cascade. Interestingly, when combining all ECF σ factors into 3-step timer cascades (containing ECF28, ECF32 and ECF34 in two different permutations) the baseline increased even more, leading to an almost complete loss of their output-dynamic range (). Computational model for ECF σ factor cascades We developed a set of detailed computational models for the ECF timer circuits to test whether these experimental data can be rationalized at a quantitative level. In particular, we asked whether the dynamics and fold-change of the 2-step timers was in quantitative agreement with the behaviour of the 1-step timers. Here, we reasoned that if ECF σ factors would display orthogonality in different genetic environments (i.e. circuits), the dynamics of all circuits should be captured by a set of models sharing the same parameters for the same ECF σ factors. Briefly, our computational model for a 2-step timer circuit (Figure ) comprises transcription (at rates ) and translation (at rates ) of the two ECF σ factors  and  as well as the  reporter cassette (), degradation and/or dilution of the resulting mRNA and protein species (at rates  and , respectively), binding of the ECF σ factor to the RNA polymerase core (with binding constants  and ) as well as binding of the resulting holoenzymes to their cognate promoters (with binding constants  and ). Analogous to the model for the 2-step timer depicted in Figure , we developed similar models also for the 1- and 0-step timers (see Materials and Methods for details). In order to test for compatibility of this set of models with our experimental data, we followed a sequential approach: First, we fitted our model to the data of the 0-step timer (Figure ; ), thereby inferring the kinetic parameters required to describe the P promoter as well as the luciferase reporter (see ). Then we fixed those parameters and varied only the parameters specific to the individual ECF σ factors, thereby fitting the models of the 1- and 2-step timers simultaneously to the experimental data (Figure –; ). Notably, all experimental data is well captured by models sharing a single set of parameters, showing that ECF28 and ECF32 display invariant quantitative behavior when being integrated in the 1- and 2-step timers. This suggests that the functional properties of these ECF σ factors are independent of the complexity of the synthetic circuit they are used in, i.e. they behave indeed orthogonally. Moreover, when integrating all information into a model for the two variants of the 3-step timers described above, the computational model correctly predicts the experimentally observed increase in baseline activity without invoking any additional fit parameters. However, while the experimental data still displays a weak (∼2-fold) residual induction for both 3-step timers, the model predicts a complete loss of dynamic range, suggesting that the  system retains subtle interactions that are not entirely captured in the computational model (; ). To illustrate the origin of the decreasing dynamic range within our mathematical model, we considered a scenario in which both ECF σ factors of the 2-step timer, referred to as ECFs X and Y, have identical expression strengths and promoter binding characteristics (Figure ). Moreover, we chose a set of physiological parameter values () and assumed that the circuit is present at 50 copies/cell, reflecting the situation of a medium copy plasmid. Under these conditions already the basal activity of the inducible promoter is predicted to lead to an average copy number of 3 ECF X molecules/cell, which, based on the high number of target promoters (50 copies), will in turn lead to the production of 25 ECF Y molecules/cell (Figure ; ). This amplification of baseline activity is further exacerbated in the last step of the cascade, for which the reporter gene activity is almost 100-fold higher than the baseline activity of the inducible promoter (Figure ; ). Ultimately, the fact that each ECF σ factors produces more ECF σ factors of the downstream step in the cascade will inevitably lead to full promoter saturation in downstream stages of longer ECF cascades. On the other hand, when considering a chromosomally integrated circuit present only at a low copy number (1–8 copies/cell, depending on growth conditions), our model predicts that even at full activation of the first ECF σ factor, each subsequent step in the cascade will produce less ECFs than the previous one, leading to a quick decay of circuit's maximal output with increasing cascade length (Figure ). Only at intermediate circuit copy numbers – when the output-dynamic range of the first ECF σ factor optimally matches the input-dynamic range of the second ECF σ factor does our model predicts an improved signal transmission through the 2-step timer circuit (Figure ; ). Note that the optimal circuit copy number, however, critically depends on the strength of the ECF promoters involved. For stronger promoters, our model predicts that lower circuit copy numbers are required to achieve maximal signal transmission (Figure ; ). From this we expected that timer circuits comprising strong ECF target promoters would display a higher output dynamic range on single copy than on a multi-copy plasmid. Computational model for ECF cascades. () Computational model for a σ factor cascade comprising two ECFs  and , the latter of which drives expression of the luciferase ( cassette. In the model we included transcription and translation of genes and mRNAs of  and the  cassette, with transcription rates  and translation rates β (). In addition, degradation and/or dilution of mRNA and protein species occur at rates  and , respectively, ECF σ factors bind to core RNA polymerase with equilibrium dissociation constant  and the resulting holoenzymes bind to their cognate promoters with dissociation constant (. For further details please refer to the . () Signal propagation in the 2-step timer cascade for plasmid-borne (B; copy number  = 50) and for chromosomal circuit expression (C; copy number  = 1). The lower panel shows the equilibrium abundance of ECF Y proteins (output of the first ECF promoter P) as a function of the abundance of ECF X proteins (all units are molecules/cell). Accordingly, on top, the equilibrium abundance of reporter proteins (output of the second ECF promoter P) as a function of the abundance of ECF Y proteins is shown. Here, LOW and HIGH indicate the respective protein abundances obtained at basal and maximal activity of the inducible promoter P, which drives  expression. () Computation model prediction of the variation of the output dynamic range of the 2-step timer circuit as a function of the circuit copy number for the two exemplary cases in which the ECF target promoter has high (dashed line) or medium (solid line) strength. Expression dynamics and signal propagation in chromosomally integrated timer circuits Based on our predictions, we next addressed the question if a reduction in circuit copy number would improve signal transmission in our ECF cascades. Towards that end, we integrated all 0-, 1- and 2-step timers into the chromosome of  (see Materials and Methods for details) and monitored luciferase activity upon induction with different arabinose concentrations (Figure ). For the 0-step timer (P, Figure ), the maximal activity at high arabinose levels was decreased by a factor of 15 when compared to the plasmid-encoded 0-step timer (Figure ). Surprisingly, the basal activity decreased by a factor of ≥400 (reaching the lower luciferase detection limit), leading to an overall output-dynamic range of at least 50000x for the chromosomally integrated construct (Figure ). Although the molecular origin for this context-dependence remains elusive, it is plausible that the DNA loop required for P repression in the absence of arabinose () is more stable on the chromosome as compared to the medium copy plasmid, which might lead to tighter P regulation of the chromosomally integrated construct. Consistent with this low basal activity of P, we found that the basal activity of all 1- and 2-step timers also remains at the lower detection limit (Figure –), confirming our model prediction that the OFF state should be stably maintained for low copy timer circuits (Figure ). Likewise, our model predicted a decrease of the maximal output strength with increasing ECF cascade length, which we qualitatively confirmed in all chromosomal timer circuits (Figure –). Output reduction, however, was far stronger in the ECF28-based 1-step timer (250-fold; Figure ) compared to the ECF32-based 1-step timer (2.5-fold; Figure ), suggesting the existence of non-linear effects also in the regulation of ECF target promoters, which cannot be explained by mere circuit copy number reduction. Concomitant with output reduction we also observed an apparent increase in time delay, which was much stronger in the ECF28-based 1-step timer (130 min) compared to the ECF32-based 1-step timer (15 min) (Figure  and ). When combining the two ECFs into 2-step timer circuits in different permutations (Figure –), the time delay slightly increased to 140 min (Figure ) and 135 min (Figure ), while the output dynamic range only decreased to 80-fold and 50-fold, respectively. These data show that a reduction of circuit copy number indeed improves signal transmission through the 2-step timers, ending up with a more than 10-fold higher output dynamic range than for the equivalent plasmid-encoded circuits (cf. Figure  and ). However, integrating the circuits into the  chromosome still lead to a decrease of maximal signal strength with increasing ECF cascade length, suggesting that in the future additional fine-tuning of ECF σ factor expression levels to match their cognate target promoter characteristics will help improving signal transmission even further. Single-copy autonomous timer circuits in . () All circuits shown in the cartoons of (–) were integrated into the chromosome of  strain SV01 using the pSV plasmid series (). Panels (B–F) show the dynamical response of luciferase activity (shown in relative luminescence units normalized by the optical density measured at 600 nm) in synthetic ECF cascades featuring no (B), one (C, D) and two (E, F) ECF σ factors, after the addition of various concentrations of arabinose at  = 0 h (). The time delay of gene induction () is indicated for the highest arabinose concentration (10%) and was defined as the time when luciferase activity first exceeded the pre-induction value by 2-fold. Maximal fold induction is also indicated. The experimental response dynamics () was recorded during exponential growth, as described in Materials and Methods. Implementation of orthogonal ECF switches in We next aimed at expanding the potential of ECF σ factors as synthetic orthogonal regulators beyond the  species border. We therefore chose to implement of ECF switches in the Gram-positive model organism . We selected 10 ECF-promoter pairs () from organisms belonging to the  and  (,), such that members of the chosen ECF groups were not present in , thereby minimizing the probability of undesired cross-reactions. Functionality of ECF σ factors in  was tested by placing the ECF-encoding genes under the control of the LIKE expression system, which is based on the bacitracin-inducible P promoter (). The ECF target promoters were transcriptionally fused to a -adapted luciferase cassette (,). As a host, we used  strain 168 and integrated each TU at a different locus on the chromosome (see ), to avoid any negative effects of poor insulation of the components of the switch. All chosen loci are located close to the chromosomal origin of replication, assuring that any negative positioning effects are minimized (,). Out of the 10 ECF-promoter pairs tested, we found that three ECF target promoters (ECF41, ECFUN and ECF105) displayed strong activity when their cognate ECF σ factor was expressed (), while the other seven constructs did not show any discernable luciferase activity (data not shown). Here, titration of ECF41, ECFUN and ECF105 lead to a 100-, 30- and 15-fold upregulation of their cognate target promoters, respectively, while the negative control strains not expressing the ECF σ factors showed target promoter activities close to the luminescence background (). Moreover, the expression of one type of ECF σ factor did not trigger the activation of non-cognate ECF target promoters (), showing that there is no discernable cross-regulation between these heterologous ECF switches within our experimental detection limit. While these observations demonstrate specific activation of the target promoters by their cognate ECF σ factors, we also tested whether overexpression of these ECF σ factors had any adverse effects on  physiology. But neither the growth behavior in LB medium () nor the expression behavior of a housekeeping promoter (P, ()) were affected by the overexpression of any of the three ECF σ factors (). These data highlight the potential of ECF σ factors as orthogonal regulators also in the Gram-positive model organism . Besides implementing ECF switches in , we also wanted to probe whether ECF σ factors are amenable to higher order circuit design in this host. Towards this end we used the three functional ECF σ factors implemented above, and constructed chromosomally encoded ECF timers in  (see Materials and Methods for details). When comparing the dynamic behavior of the 0-step timer (P) to the one of the 1-step timers containing ECF41, ECFUN and ECF105, we found that the quick response of the 0-step timer (5 min; Figure ) was delayed in the 1-step timers (15–20 min; Figure – and ) and even more in the 2-step timers combining ECF41 and ECFUN (40 min; Figure  and ). These values are comparable to the doubling time of  (35 min in LB medium at 30C), in agreement with our observations in . Likewise, also the output-dynamic range decreased from a ∼200-fold induction in the 0-step timer to a ∼15–100-fold induction in the 1-step timers (Figure  and  and ). In , both the maximal activity as well as the baseline decreased from the 0-step to the 1-step timers. This is even more pronounced in the 2-step timers that combine ECF41 and ECFUN, for which the overall activity approaches the lower detection limit of luciferase activity, thereby reducing the induction range to 3-fold (ECF41-ECFUN- Figure ) and 8-fold (ECFUN-ECF41- Figure ). Note that luciferase signals close to the detection limit naturally display higher sample-to-sample variability, which leads to increased measurement noise and hence higher standard deviations (error bars) in the  data. However, overall these results are in qualitative agreement with the expectation raised by our computational model (Figure ), which predicted a decay of the overall signal strength with increasing length of the σ factor cascade for single-copy ECF timer circuits. This data also fits our observations on the behavior of the chromosomally encoded  timer circuits (cf. Figure ). Taken together, these results clearly demonstrate that more complex ECF circuits can also be functionally assembled in , where they display similar characteristics to ECF circuits in . Time delayed response of synthetic ECF cascades in . () All circuits shown in the cartoons of (–) were integrated into the chromosome of  168. Panels (B–F) show the dynamical response of luciferase activity (shown in relative luminescence units normalized by the optical density measured at 600 nm) in synthetic ECF cascades featuring no (B), one (C, D) and two (E, F) ECF σ factors, after the addition of various concentrations of bacitracin at  = 0 h (). The time delay of gene induction () is indicated for the highest bacitracin concentration (10 μg/ml) and was defined as the time when luciferase activity first exceeded the pre-induction value by 2-fold. Maximal fold induction is also indicated. The experimental response dynamics () was recorded throughout growth, as described in Materials and Methods. The response dynamics of the computational model () was obtained by a simultaneous fit of all experimental data in (B–F), showing that the behavior of all 5 circuits can be explained with one self-consistent set of physiological parameters (see ). Here, the time delays in the computational model (as given for 10 μg/ml bacitracin) are: (B) 5 min, (C) 12 min, (D) 14 min, (E) 25 min and (F) 35 min. Computational model for σ factor cascades in Based on the convergent qualitative behavior of ECF circuits in both organisms, we wondered whether the experimental data in  is also quantitatively consistent with our computational model. Adapting all species-specific model parameters to those known for  () and estimating the remaining ones in a sequential fitting approach as described above, indeed showed that the kinetic response of all circuits was well-captured with a single set of parameters (solid lines in Figure  and ). During the fitting process it was necessary to incorporate time-dependent basal promoter activities of P and P into the model, as they slightly increase at  = 0.5–1 h even in the absence of inducer (Figure  and ). Since this behavior is also found in the negative controls not expressing any heterologous ECF σ factors () and since it coincides with the end of exponential phase (see ), it is conceivable that P and P are partially recognized by one of the endogenous σ factors of , some of which are up-regulated during transition phase of  (,). While these observations suggest that orthogonality of ECF switches is reduced during transition phase, we would like to emphasize that these non-specific modulations on basal ECF promoter activities are small (2–3-fold), and thus still allow for predictable circuit behavior even during the entry into stationary phase. Indeed, within our model both the delayed response times as well as the decreasing dynamic range for longer ECF cascades was accurately captured (solid lines in Figure  and ). Moreover, as was the case for , the model predicts an almost complete loss of output-dynamic range for the 3-step timer circuits in , which we also confirmed experimentally (see ). Recovery of signal transmission in  chromosomally encoded ECF cascades Our computational analysis suggested that signal transmission in ECF σ factor cascades can be improved by lowering the overall ECF σ factor expression level in plasmid-encoded circuits. But reducing the copy number (from ∼50 in plasmid-encoded circuits to ∼1 in chromosomally-encoded circuits) lead to a loss of maximal output signal, both in  and  (Figures  and ). For recovering signal transmission, we increased the expression level of only the first ECF σ factor of the cascade, as it has been previously shown that such an approach can recover the loss of output imposed by the reduction in copy number on a toggle switch (). We have used the  2-step timers as a test case and placed the first TU (P-ECF41 or P) on a multi-copy plasmid, while keeping the other two TUs (P and P or P and P) on the chromosome (). These partially plasmid-encoded 2-step timers showed a similar time delay to their chromosomally encoded counterparts, and indeed reached higher maximal activity levels that were not accompanied by an increase of the baseline (). The resulting increases in dynamic range (from 3- to 6-fold in the ECF41-ECFUN- 2-step timer and from 8- to 12-fold in the ECFUN-ECF41- timer) demonstrate that the behavior of the ECF timers can be improved by fine-tuning the expression levels of its components. Taken together, our results unveil a fundamental limitation for signal propagation via σ factor cascades, which is linked to the fact that σ factors operate in a non-cooperative manner. Indeed, σ factors bind to RNA polymerase as monomers, and so do the resulting holoenzymes to their promoters (). Accordingly, the dose–response curves of ECF promoters are hyperbolic (with an effective Hill exponent ≤ 1), such that double the σ factor concentration can maximally lead to double the target promoter activity. Given that the dose-response curve is additionally limited by a basal promoter activity at low, and by promoter saturation at high ECF σ factor levels, a given input-dynamic range of ECF σ factor concentrations will almost certainly be transferred into a lower output-dynamic range of the downstream ECF σ factor, i.e. information will be lost within this step in the cascade. While our current design does not circumvent this limitation, our model shows that by fine-tuning the magnitude of output gene expression to match precisely the diagonal in Figure –, e.g. by adjusting the overall expression strength of the downstream ECF σ factor, it is possible to optimize signal transmission to its theoretical maximum. Switching kinetics of ECF cascades from ON to OFF How do the constructed timer circuits respond when the expression of the first gene in the cascade is suddenly turned OFF? Similar to the switching kinetics when suddenly turned ON, theory predicts that there should be also an increasing time delay with increasing cascade length for the reverse switching direction (). This is based on the fact that after shut-down of the first promoter, ECF σ factor levels have to be diluted and/or degraded below the activation threshold for their target promoter, such that expression of the downstream σ factor is turned OFF, etc. To test this prediction experimentally we first pre-induced timer circuits in  and  with their highest inducer levels (10% arabinose and 10 μg/ml bacitracin, respectively), then washed cells with inducer-free medium and monitored luciferase activity in a microplate reader (Figure ). For the ECF σ factor cascades in  (Figure ), we observed that after inducer removal ( = 0 h), luciferase activity first increased ∼2-fold within 0.5 – 2 h and then decreased with different rates. This somewhat unexpected increase in luciferase activity after inducer removal is presumably caused by a transient decrease in the growth rate after the washing step (), which results in a decreased protein dilution rate and hence in increased accumulation of luciferase enzymes. Importantly, closer inspection of the switching kinetics shows that both the time at which luciferase activity peaks (Figure ), as well as the timescale at which the luciferase signal decays (Figure ) increases with the number of genes in the ECF cascade, as expected qualitatively. Here, the signal half-life time of the 0-step timer (130 min) is only slightly faster than the cell doubling time in these experiments (∼175 min), suggesting that the luciferase enzymes are mostly stable and only diluted due to cell growth. While longer ECF cascades display up to a 2–4 fold increase in signal half-life times (Figure ), for the 1-step timer involving ECF32 the signal half-life time is very similar to the 0-step timer. This is consistent with the fact that our model predicted low protein stability for ECF32 from the induction experiments above (cf. ). Interestingly, when simulating our computational model with the parameter set inferred before, the theoretical prediction for the switching kinetics from ON to OFF is strikingly similar to the experimental response dynamics – displaying also a growth rate-induced peak in luciferase signal (Figure ). Although the signal half-life time predicted by the model is slightly higher than determined experimentally (Figure ), the model captures the temporal hierarchy of switching kinetics across the different cascades very well – including also the rapid OFF-switching of the ECF32-containing 1-step timer (Figure ; ). Parallel to these observations in , we found that when switching the ECF σ factor cascades in  from ON to OFF by washing cells with inducer-free medium, they also displayed a longer signal half-life time with increasing cascade length (Figure  and ). In this case, we did not observe a growth-delay after the washing step, and accordingly an almost instant exponential decrease in luciferase signals until cells enter the transition to stationary phase after ∼1.5 h. Strikingly, also here the previously inferred model parameters () lead to model predictions that qualitatively captured the experimental kinetics (Figure ). This includes also the switching kinetics of the ECF41-involving 1-step timer, which displays a similarly rapid signal half-life time than the 0-step timer (Figure ), as predicted theoretically based on a reduced protein half-life of ECF41 (). However, the half-life times of the 2-step timers were overestimated 2–3-fold by our model, likely because both signals are already close to the background, leading to noisy half-life estimates. In summary, these results clearly show that multi-tiered ECF σ factor cascades not only respond with a progressively longer time delay when switched ON, but also relax to their initial state more slowly when switched OFF. The striking congruence between our model predictions and the experimental dynamics further corroborates the validity of our model, and suggests that two of the heterologous ECF σ factors (ECF32 in  and ECF41 in ) are subject to proteolysis . Switching synthetic ECF cascades from ON to OFF state. Decay of luciferase activity in () plasmid-encoded timer circuits in  and () chromosomally integrated timer circuits in , when cells are shifted from inducer-rich (10% arabinose in (A), 10 μg/ml bacitracin in (D)) to inducer-free medium at  = 0 h. The strains used in (A) and (D) are identical to those in Figures  and , respectively. Symbols and error bars indicate mean and standard deviation from three independent biological replicates. () and () show the computational prediction () for the switching kinetics from ON to OFF state in the models for the timer circuits of  and , respectively, when the transcription rate of the inducible promoter is shifted to its basal value at  = 0 h. Solid lines in (A and B) correspond to fits of an exponentially decaying function, which was used to infer the experimental and theoretical signal half-life times reported in ( and ). Note that the time interval for these fits (2.5–5 h in (A and B); 0–1.5 h in (D and E)) was restricted to a period of constant exponential growth (cf. ). In this study we have demonstrated that heterologous ECF σ factors can be successfully implemented in two distantly related bacteria –  and  to build orthogonal synthetic circuitry containing two or more such regulators. The ECF σ factors applied here are derived from phylogenetically distant organisms and belong to six distinct ECF subgroups. As such, they recognize different target promoter sequences and are controlled by different mechanisms (). Despite this variation of the individual building blocks, we found a strikingly convergent circuit behavior in all assembled variants. In fact, in both organisms the ECF σ factor cascades showed the function of ‘autonomous timers’, with a characteristic time delay between inducer addition and activation, as well as between inducer removal and deactivation of target gene expression. The quantitative behavior of these timers can be explained by a computational model, which not only predicts the time delays imposed by the increasing length of the ECF σ factor cascade, but also captures the experimentally observed loss of dynamic range in both  and . Hence, our study demonstrates that phylogenetically different ECF σ factors share very similar functional characteristics in different model species, suggesting that ECF σ factors might be universally applicable to a range of other bacteria, including biotechnological workhorses such as  () or  (). Autonomous timer circuits based on orthogonal ECF σ factors will therefore not only expand the synthetic regulatory repertoire in other important microorganisms, but also enable biotechnological applications. For instance, the yield of heterologous inositol production in  could be greatly enhanced by delaying the expression of engineered pathway enzymes until midway through the cultivation (). Such a dynamic flux control allowed substrate pools to first accumulate and then be directed into the engineered pathway, analogous to the ‘just-in-time transcription’ frequently found in natural systems (). While Gupta  used an engineered quorum sensing circuit to globally slave the expression of all pathway components to bacterial growth phase (), the autonomous timers built here would allow for the introduction of a fine-tuned timing hierarchy between the expression of individual pathway components. For instance, if the ultimate product of the heterologous pathway is toxic to the cell, it is advantageous to quickly express early enzymes in the pathway and defer the expression of the last, product-forming enzyme until sufficient intermediates have accumulated, thereby maximizing total yield (). With our ECF-based timer circuits we achieved maximal time delays of 1–2 cell doubling times in both model organisms, a timescale at which pathway intermediates could indeed accumulate. Interestingly, the time delays of our  timer circuits are comparable to time delays measured in an  cell free () expression system (), in which σ factor cascades generated time delays between 5 and 10 min (for a single σ factor) and 60 min (for a cascade of five σ factors). In addition to a precise temporal control of gene expression, the optimization of biosynthetic pathway productivity critically hinges on the fine-tuning of relative enzyme stoichiometries (). Although it would be ideal to tune expression timing and strength independently, the current prototypes of our autonomous timer circuits exhibit a strong correlation between the time delay and the overall strength of final target gene expression. Generally, our model showed that the decrease of output dynamic range in later stages of the ECF cascade can be explained with the non-cooperative regulation of ECF target promoters, resulting in an output dynamic range that will always be smaller than its input dynamic range (cf. Figure ). Through fine-tuning the circuit copy number we showed that signal transmission through the ECF cascade can be improved (cf. Figures  and ) – essentially by adjusting the output dynamic range of one ECF promoter to the input dynamic range of the next ECF promoter. Note that similar fine-tuning of input and output dynamic ranges was required when functionally connecting a library of multiple Tet repressor homologs within the genetic design environment ‘Cello’ (). Likewise, during the conversion of a bistable multi-copy genetic toggle switch into a single-copy variant, bistability could only be preserved by either increasing overall expression strength or by reducing basal promoter activity (), showing that also here the expression strength of transcriptional regulators (LacI and TetR) needs to be finely adjusted to a condition-dependent ‘operating’ point. Besides fine-tuning ECF expression levels, another strategy to improve signal transmission in the timer circuits could be inspired by natural σ factor cascades, which often control complex temporal sequences of developmental processes, e.g., in the sporulation cascade of Firmicutes bacteria (). Signal transmission in these cascades heavily relies on the expression of anti-σ factors, which can sequester σ factors into transcriptionally unproductive σ/anti-σ factor complexes. Here, sequestration reduces target promoter activity at low σ factor levels and thereby effectively causes a non-linear (ultrasensitive) dose-response behavior for rising σ levels (,). The introduction of heterologous anti-σ factors into synthetic timer cascades could hence facilitate signal amplification and would help generating a digital switching behavior between the OFF and ON states of the target promoter. Similarly, ultrasensitivity has been successfully exploited to build time delays in switches and cascades comprised of other regulators, such as in a synthetic DNA strand-displacement circuit (), in a synthetic protein-protein sequestration cascade () or in a cascade of cooperatively regulated transcription factors (). While these examples indicate that the introduction of ultrasensitivity via anti-σ factors could convey a number of desirable characteristics to the construction of autonomous timers and other ECF-based synthetic circuitry, it was shown that the expression of heterologous anti-σ factors is associated with significant toxicity in  (). This suggests that the simultaneous expression of multiple anti-σ factors will be problematic. Thus, scaling up the use of anti-σ factors in synthetic ECF circuits will only be possible if we better understand and minimize the burden incurred by anti-σ expression. In conclusion, we have successfully implemented ECF σ factor-based autonomous timers  and demonstrated that the concept is generally applicable to different ECF groups, organisms or genetic systems. In the future we expect that the combination of orthogonal ECF σ factors with other tools for transcriptional, translational and post-translational synthetic circuit design () will greatly facilitate the development of more sophisticated  gene expression programs in a variety of biotechnological applications and production hosts. Click here for additional data file..