T cells have emerged as a promising
candidate for cell-based therapies, and engineering of T cells to
express antigen-specific chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) has enabled
programmable targeting of cancer cells. Multiple clinical trials with CARs against
B cell cancers have driven up to a 90% complete response rate in patients, and several CAR T cell products targeting acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) and non-Hodgkin lymphoma have been approved for clinical use
in the United States. Despite these promising clinical results,
there are significant
safety and efficacy considerations with CAR T cell therapies, often
mirroring fundamental regulatory challenges of the immune system. For example, the immune system naturally seeks to prevent autoimmune
reactions by selecting against highly autoreactive T cells during
their development in the thymus. However,
engineered cancer-specific receptors often target markers that, while
overexpressed on tumor cells, may still be found at lower levels in
healthy tissues. These modified cells
have the potential for an autoreactive “on-target, off-tumor”
response, which has been observed and proven fatal in at least one
clinical trial. In addition, there are
numerous regulatory checks that prevent the immune system from responding
too strongly against pathogens and causing systemic harm, checks that
may become disrupted by engineered T cells. CARs, in particular, can
instigate a strong cytokine release in response to antigen stimulation,
accelerating the immune response to potentially fatal levels. This
cytokine release syndrome (CRS) has been observed in several CAR T
cell clinical trials, and a regimen of immunosuppressive
drugs is often required to ameliorate the response. These safety considerations point to the dangerous
aspects of what
is otherwise the major advantage of cell-based therapies: the ability
to drive strong responses based on the cell’s own machinery.
Targeted cytotoxicity is fundamental to the power of T cell therapies,
but it is also the basis of its potential harms. This challenge is
compounded by the immense cost—both in time and money—of
cell-based therapies, which makes it difficult to iterate this therapy
over and over again until it meets a patient’s individual needs. T cell therapies would thus greatly benefit from the development
of tools that allow greater control over cell behavior, enabling an
already personalized therapy to be customizable toward a patient’s
immediate and changing needs. Advances in genetic engineering and
synthetic biology have provided significant insight into both the
design and implementation of such controls in the form of synthetic
receptors, protein-based switches, genetic circuits, and genome editing
tools. These tools have in turn been used
to create “ON-Switch” CARs, combinatorial activation systems, doxycycline-inducible
CARs, antibody-inducible CARs, kill switches, pause switches, tunable receptor systems, proliferation
switches, and a universal “off
the shelf” T cell. These systems
all reflect the tremendous potential of synthetic biology approaches
in developing safer and more powerful forms of T cell therapy that
can be customized to fit each patient. While these technologies
offer important forms of control over
T cell behavior, their designs are accompanied by limitations. For
example, while kill switches provide vital control in cases where
the T cells are toxic to the patient, completely shutting off the
therapy may be an extreme response for patients who only require a
slight modification of the therapy to abrogate negative reactions.
Some approaches are also only limited to certain types of therapy,
such as the many CAR receptor designs that strictly provide added
flexibility and control to CAR T cell therapy. In addition, certain
inducible systems like the “ON Switch” CAR require the
drug-inducer to be continuously provided to maintain the ON state,
which may be less ideal if permanent changes are required for a patient.
Furthermore, prolonged drug-inducer exposure may be detrimental to
patients if the inducer has a less than ideal safety profile, even
when the drug is FDA-approved. While these approaches will advance
the scope of potential T cell therapies, developing further technologies
that are compatible with them may help to expand their use. To address the need for advanced control of T cell responses for
various immunotherapy applications, we have developed a drug-inducible
genetic circuit platform that acts as a one-time state switch in human
primary T cells. This platform is designed to be lentivirus-compatible,
which will facilitate genetic modification of human primary T cells.
Our system also has memory capability that reduces the need for prolonged
drug administration to maintain gene expression level. We have adapted
these circuits to control CAR expression, creating a variety of circuits,
including an On Switch (ON), Off Switch (OFF), and Expression Level
Switch (EXP) that controls CAR expression, alters T cell behavior,
retains memory, and exhibits activity that can be tuned  drug dosage and duration. The ON and the OFF switch enable control
over when a CAR is expressed in a cell, while the EXP switch provides
a novel mechanism to combine the memory capacity of the circuit with
the ability to modulate the level of CAR expression within each cell.
All three forms of control provide paths toward more complex therapeutic
strategies, and these gene switches represent the most versatile switches
in T cells and have the potential to improve the safety and efficacy
of T cell immunotherapy. Recombinase-Based Gene
Switch for Controlling CAR Expression To implement a lentivirus-compatible,
two-state switch with memory
in T cells, we have adapted the recombinase-based flip-excision (FLEx)
stable inversion switch for T cells. Recombinases are enzymes that
can perform inversion or excision steps on DNA based on the relative
orientation of DNA recognition sites. Recombinases were chosen for
this work because they have demonstrated exceptional versatility and
performance for engineering of gene regulation systems in mammalian
cells. The FLEx switch was initially
designed using the Cre/ system to regulate gene
expression in mammalian cells  retroviral transduction
of the switch. This system relies upon
the availability of orthogonal  variant sites
that are recognized by the Cre recombinase but do not interact with
other variant sequences. Activation of the FLEx switch with recombinase
begins with an unstable inversion step followed by a stable excision
step, effectively removing one sequence of DNA and inverting another
(). Due to
the configuration and of recombination sites in the final product,
this stable inversion switch can only be performed one time. The overall
product is a one-time state switch that—when genes are encoded
between the recombination sites—can stably alter gene expression  recombinase activity. The FLEx switch exhibits several
features that make it both applicable
and beneficial toward T cell therapies. The stable inversion capability
means that unlike a transcriptionally inducible gene system, this
circuit contains memory: when recombinase activity is terminated,
changes made to the cells are maintained. This property is ideal for
therapeutic strategies that seek a permanent change to T cell behavior
without requiring continuous drug intake. It also enables changes
to remain robust in response to rapid changes in proliferation that
may dilute protein levels. In addition, the FLEx switch avoids the
use of genetic elements that cannot be implemented with viruses. For
example, transcription termination sites are a powerful and simple
element that enables the design of complex recombinase-based logic
systems in mammalian cells. However,
transcription termination sites interfere with the reverse transcription
process of viral integration, and sequences containing transcription
termination sites cannot be integrated into the T cell genome  viral transduction, rendering them unusable in many
clinical settings that rely upon viral transduction for engineered
T cell production. The FLEx switch does not contain transcriptional
stop sites or other elements that would interfere with viral integration,
and it has demonstrated lentiviral compatibility. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00512/suppl_file/sb8b00512_si_001.pdf While the FLEx switch has been designed with the
Cre/ system, Cre exhibits toxicity in mammalian cells
due to the presence of pseudo- sites in the genome.
This genotoxicity requires careful tuning to be mitigated. We initially developed a Cre/-based FLEx switch into Jurkat T cells and observed high toxicity
upon Cre induction (). We adapted the FLEx switch to operate with the FlpO/ recombinase system instead, as the Flp recombinase has not been
reported to be toxic. Parallel to Cre recognition of
the  DNA recognition sites and variants upon the  sequence, the FlpO recombinase recognizes and acts upon  recognition sequences and variants including the  sequence, which we used with the  sequence to construct a FlpO-based FLEx switch. A similar FlpO-based
FLEx switch has been designed using other variant  sites. To control recombination, we
used FlpO conjugated to the mutated estrogen receptor ER, which localizes the recombinase to
the cytoplasm. When the ER domain
binds to 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT), a metabolite of the drug tamoxifen,
FlpOER is localized to the nucleus where the recombinase
can act upon the FLEx switch (a). We chose the tamoxifen-inducible FlpO for our circuit
design because tamoxifen is an FDA-approved drug, which will facilitate
implementation into the clinic. We have adapted the FlpOER/ FLEx switch design to alter the orientation
of CAR genes to create a stable ON and stable OFF switch (b). In addition,
we have designed an “Expression Level” (EXP) switch
that takes advantage of the unbalanced bidirectional activity of the
human EF1α promoter, controlling the orientation of promoter
relative to the CAR gene to stably alter cells from low expression
to high expression of CAR (b). FlpO recombinase based FLEx switch design.
(a) Mechanism of the
4-OHT-inducible FLEx switch using FlpOER. Binding of
4-OHT to the ER domain drives nuclear localization of
the FlpO recombinase, initiating a reversible inversion upon either
the  or  recognition site and
then an irreversible excision upon the remaining site. By encoding
sequences representing State 1 and State 2 between the recognition
sites, induction of FlpO activity stably shifts the cell from State
1 to State 2. (b) Design of the ON, OFF, and the Expression (EXP)
level switch to control expression of CAR. The ON and OFF Switch express
the CAR gene under State 1 and State 2 respectively. The EXP switch
alters the orientation of the EF1α promoter relative to a CAR
gene to take the cell from low CAR expression to high expression. Induction of Recombinase Activity Drives
Changes in CAR Expression We transduced human primary CD4+
T cells with two lentiviruses:
one virus that contained a constitutively expressed FlpOER, and another expressing either the ON, OFF, or EXP switch controlling
the expression of an αHer2-CAR. We sorted cells for FlpOER expression and then induced with 4-OHT, a metabolite of
tamoxifen, and observed changes in CAR expression  flow cytometry. All switches contained a CAR expressing an extracellular
myc epitope tag that could be detected  antibody
staining, but CAR expression in the EXP Switch was measured through
an mCherry fluorescent tag directly conjugated to the CAR. However,
to reduce the potential of altered CAR degradation rates due to the
mCherry fluorescent tag, ON and OFF Switch cells expressed a CAR that
lacked the fluorescent tag, and instead CAR expression in these cells
was measured by antibody staining for the myc epitope. All three
circuits exhibited significant changes in anti-Her2 CAR expression
in recombinase-positive CD4+ T cells within 1 day of induction (). The ON switch,
in particular, demonstrated fast kinetics, reaching its maximal percentage
of switched cells within 1 day. Meanwhile, OFF Switch cells demonstrated
a loss in CAR+ cells within 1 day of induction, but the population
required 6 days to stabilize (<10% cells expressing CAR). The slower
dynamics of the OFF Switch compared to the ON Switch is likely due
to the need to degrade and dilute CAR expression, making the OFF switch
more reliant upon both growth and protein degradation rates. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00512/suppl_file/sb8b00512_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00512/suppl_file/sb8b00512_si_001.pdf The EXP Switch exhibits an increase
in mean CAR expression across
all recombinase-positive cells, though only approximately 20% of the
cells express CAR. Indeed, all three circuits demonstrate that our
populations are not homogeneously expressing all components of the
circuit. In addition to variations in recombinase and CAR expression
(), not all induced
ON Switch cells express CAR (). Nor do all uninduced OFF and EXP switch cells express
CAR (). This
population heterogeneity is likely due to transduction inefficiency,
which appears to have the greatest effect in implementing the EXP
switch as apparent in its bimodal distribution throughout induction,
and could additionally be affected by differences in viral integration
location between cells. Indeed, when we integrated these circuits
into Jurkat T cells, which generally exhibit greater ease of transduction,
we observed cell populations that—with or without drug—exhibited
greater homogeneity in all three switches (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00512/suppl_file/sb8b00512_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00512/suppl_file/sb8b00512_si_001.pdf Two key markers of circuit performance are
basal switching and
switching completeness. A small population (∼8%) of ON Switch
cells express CAR prior to induction, which indicates a low level
basal FlpOER activity (). This basal level of CAR expression appears
to be connected to a higher level of recombinase expression (). Switching completeness
is better observed in the OFF switch, where less than 10% of cells
still express CAR at the end of induction. In addition to these markers
of circuit activity, we observed high viability and mostly comparable
cell growth between uninduced and induced cells over the course of
induction (), suggesting
that toxicity of FlpO recombinase is minimal in T cells. FlpO can be
used to create ON, OFF, and Expression level switches
to control αHer2-CAR expression in human primary CD4+ T cells.
(a) Time course data for recombinase-positive cells with or without
drug addition (1 μM 4-OHT). Samples were obtained in triplicate
from each induced or noninduced culture and then plotted as mean and
standard deviation. The ON and OFF switches are presented as percent
cell expressing the αHer2-B1D2-CAR. The EXP switch is presented
as the mean αHer2-G98-CAR expression level in arbitrary units
(AU). For all circuits, CAR expression in +4-OHT cells was significantly
different from −4-OHT cells starting 1 day postinduction (unpaired
two-tailed  test with Holm–Sidak adjustment,  < 0.0001). (b) Change in distribution of CAR expression
level (AU) in recombinase-positive cells days following 4-OHT induction. Changes in
CAR Expression Impact T Cell Responses to Target
Antigen The induced changes in CAR expression by our switches
are expected to alter T cell responses to antigen stimulation. We
continued with switches that controlled expression of an αHer2-CAR
and quantified the activation of circuit-expressing Jurkat T cells
by stimulating them with plate-bound Her2 antigen and measuring the
expression of an integrated NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells)-GFP
transcription reporter, which produces GFP in response to binding
of the NFAT transcription factor that is produced during T cell activation (). We observed that induced ON switch T cells, which express
a CAR after 4-OHT-induction, can be activated with Her2. There was
a low level of NFAT reporter expression at higher Her2 doses that
suggests some basal CAR expression in uninduced cells, which could
be due to a low level of basal recombinase activity. With the OFF
switch, we observed that 4-OHT-induced cells have low reporter activity
when stimulated with Her2, corresponding to the loss of CAR expression.
The remaining level of NFAT activity in induced cells may be due to
incomplete FLEx circuit switching, which could result from factors
such as inaccessibility to the integration site. These results are
mirrored in ON and OFF switch CD4+ primary T cells that are activated
10 days after induction, where activation is measured  production of the IL-2 cytokine (). For EXP switch-expressing Jurkat T cells,
we observed that uninduced cells (which are in the low CAR expression
state) were activated in the presence of Her2 at a level higher than
the basal activation in uninduced ON switch cells (). The increase in CAR expression
after 4-OHT induction led to a corresponding increase in NFAT-GFP
expression. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00512/suppl_file/sb8b00512_si_001.pdf Interestingly, while we observed this effect for a low-affinity
Her2-CAR (C6.5G98A,  = 3.2 × 10), when the expression
level switch is applied to Her2-CARs with increased affinity (C6.5,  = 1.6 × 10; C6MH3-B1,  = 1.2 × 10; C6-B1D2,  = 1.5 × 10), the effect on NFAT-GFP activation levels is reduced
at high levels of Her2 antigen, illustrating that the level of T cell
activation is dually modulated by the CAR expression level and its
antigen-scFv affinity (), corroborating similar observations by others. Primary CD4+
T cells expressing the EXP switch also demonstrate an increase in
IL-2 production when activated against Her2. Expression of IL-2 in
uninduced EXP cells was low and similar to wild-type, which may be
due to a combination of the low CAR expression within the cells, the
small population of cells expressing CAR overall, and the low affinity
of the CAR. To confirm that these changes in T cell behavior
could also be
observed in primary T cells, we induced switch-expressing primary
CD8+ T cells for 6 days and then plated the cells with an engineered
Her2+/GFP+ NALM6 cell line overnight. We measured GFP expression in
the sample  flow cytometry to ascertain the fraction
of target NALM6 cells that were killed (). The ability of the CD8+ T cells to kill
these target NALM6 cells was altered by the addition 4-OHT: induced
ON and EXP switch cells demonstrated an increase in killing, and induced
OFF switch cells demonstrated a loss in killing compared to their
uninduced counterparts. These results both confirm that the ON, OFF,
and EXP circuits exhibit switching behavior in primary CD8+ T cells,
and that these changes in CAR expression affect T cell behavior. Similar
to the basal NFAT-GFP activation in ON switch Jurkat T cells, these
results do indicate some basal killing in uninduced ON switch cells,
as well as some remaining killing capability in the induced OFF switch
cells—behaviors that could require further tuning for practical
implementation. However, much of the basal killing is derived from
the CD8 T cells alone, even without a CAR. αHer2 CAR activation in T cells containing the recombinase
switches. Switch-expressing Jurkat T cells (a) and human primary CD4+
T cells (b) for control of expression of an αHer2-G98-CAR were
exposed to 1 μM 4-OHT prior to CAR activation for 5 days (Jurkat,
ON and OFF), 8 days (Jurkat, EXP), and 9 days (Primary CD4+, all).
Jurkat cells were exposed to different concentrations of plate-bound
Her2 protein, and primary T cells were exposed to 5 μg/mL Her2.
An NFAT-GFP transcription reporter and IL-2 were measured for Jurkat
and primary T cell, respectively. Cells were plated against Her2 antigen
in triplicate, and both NFAT-GFP (arbitrary units, AU) and IL-2 (pg/mL)
were plotted as mean and standard deviation. NFAT-GFP expression was
significantly different between +4-OHT and −4-OHT Jurkat T
cells for all three circuits at all Her2 dosages (unpaired, two-tail  test with Holm–Sidak adjustment,  < 0.01) with the exception of the EXP switch exposed to the lowest
Her2 dosage (0.0625 μg/mL). Statistical significance in IL-2
production was determined by unpaired, two-tail  test (* < 0.05, ** < 0.01).
Activation of primary T cell IL-2 production was repeated on consecutive
days (at 1 μg/mL on day 8 and 5 μg/mL on day 9 for EXP
switch, at 5 μg/mL on days 7–9 for ON and OFF switch),
and day 9 is reported here. Modulation of cell-killing
activity of T cells containing the recombinase
switches. Human primary CD8+ T cells containing the ON, OFF, or EXP
switch controlling expression of an αHer2-G98-CAR were exposed
to 1 μM 4-OHT prior to CAR activation for 6 days and then plated
with Her2+/GFP+ NALM6 cells at an effector:target ratio of 1:2 for
20 h. (Top Panel) Histogram of CAR expression in induced and uninduced
CD8+ T cells 7 days postinduction. (Bottom Panel) Percentage of target
NALM6 cells killed by primary CD8+ T cells. Cells were plated in triplicate,
and % target cells killed was plotted as mean and standard deviation.
Statistical significance in cell killing was determined by unpaired,
two-tail  test (* < 0.05, **** < 0.0001). Cell killing assay performed three consecutive
days (5–7 days postinduction), and day 6 cell killing is reported
here. Switch Cells Exhibit Memory
When Drug Is Removed One
unique feature of the recombinase-based switch that is not found in
other existing gene switches is memory: removal of the drug will maintain
any changes made to the cell. Cells that have been switched on will
stay on, cells that have been switched off will stay off, and cells
that now express greater CAR will continue to express greater CAR.
To test this feature in our cells, we compared CAR expression 15 days
postinduction in recombinase-positive primary CD4+ T cells that had
been induced for only 2 days  cells that had
been continuously induced for the entire 15 day period. For each switch
type, the level of CAR expression for cells that had been continuously
induced was the same as the level of CAR expression for cells that
had their induction stopped after 2 days, indicating each switch type
was able to maintain memory of the changes made to the cell even after
induction had ended (). Recombinase switches in primary T cells maintained CAR expression
memory after the removal of the inducer. (a) Experimental work flow
characterizing the switch circuit memory. (b) CAR expression from
the ON, OFF, or EXP switch with or without washing the 1 μM
4-OHT after 2 days of 4-OHT exposure. The ON and OFF switches are
presented as percent cell expressing the αHer2-B1D2-CAR. The
EXP switch is presented as the mean αHer2-G98-CAR expression
level in arbitrary units (AU). Samples were obtained in triplicate
from each induced or noninduced culture and then plotted as mean and
standard deviation. Statistical significance in CAR expression was
determined by unpaired, two-tail  test (**** < 0.0001). Tunability of Switching Can Be Driven by Drug Dosage and Duration While these circuits ostensibly provide a two-state system, the
percentage of cells that switched states may be tunable by applying
the inducer at different concentrations. Therefore, we treated recombinase-positive
primary CD4+ T cells with a range of 4-OHT dosages and showed that
the percentage of cell population switched states in the ON and OFF
switch can indeed be modulated (a). In addition, the level of mean CAR expression in
the EXP switch can be further tuned  drug dosage.
The trend in CAR expression  drug dosage remains
consistent when measured 3, 6, and 9 days postinduction for all three
switches. However, there is a decrease in CAR expression on day 6
for both low dosage OFF switch and high dosage ON switch that is likely
the result of day-to-day fluctuations in the flow cytometer. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00512/suppl_file/sb8b00512_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00512/suppl_file/sb8b00512_si_001.pdf In cases where the switch
takes longer to work, the memory feature
enables further tuning of switch dynamics. In particular, varying
the duration of drug dosage resulted in varying degrees of switching
in Jurkat OFF Switch cells (b, ). However, these results did not extend to primary T cells, where
all switches expressed the same level of CAR when induced for only
2 days compared to cells that were induced for much longer (). Jurkat ON and
EXP switch cells also did not exhibit drug duration tunability (). Dose and duration
of 4-OHT induction govern the CAR expression
from the recombinase switches. (a) CAR expression as a function of
4-OHT concentration for the ON, OFF, and EXP switch. The dose response
was performed once and measured at 3 points following induction. Different
lines represent the CAR expression at 3, 6, or 9 days after 4-OHT
exposure. The ON and OFF switches are presented as percent cell expressing
the αHer2-B1D2-CAR. The EXP switch is presented as the mean
αHer2-G98-CAR expression level in arbitrary units (AU). (b)
CAR expression as a function of 4-OHT exposure duration. Cells were
washed at the indicated day after 4-OHT exposure, and αHer2-C65-CAR
expression was measured 14 days after the initial drug addition. Samples
in (a) and (b) were obtained in triplicate from each induced or noninduced
culture and then plotted as mean and standard deviation. Statistical
significance in cells induced for  days compared
to cells induced for  – 1 days was determined
by unpaired, two-tail  test with Holm–Sidak
adjustment (*** < 0.001, **** < 0.0001). We have presented a recombinase-based genetic circuit system that
allows for increased control of primary T cell behavior. The circuits
we have presented here are a lentiviral-compatible system with memory
capability such that continual addition of the drug is not required
for maintenance of any desired changes to the cellular state. This
capacity for memory would be particularly important for therapeutic
strategies that require permanent changes to be made to the cell,
such as permanently shutting off expression of a particular gene,
enabling only a temporary drug intake to make changes in lieu of asking
a patient to continuously consume the drug. These switches can be
used to turn a gene ON or OFF, as well as to stably alter the level
of gene expression. In addition, we have demonstrated that the circuit’s
control of CAR expression extends to an effect on functional outputs
like IL-2 production in CD4+ T cells and cell killing in CD8+ T cells. The activity of these circuits provides a number of advantages
for patients who require a tunable but permanent change made to the
behavior of their engineered T cells. While transiently inducible
systems, such as a the drug-dimerizable “ON Switch”
CAR, can be powerful forms of control, the memory capacity of the
circuits described here will enable the development of a broader class
of therapeutic strategies that can make long-lasting changes to T
cell behavior without requiring constant drug induction. Thus, this
system provides a potential practical advantage, minimizing the duration
of drug exposure, and potentially reducing the complexity of the treatment
and possible side effects of the drug-inducer. While the ability of
the OFF switch to reduce the number of CAR-expressing T cells is similar
to the implementation of an inducible kill switch, our platform does
not kill the T cell. The availability of this nonapoptotic method
to reducing CAR expression can enable the continued use of the engineered
cell with other T cell-controlling technologies—such as controls
over proliferation or localization—and provide doctors with
more tunable parameters to respond to an individual’s needs. Moreover, the inducible kill switch lacks the
ability to serve in therapeutic strategies that require for CAR expression
to be turned on in a controlled manner, such as in our ON switch,
or to modulate gene expression levels similar to our EXP switch, reflecting
the flexibility in therapeutic design offered by our one-time state
switch platform. Thus, our system confers a potential practical advantage. In addition, the tunability of the circuit behavior enables not
only the preprogrammed State 1 and State 2 expressed within the circuit,
but also a range of CAR expression across the population that could
further tune therapeutic activity within the patient. The potential
of induction duration to tune circuit behavior may also expand the
available therapeutic range. At a 4-OHT concentration of 1 μM,
we were only able to observe this duration dosage property in OFF
Switch Jurkat T cells. There are many potential factors driving the
varying impact of drug duration on the circuits in different cell
types. For example, variations in cell division rates between primary
and Jurkat T cells may impact the rate of CAR dilution, which would
in turn drive differences in OFF switch dynamics in the two cell lines
that become magnified when drug is added for shorter durations. It
is also possible that the basic mechanical differences of creating
more protein (as seen in the ON and EXP) switch compared to destroying
protein (as in the OFF switch), which we see creates differences in
the induction dynamics, may then impact the effect of drug duration
(at least as observed in Jurkat T cells). While the results described
here do not indicate successful drug duration tuning of circuits in
primary T cells for the given dosage and durations, the results in
Jurkat T cells suggest that there is a capacity for the memory capability
of the FLEx switch to enable drug duration tuning. Further computational
and experimental work exploring the combined parameter space of drug
dosage (particularly lower drug concentrations) and drug duration,
particularly , may reveal more tunable behavior
for all three switches in primary T cells. Indeed,  use of these switches will require greater study and investigation
into the kinetics of both drug delivery and induction of cells. Our genetic circuits also enable more complex T cell therapeutics
by providing a platform to program two different therapeutic states
into a cell simply by expressing a particular gene of choice within
the switch cassette. This increased complexity will expand therapeutic
strategies that can be implemented, as it will enable an easy change
from one state of therapy to another based on a patient’s individual
needs. While we have focused on its use with CARs in this work, our
circuit is also compatible with other forms of T cell therapies that
could benefit from control of other genes. Our use of FlpOER takes advantage of the power of
drug-inducible recombinases to create powerful genetic technologies,
as well as the improved viability of cells expressing FlpO over the
commonly used Cre recombinase. However, one potential limitation of
recombinases is their immunogenicity due to their nonhuman origins
(FlpO, for example, is derived from yeast). To mitigate transgene
immunogenicity, one strategy is to leverage genome editing tools to
eliminate the gene B2M, an important component for antigen display
through class I human leukocyte antigen (HLA). Inhibiting the capacity for antigen display in engineered T cells
reduces the potential to present epitopes derived from the components
of our circuit, which in turn could act as a safeguard to prevent
other immune cells from targeting these engineered cells. This strategy
has also been combined with HLA-E overexpression to reduce immunogenicity
against pluripotent stem cells by preventing the “missing-self”
elimination driven by natural killer cells. This approach would not only enable the development of “universal
T cells” and provide a bank of “off-the-shelf”
therapeutic T cells, it would enable the incorporation of genetic
technologies comprised of proteins from diverse organisms. While the
compatibility of these approaches with our platform and their combined
viability in a therapeutic setting have yet to be established, with
the rapid advancement in genome editing technologies, we are confident
that transgene immunogenicity derived from FlpO can be addressed. Optimized use of our recombinase-based switching will rely on careful
consideration of the potential application. In particular, there are
situations where low levels of basal activity or incomplete switching
may carry enough risk that this approach will not be applicable, particularly
if it results in low levels of cell killing that are still toxic to
the patient. These issues could be further compounded by the selective
proliferation of CAR-expressing T cells by antigen-presenting cells,
which would further enhance the pool of either basal ON cells or incomplete
OFF cells. Careful tuning of recombinase expression or activity may
provide further avenues to address these limitations, as could the
incorporation of inducible kill switches to selectively kill cells
that are not behaving as directed. Indeed, a version of this switch
that controls not only CAR expression, but also a drug-inducible kill
switch (which, similar to our OFF switch, is not 100% effective) could
be an intriguing path to combine the power of these technologies.
With this design, if a cell does not turn off expression of the CAR
and the kill switch, we can induce the kill switch to kill off the
remaining CAR/kill switch-expressing cells, leaving the “off”
cells alive to perform other function that may have installed into
them. T cell therapies will require us not just to rely on the
mechanics
of the immune system, but also to understand the intricacies that
are available and necessary for us to fine-tune in order to create
a safe and effective treatment. With many developments and tools focused
around developing one facet of control, having a platform of genetic
circuits that can be applied in different ways creates a wider array
of options available to implement T cell therapies. The circuit we described is comprised
of two parts: the inducible recombinase and the FLEx switch. These
components were cloned into separate lentiviral backbones using a
combination of Gibson and traditional molecular cloning methods. The
FlpOER recombinase was cloned into the backbone followed
by a T2A ribosomal skip sequence and an mTAG-BFP fluorescent marker. The FLEx switch was designed using the  and  recombination sites. For the ON and OFF switches, the
chimeric antigen receptor sequence was inserted between the recombination
sites. The SFFV promoter was used to drive FLEx switch (and thus,
CAR) expression. For the expression level switch, the EF1α promoter
was inserted between the recombination sites such that the reverse
promoter orientation was encoded in the 5′ to 3′ direction.
The CAR was expressed downstream of the FLEx/reverse EF1α promoter. Primary T Cell Isolation and Transduction Blood was
obtained from the Boston Children’s Hospital, and primary CD4+
T cells were harvested using either the STEMCELL CD4+ enriched cocktail
or STEMCELL CD8+ enriched cocktail in conjunction with the RosetteSep
system. T cells were preserved at −80 °C in 90% FBS (Gibco)
and 10% DMSO. T cells were maintained X-Vivo 15 media (Lonza) supplemented
with 5% Human AB Serum (Valley Biomedical), 10 mM -acetyl -Cysteine (Sigma), and 55 μM 2-mercaptoethanol
(Gibco). Through thawing and transduction, T cells were maintained
with 100 units/mL recombinant IL-2 (Tecin, NCI BRB Preclinical Repository)
and then 50 units/mL post-transduction. Human embryonic kidney
(HEK) 293 FT cells were transfected with lentiviral packaging plasmids
and either the FLEx switch plasmid or the inducible recombinase plasmid
in a T175 flask using polyethylenimine (PEI). One day after transfection,
media was replaced with Ultraculture media (Lonza) supplemented with
100 U/mL Penicillin + 100 μg/mL Streptomycin (Corning), 2 mM -Glutamine (Corning), 50 mM Sodium Butyrate (Alfa Aesar), and
1 mM Sodium Pyruvate (Lonza), and virus was collected three and 4
days after transfection by collecting and spinning the media, and
retaining the supernatant. For CD4+ T cell transduction, virus was
concentrated through ultracentrifugation with 20% sucrose (Sigma)
for 2 h at 4 °C and 22 000. For CD8+
T cell transduction, virus was concentrated using PEG-8000: virus
was mixed with a 40% (w/v) PEG-8000 and 1.2 M NaCl solution overnight
and spun down for 1 h at 4 °C and 1600. T cells were thawed 2 days prior to transduction and activated
with CD3/CD28 Dynabeads (Gibco) 1 day prior. Cells were transduced  spinfection: for CD4 + T cells, using half of concentrated
virus, both inducible recombinase and switch viruses were spun onto
the well of a 6-well retronectin (Clontech)-coated plates for 90 min
at 1200. The same protocol was followed for CD8+
T cells, but with the entire volume of concentrated virus. Activated
primary T cells were then spun onto the virus plates for 60 min at
1200. Jurkat T Cell Maintenance and Transduction Through
transduction and general maintenance, Jurkat T cells were maintained
in RPMI media (Lonza) supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum (Gibco),
2 mM glutamine, and 100 U/mL penicillin+100 μg/mL streptomycin.
Through analysis, cells were maintained in RPMI media supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum and 2 mM glutamine. Lentiviral transduction
was used to produce T cell lines containing full circuitry (inducible
recombinase and designated ON/OFF/EXP switch). HEK293FT cells were
transfected  PEI in a 6 well plate with lentiviral
packaging plasmids and the circuit component lentiviral plasmid to
produce virus containing the specified component. Virus was collected
3 days after transfection. Approximately 500 000 Jurkat
NFAT cells—a line produced
by the Weiss lab at UCSF to express an
NFAT-GFP activation reporter—were infected with 500 μL
of the recombinase virus and 500 μL of the switch for cotransduction
of the entire circuit. Transduced Jurkat-NFAT cell were diluted with
media 1 day after infection and then collected 3 days after infection. Cells were induced with
4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT, Sigma), a metabolite of tamoxifen, in methanol
solution. All induction experiments were conducted with 1 μM
4-OHT except for dose response experiments, which were conducted with
a 4-OHT concentration range from 10 to 10 μM.
For induction time courses, cells were induced at a starting concentration
of 200 000 cells/mL and maintained between 200 000 and
1 200 000 cells/mL with media containing 1 μM
4-OHT. Uninduced cells were also plated and maintained at the same
concentrations in inducer-negative media. Flow Cytometry Sorting
and Analysis Cells were sorted
for BFP-positive expression using the SH800 Cell Sorter (Sony. BFP-FL1
channel). To measure circuit switching dynamics and NFAT-GFP expression
were measured  flow cytometry (Attune NxT Flow
Cytometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific. BFP-VL1 channel, PE-YL1 channel,
mCherry-YL2 channel, GFP-BL1 channel). Results were analyzed using
FlowJo 10.0.7 (FlowJo, LLC). CAR expression in the EXPression Level
switch was characterized  an mCherry tag directly
connected to the CAR. CARs in ON and OFF switches did not contain
the mCherry tag, and expression was measured by staining for a myc
epitope tag expressed in the extracellular portion of the CAR. Staining
was done using a PE-conjugated human c-myc antibody (R&D Systems
IC3696P) at a concentration of 10 μL antibody/10 cells. CAR Activation with Plate-Bound Her2 Protein Target
antigen was plated on 96 well, tissue culture-treated flat bottom
plates in Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Corning)
for 2 h at 37 °C. Wells were then washed two times with PBS,
and 200 000 cells at a concentration of 1 000 000
cells/mL were plated overnight. To remove supplemental IL-2 prior
to plating, primary CD4+ T cells were washed two times and ultimately
plated with IL-2-negative media. Cells were plated with or without
4-OHT in accordance with their induction conditions. IL-2 production by CD4+ primary T cells
was measured using an ELISA kit (BD 550611) according to manufacturer’s
instruction. 100 μL of supernatant from each sample was collected
19 h postinduction and frozen in −80 °C prior to quantification
with the ELISA. CD8+ primary T cells
were plated with
Her2+/GFP+ NALM6 cells at an effector:target ratio of 1:2 on a 96
well, tissue culture-treated flat bottom plates for 20 h. Cells were
plated with or without 4-OHT in accordance with their induction conditions.
NALM6 cells were counted  flow cytometry by gating
for live and GFP+ cells. The lack of mycoplasma contamination in NALM6
cells was verified using the MycoAlert Mycoplasma Detection Kit (Lonza
LT07–218). Cell Washing for Memory and Induction Duration To test
memory in switch-expressing CD4+ T cells, cells were induced with
1 μM 4-OHT at a starting concentration of 200 000 cells/mL
and maintained between 200 000 and 1 200 000
cells/mL with media containing 1 μM 4-OHT. Uninduced cells were
also plated and maintained at the same concentrations in inducer-negative
media. A fraction of induced cells was removed from sample 2 days
postinduction. To wash away inducer, removed cells were spun down
for 5 min at 300, resuspended in 5 mL inducer-negative,
and then spun down again. Cells were resuspended in inducer-negative
media and maintained between 200 000 and 1 200 000
cells/mL in inducer-negative media. To test effect of induction
duration, switch-expressing Jurkat T cells were induced with 1 μM
4-OHT at a starting concentration of 800 000 cells/mL. For
each day up until 4 days postinduction, a fraction of induced cells
were removed. Removed cells were then spun down for 5 min at 300, washed with 5 mL inducer-negative media, and then resuspended
to a concentration of 800 000 cells/mL in inducer-negative
media. Induced cells were then diluted 1:2. On day 4, all cells were
diluted 1:8, and 8 days postinduction, one last batch of induced cells
were washed. Through the rest of the experiment, cells were maintained
between 200 000 and 1 600 000 cells/mL..