As the model
organism for eukaryotic
green algae and plants,  has been widely studied over recent decades, as summarized in ref (). Its fully sequenced haploid genome offers great benefits in establishing
techniques for nuclear transformation and
electroporation, as well as genome editing
techniques such as the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Special
strains that are even easier to transform are also available, for
example, the CW15 strain with a reduced cell wall. Nevertheless, transformation, and specific gene targeting
techniques in particular, still need to be further optimized in order
to obtain an efficient platform for creating mutants that can be applied
to other algae and plant species. The recent confirmation of
the transformation of  using ribonucleoproteins of Cas9 and coupled
single-guide RNA (sgRNA) opened the way for the production of gene
knockout mutants and, in some cases, the knock-in of foreign DNA delivered
in specific sequences (compare ). The latter was recently confirmed as
enabling unspecific knock-ins  nonhomologous end-joining
(NHEJ), which displayed the disadvantage of sequence changes often
observed during DNA integration (C,E) which, together with low transformation
efficiency, makes identification of specific genotypes problematic
and requiring extensive sequencing procedures. Therefore, specific
knock-ins caused by HR (F–I), with a high probability of complete and sequence-specific
DNA integration, display great potential in altering gene structures
and therefore altering protein sequences, to implement protein tagging
systems, for example, or to replace genes
with copies containing single point mutations. Significantly, such
specific knock-ins created through the HR pathway (F), that is, replacing a target
sequence using homologous flanking regions, only appear naturally
at very low frequencies in ; instead, random DNA integration is dominant and mediated by NHEJ. Inducing DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) using
the Cas9 nuclease at specific sequences and providing homologous repair
templates were shown to increase the probability of specific knock-ins
in various species. HR activity is often suppressed
by the NHEJ pathway in eukaryotes and
is only present in certain stages of the eukaryotic cell cycle, that is, in the late DNA synthesis phase (S
phase) and early mitotic phase (M phase). In addition, HR activity
is well-known from the recombination of parental DNA in meiosis. Various attempts to improve HR efficiency in microalgae as well
as in other species have been reported in recent years, including,
for example, by interfering with the NHEJ-specific DNA-Ligase IV, inducing DSBs, or taking advantage of synchronized cells in order
to access HR specific stages of the cell cycle for transformation,
for example, using a zinc-finger nuclease. However, the level of HR efficiency so far obtained is still lower
than that required to make these procedures part of the daily routine
of the genetic modification of . Therefore, a more profound synchronization of cells in a culture
during the eukaryotic cell cycle stages at the same time display a
promising advantage to optimize genome editing in  by exploiting the differentially present DNA integration mechanisms
during the cell cycle and though could serve as a model system for
similar strategies in other algae species. It was our hypothesis that
a relaxed chromatin structure, present during the interphase in all
synchronized cells of  before entering
the mitotic prophase with associated chromatin condensation, could enhance DNA integration. Moreover, such
chromatin state is expected to offer a more accessible target for
the Cas9 nuclease in order to introduce a DSB for repair by NHEJ or
HR. The latter mechanism, which could be displayed at a specific cell
cycle stage, could lead to a specific knock-in of a transformed DNA
molecule containing homologous flanking regions to a defined target
site (F). Cell synchronization depends on light and temperature (12 h of
light at 28 °C and 12 h of darkness at 18 °C) and was shown
to be obtained during short-term cultivation, leading to one cell division per night (M phase) and cell growth
during the day (interphase) in . Moreover, depending on specific growth conditions,  can even undergo multiple cell divisions consisting of S and M phases including chromatin decondensation. Further, cells enter the interphase again starting
with the G1 phase that can last for several hours and includes an extended decondensed chromatin structure.
Between S and M phase, eukaryotes generally exhibit a second growth
phase G2, that is either not present or difficult to detect in () In order to reach
optimal cell synchronization, long-term cultivation in such conditions was therefore chosen to investigate the possibility
of maximizing genome editing (GE) efficiency by accessing each stage
of the cell cycle for transformation and so define specific properties
for DNA integration depending on NHEJ which is dominant in the G1
phase in eukaryotes and/or HR, that is
present in S and early M phase. Determining the transformation efficiency
(obtained clones/used ng DNA for transformation/transformed cells)
at certain stages of the cell cycle, using either nonhomologous or
homologous transformation constructs, should therefore provide information
about the ongoing DNA repair mechanisms (NHEJ/HR), while target sequence
analysis could confirm the occurrence of specific knock-ins. For the prompt detection of transformation events, the gene (,,) was
chosen as the target. The associated protein is involved in the assembly
of the light-harvesting system in the thylakoid membranes. When absent
due to a knockout, mutants display a pale green phenotype that is
easily detected by the naked eye on plates during growth after transformation.
This approach made it possible for the knockout frequency to be quickly
determined by counting the pale green colonies as compared to the
native green ones, created by random mutations. Interestingly, the
knockout frequency of  was very
low in earlier experiments (0.5–1%) compared to knockouts of
other target genes, for example, the chlorophyllide-a oxygenase (, ∼20%, data not shown), which also leads to a
pale phenotype, though less pronounced. Nevertheless, analyzing the
low knockout frequency of the  gene offers
the advantage of showing the full effect of an optimized GE frequency,
avoiding saturation. To enable specific recombination events by HR
at the  locus, a construct with 2 kb flanking
regions surrounding the sgRNA guided target sequence was created.
Large flanking regions were previously shown to enhance HR events
in () and in other microalgae, increasing
the probability of such events. Schematic overview of single guide RNA (sgRNA), guided
Cas9 introduced
DNA double-strand breaks (DSB), and possible DNA repair pathways in
eukaryotes. Repair mechanisms include nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ)
and homologous recombination (HR), the possible outcomes of which
depend on the provision of DNA repair and the respective active repair
mechanism. In the uppermost part, the selected exemplary nuclear (gDNA)
target sequence (t) and 5′ and 3′ flanking regions (5F,
3F) are depicted. Using sgRNA-guided Cas9, a DSB can be introduced
in the target region, but the process is not entirely predictable.
As long as a nonhomologous repair template confers antibiotic resistance
( cassette), an active NHEJ pathway can lead
to several results: (A) target sequence repair with error-prone sequence
modifications, (B) insertion of random (r) sequences, (C) insertion
of DNA clockwise, and anticlockwise in (D), and (E) insertion of truncated
repair DNA. As a consequence, there are likely to be remnants of the
chosen target sequence. In contrast, the provision of homologous repair
DNA containing the flanking regions can lead to different results
in an active HR pathway: the most desirable outcome is shown in (F),
that is, the sequence-specific replacement of the target sequence
with . Other options are multiple insertions
of  (G), inverted insertions (H) and deletions
(I). CW15 Cell Synchronization under
Long-Term Cultivation As reported by ref (), cell synchronization
of  can be achieved by applying a temperature
of 28 °C during the light phase (resulting in cell growth) and
18 °C in the dark phase (leading to an exact doubling of cell
numbers). We observed the growth behavior of CW15 in similar light-dark
and warm-cool cycles, as carried out by ref (), in a multicultivator
system that measured the optical density over several days (not shown).
Interestingly, under these growth conditions (12 h light at 28 °C
and 12 h darkness at 18 °C), we observed a change in growth behavior
during prolonged cultivation, leading to a higher daily cell number
than expected, if two daughter cells were being generated by each
mother cell. In order to further characterize such growth behavior,
a batch culture of CW15 was maintained under these conditions and
after 3 to 4 days of growth, cells were used to inoculate a new culture,
in order to achieve a long-term adaptation (2 weeks of preculturing
with ongoing cultivation). Following a subsequent inoculation, the
cell number was determined continuously using a cell counter (A, B). As expected, a pretty constant
cell number was measured during
the light phases (A), but a significant cell number increase was observed during
each dark phase. In addition to the previous report in which the cultivation was short-term, we saw higher
cell division rates after long-term cultivation with approximately
2 cell divisions during each dark phase, as previously described by to be possible in . On the third day after inoculation in particular (B), the expected
synchronization
of the culture could be observed. After 3 h of light, cell division
stopped and the cell number remained constant for about 6 h before
cell division resumed. In the following 4.5 h, the cell number doubled,
from 3.57 × 10 cells/mL to 6.97 × 10 cells/mL (a factor of 1.95), implying synchronized cell division
was underway in the culture. A second cell division occurred during
this dark phase, resulting in 12.4 × 10 cells/mL
the next day (a factor of 1.78). On the basis of general knowledge
of the eukaryotic cell cycle, we could assume that the two major phases
(interphase and M phase, B) were underway in the vast majority of the CW15 cells
at different points of time during this cultivation procedure. Due
to the occurrence of two subsequent cell divisions in the dark phase,
a second interphase (though shorter) occurred, as described by ref (). This shorter interphase
was not examined further and so is not displayed in the M phase in B. Growth curves
of synchronized  CW15
cultures. The number of cells of  CW15
grown at 28 °C during the light phase (12 h, 200 μmol photons
m s) and at 18 °C (12
h) during the dark phase (as indicated by bars) was determined using
a cell counter after 2 weeks of preculturing under the same conditions.
Each data point represents an average of three technical replicates
that were each counted twice. (A) Overview of cell number during growth
for 4 days. (B) Enlarged view of the curve after 3 days of growth.
Assumed cell cycle phases are shown as bars. A one-sided  test was performed, and the statistical confidence level is shown
in relation to the previous data point as two asterisks for  < 0.01, three asterisks for  <
0.001, while a hash represents insignificant values of  > 0.05. Determination
of Transformation Efficiency in Synchronized  CW15 Cultures Using CW15 synchronized
cultures made it possible to investigate the effect on transformation
efficiency and the occurrence of different DNA repair mechanisms (NHEJ/HR)
by using a nonhomologous (pHyg3, ) or homologous linearized transformation
construct (HCP, containing homologous flanking regions of , ) at different time points during cultivation. Random DNA
integration by NHEJ was therefore expected to lead to hygromycin-resistant,
normal green colonies, whereas HR-mediated recombination events at  should generate pale green clones. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00390/suppl_file/sb0c00390_si_001.pdf First, we defined an optimized transformation protocol
aimed at
minimizing false positive clones and simplifying the procedure based
on. The final optimized protocol is described
in detail in the  section (see also ) and includes the reduction of materials,
working time and a more stringent selection using a higher hygromycin
concentration. Once optimized conditions on synchronized CW15 had
been established, the analysis of transformations at different time
points on the third day of cultivation with respective constructs
(A) displayed
a strong enhancement of the transformation efficiency (TE). Compared to the TE of unsynchronized cells, the TE using synchronized
cells and pHyg3 remained rather low during the first hours of illumination
(around 10 clones/ng DNA/cells), but was drastically
enhanced to a maximum at +4 h of illumination (+1800%). In the following
hours, TE decreased to a pronounced minimum at +8 h, but increased
again at the end of illumination period to around 5 × 10 clones/ng DNA/cells. TE using HCP displayed a similar
pattern, but interestingly reached a maximum at +6 h (∼10 clones/ng DNA/cells), although less pronounced compared
to that for pHyg3. No pale colonies could be found after all those
transformations, confirming the aforementioned inefficiency of the
HR pathway in . Nevertheless, the different
maxima of TE using pHyg3 and HCP point to the recognition by the cell
of homologous foreign DNA, which cannot be used for HR-mediated recombination
in this physiological state, probably due to missing DNA DSBs in the
target sequence  and/or an inactive HR pathway
caused by a lack of necessary proteins. By combining the TE
values of synchronized CW15 cells with the
cell number on day 3 after inoculation (B), it was possible to associate the defined
cell cycle stages based on TE tendency. As with the G1 phase, NHEJ
is the dominant DNA repair pathway, reflected in the maximal TE using
pHyg3 at +4 h of illumination. The following minimum of TE at +8 h
can be explained by cells entering the S phase, in which DNA integration
must be avoided in order to protect the karyome from the random rearrangement
of the newly synthesized DNA. Nevertheless, the possibility that HR
could be active at this stage was further investigated. Before entering
the M phase, eukaryotic cells undergo a shorter G2 phase, although
not described by the literature for , which we associated with around
+9 h after illumination. Cells then re-enter the M phase at around
+10 h of light and begin to divide. HR activity was therefore expected
to be present during the last hours of illumination in order to enable
sequence-specific DNA repair to take place before cell division. These
results strongly suggest the need for the Cas9 nuclease to introduce
DNA DSBs enabling recombination events. Overview of used transformation
constructs and the target locus
of  depicted as true-to-scale schematic representations
of different elements. (Top) The standard transformation vector pHyg3
for  contains the antibiotic resistance
cassette, consisting of the promoter (p) of the β-Tubulin gene,
the hygromycin resistance gene  and the 3′
UTR (3) of the RubisCO small subunit 2 gene. (Middle) The knock-in
construct HCP (homologous recombination for ) targeting the  locus was created by cloning
the  cassette of pHyg3 in between two homologous
flanking regions (5′ and 3′ flanking, surrounding a
first target sequence T1) into the bluescript vector KS-. (Bottom)
The  locus included the 5′ UTR (5),
coding exons depicted in black and the 3′ UTR (3). Both target
sequences used for creating sgRNA (T1, T2) are shown, as well as the
primer binding sites and the sizes of the expected amplification products. Analysis of
transformation efficiency of unsynchronized and synchronized
cell cultures of  CW15. (A) TE was measured
at different time points (h, hours after illumination start) after
3 days of cultivation under synchronizing conditions. Each data point
shows mean ± SD,  = 3. Transformations by linearized
construct pHyg3 (nonhomologous) are depicted in black, and those by
linearized construct HCP (homologue to ) are
shown in yellow. A one-sided  test was performed
and the statistical confidence level is shown in relation to the previous
related data point as one asterisk for  < 0.05,
two asterisks for  < 0.01, three asterisks for  < 0.001, while a hash represents insignificant values
of  > 0.05. (B) TE data is displayed in comparison
with the corresponding cell number (shown as log, gray
circles) on the third day of growth under synchronizing conditions
(compare B).
Below, the illumination cycle is depicted as bars, as well as the
assumed cell cycle phases. Genome Editing of Synchronized
CW15 Using the Cas9 Nuclease http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00390/suppl_file/sb0c00390_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00390/suppl_file/sb0c00390_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00390/suppl_file/sb0c00390_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00390/suppl_file/sb0c00390_si_001.pdf The Cas9 nuclease was expressed
in  and purified using Ni-affinity chromatography.
The presence of recombinant
enzyme was evaluated by SDS-PAGE in the eluted fractions (), which showed a high degree of purity.
Another critical feature for a high activity was the removal of bacterial
nucleic acids, achieved by EDTA incubation and subsequent washing
to remove the chelating agent. The concentrated Cas9 preparation () was further evaluated by immunodecoration
analysis using an α-His tag antibody (). An  assay proved the capability
of restricting the defined target DNA sequence of  () in the presence of the respective
sgRNA (T1, T2). Since both target sequences are close to the end of
the DNA molecule (), little change in size occurred, but it nevertheless proved
to be a functional Cas9 nuclease. Interestingly, while testing
different target sequences as sgRNA for  in
transformations (not shown), we saw that not all events led to the
creation of a pale phenotype, suggesting the inefficiency of  related sequences in genome editing. The defined
target sequence 1 (T1,) was therefore maintained
and an additional target sequence (T2, ) was chosen. Both sgRNAs led to the creation
of pale mutants and so were used together for genome editing experiments.
Although T2 is also present in HCP (), a restriction of the homologous template
was not thought to interfere with putative HR activity, since about
half of the homologous flanking region would still be present and
because there was no incubation of Cas9 ribonucleoproteins together
with HCP at activating temperatures prior to transformation. When transforming synchronized CW15 at different time points using
Cas9, pale green mutants were obtained in all cases at higher percentages
than for unsynchronized cultures (A,C–E), underlining once again the
advantage of synchronization. Interestingly, TE increased only at
+4 h when using HCP together with Cas9 ribonucleoproteins (HCP-GE)
compared to the use of HCP alone, underscoring the dominance of the
NHEJ pathway in leading to random mutants. In all other cases, TE
decreased or was unchanged when additionally using Cas9, pointing
to more specific DNA repair, that is, HR. The maximal efficiencies for creating
pale mutants (around 5%)
occurred at +8 h and +12 h of illumination, which were associated
with the S phase and the G2/M phase respectively, since HR activity
has a higher efficiency for functional knockouts and was assumed to
be present at these time points. This hypothesis was further supported
by the rather low percentage of pale mutants at time point +4 h, which
was attributed to the G1 phase with high NHEJ activity. Since TE at
+8 h (S phase) was very low (B), time point +12 h was chosen for further optimization
experiments to test different amounts of the components used (B) due to quite a
high TE and a high percentage of pale mutants accompanied by the expected
HR activity. Interestingly, the provision of more plasmid DNA
(150 to 400 ng
HCP) decreased the TE but resulted in a similar percentage of pale
mutants, confirming the recognition of the homologous template and,
moreover, that the introduction of the DSB was the limiting step.
This conclusion was further confirmed when using double the amount
of sgRNA (5.4 μg to 10.8 μg) because the TE increased
again (+100%) and the percentage of pale mutants was more than doubled
(factor 2.1). A further increase of sgRNA (21.6 μg) and Cas9
(6 μg) resulted in the highest percentage of pale mutants observed
(14.3% and 13.8%), with an average of 14%. A further increase of sgRNA
to 40 μg decreased the yield of pale green clones, which confirms
the optimal ratio previously determined. Overall, the efficiency of
creating pale mutants could be increased by about 1300% by switching
from unsynchronized cells (1.1% of pale green clones) to synchronized
cells at +12 h (14%). In principle, this could be optimized even further
by using different combinations of components. Transformation efficiency
of unsynchronized and synchronized cell
cultures of  CW15: Effect of ribonucleoprotein
Cas9 on the transformation efficiency. (A) TE were determined for
unsynchronized (unsync.) and synchronized cell cultures of  CW15, using the linearized  homologous HCP construct only (black bars) or together with ribonucleoproteins
(yellow bars, HCP-GE containing Cas9, sgRNAs T1 and T2) at different
time points after the start of illumination. Data is shown as mean
± SD,  = 3. Below, the determined percentage
of the total pale green colonies obtained for HCP-GE (P, of green
colonies G) is given: maximal values are surrounded by black boxes.
A one-sided  test was performed, and the statistical
confidence level is shown in relation to the data of unsynchronized
cells (unsync.) as one asterisk for  < 0.05,
two asterisks for  < 0.01, three asterisks for  < 0.001, with a hash representing insignificant values
of  > 0.05. This was calculated in the same way
as (B). Assumed cell cycle phases are also shown below. (B) Transformation
efficiencies of further variations of HCP-GE trials at time point
+12 h are shown as mean ± SD,  = 3. The amounts
used of HCP, sgRNAs T1, T2, and Cas9, as well as the percentage of
pale colonies and the numbers for PCR analysis, are given below. The
determined optimal ratio of components is marked by a black box. Representative
pictures of transformation results, , pale mutants
(marked black and red)  normal green mutants are
shown as a general example in (C), of transformation using HCP at
+4 h (D, compare A), as well as of transformation D at +12 h (E, compare
B). Determination of HR-Mediated
Knock-Ins in Pale Mutants A major advantage of knock-ins
caused by HR is the easy detection
of functional knockout mutants by means of PCR screening. Indeed,
large insertions can be easily detected and a functional knockout
is the highly probable consequence. Since NHEJ-mediated gene disruption
in most cases results in only a few base changes, sequencing of the corresponding target sequence products
is required and the function of the knockout has to be determined
by other means, for example, by the analysis of the protein content.
In order to analyze pale mutants obtained from different time points
(+1 h and +12 h of illumination, A), PCR was performed using primers for  that bind to the exterior of the flanking regions
() in order
to avoid false positive PCR artifacts. Interestingly, the native PCR amplicon could not be detected in
most clones from synchronized cultures, indicating a relatively high
knock-in frequency (either unspecific, by NHEJ, or specific, by HR)
of larger DNA molecules (for example, plasmid) into the  target itself. Clones derived from transformation at +1 h were devoid
of the expected HR-mediated recombination product (target sequence
replacement) of about 5.8 kb, as had been expected due to the inactive
HR pathway. On the other hand, two out of four clones from transformation
at +12 h did show the 5.8 kb recombination product, so supporting
the presence of HR in the assumed G2/M phase. The total occurrence
of HR-mediated recombination events could be even higher at this time
point or at others, since there are different outcomes (F–I) from recombination-like
events, for example, multiple insertions and deletions. Interestingly, the sought-after knock-ins of
HCP into  could not be identified at any time
point other than +12 h (tested for +1, +2, +4, +6, +8, and +10 h with
about 40 pale clones in total, data not shown). Pale clones derived from the transformations shown
in B (as indicated
for
PCR analysis) were analyzed with optimized primers. In all 10 pale
clones from transformation E (B), the native sequence of  could
not be amplified, indicating larger DNA insertions in all of them.
The first four clones displayed the expected HR-mediated knock-in
product of about 5.8 kb. When several clones carrying the same mutation
had been identified, four of them were chosen for further analysis,
as shown in C (clone number and respective transformation number as indicated,
compare with B). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00390/suppl_file/sb0c00390_si_001.pdf All clones displayed the recombinant PCR product expected
after
HR-mediated knock-in of HCP into , and were
amplified in triplets and a doublet for further analysis. After gel
extraction and purification of the respective fragments, Nested-PCR
was performed (D), which showed the abundance of the inserted  gene, as well as the T2 sequence of  used
as a control. In E, the results of all tested clones are displayed, showing the maximal
yield of specific knock-ins into  from transformations
D and E (compare with B), on average 35%. To further verify the specific knock-ins
and provide smaller molecules for easy cloning and subsequent sequencing,
PCR was again performed, as described above, using gDNA from clones
1(F) and 4(F) and partially digested thereafter with XhoI and SpeI
(see ). This revealed the expected
products of about 3.5 kb and 2.3 kb (XhoI), the latter digested further
to 1.1 kb and 1.2 kb (SpeI) respectively. Final sequencing confirmed
the HR-mediated sequence-specific knock-in in those clones, which
is shown schematically in E. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00390/suppl_file/sb0c00390_si_001.pdf Target sequence analysis
of selected pale mutants of  CW15 from
different transformation approaches. (A) PCR analysis
carried out by the flanking region surrounding primers (C5_fw/C3_rv)
for locus . Four pale mutants for each construct
(pHyg3, HCP) at two different time points (+1 h, + 12 h) were analyzed
together with the wild type; the amplicons expected after HR-mediated
knock-in of about 5.8 kb are surrounded by black boxes. (B) Similar
PCR analysis were carried out with optimized primers (C5_fw2, C3_rv2)
for 10 pale clones from transformation E (see B). As positive controls for each cell line,
additional PCRs were performed using primers Cao_fw and Cao_rv and
are shown in the lower part of the A–B panels. (C) Selected
pale mutants from transformations C, F at +12 h (see B) were used for the amplification
of sufficient amounts of recombinant knock-in fragments of  for purification and further analysis, as shown in
(D), that is, Nested-PCRs were performed using the purified fragments
as template and primers Aph7_fw/Aph7_rv for detection of the inserted  gene, in addition to primers CP_fw2/Cp_rv for detection
of the target sequence T2 of  as a control.
(E) Summary of results of additional PCR analysis performed on pale
clones from corresponding transformations of  CW15 at +12 h after the start of illumination (see also B), showing the numbers
of analyzed pale clones, the larger DNA insertions in  detected, the desired HR-mediated knock-ins (flanking-based target
sequence replacement) and its occurrence rate. (F) Schematic representation
of knock-ins of the  cassette into  detected, based on HR-mediated recombination, which was confirmed
by sequencing the corresponding XhoI and SpeI restricted amplicons
(cloned into bluescript vector KS-) from clones 1F and 4F (see ). The disrupted genomic sequence of  is depicted at the top, showing the occurrence of
the gene disruption that leads to the pale phenotype. For the numbering,
compare with B, except for transformation F, which is not shown in detail. Overall, the demonstrated
synchronization of  CW15 cultures is a
powerful option for enhancing the efficiency
of nuclear transformation, also confirmed in mammalian cells and, in particular for precise genome editing  HR, as demonstrated, for example, in different yeast
species. Furthermore, this type of cell
synchronization makes future in-depth research possible into the cell
cycle of  and could be very useful for
further research into DNA damage responses during the cell cycle. The phases of the latter could be more precisely
defined by using antibodies for cell cycle relevant proteins, for
example, cyclins or by determining cyclin-dependent protein kinase
activity. We demonstrated that access
to certain cell cycle stages makes possible the genetic manipulation
of the nuclear genome in different ways, depending on the desired
outcome. When simple random DNA integration is sufficient, usage of
the dominance of NHEJ at +4 h after illumination is the best option,
since it enables the highest transformation efficiency, as also described
by ref () for the
eukaryotic parasite . With
regard to genome editing strategies, avoiding NHEJ as much
as possible and favoring HR-mediated DNA integration offers multiple
benefits, including the reduction of unspecific DNA integration and enhanced gene targeting. A time point in the cell cycle of  was identified (+12 h of illumination, B, ) offering a higher
HR/NHEJ ratio and used to create mutants with an HR-based knock-in.
Further research is required to evaluate the additional possibility
of inactivating the NHEJ pathway in , which
could reduce or even eliminate unspecific DNA integration accompanied by specific knock-ins
using cell synchronization. Furthermore, the greatest efficiency of
gene targeting in producing knockouts could be observed at this time
point (+12 h), which confirms the advantage of HR-based gene disruption
in leading to a higher probability of functional knockouts of genes.
Such knockout mutants also offer the benefit of being easily identified
by PCR, due to the high frequency of knock-in events using larger
DNA molecules. Additional PCR analysis of targeted loci also enables the identification of the desired
knock-in events (target sequence replacement by HR) that were shown
to happen at acceptable rates. The actual efficiency of HR as identified
in this work might be even higher, given the different outcomes of
HR, as described by for the fungus . Specific knock-ins make advanced
genome editing possible, for example,
eliminating native genes and replacing them with altered sequences
for specific purposes, such as point mutated or extended gene copies leading to
tagged proteins. Thus, 5% of colonies
growing on selective medium will display a desired mutant knock-in
sequence even in the absence of a visible phenotype. Since  displays a rather inefficient target for genome editing
and was mainly chosen as the optimal phenotype of a knockout, our
improved strategy should increase the efficiency of genome editing
for more easy accessible targets and so provide high frequencies of
the creation of knockouts and specific knock-ins. Finally, valuable
information concerning the nuclear HR pathway in  could be obtained, that is, its identification in special phases
(G2/M) of the cell cycle, which is consistent with other eukaryotes. Further optimization of
HR usage could be achieved by identifying
the optimal length of the homologous regions and the additional determination of optimal Cas9, sgRNA, and plasmid
amounts as well as other types of DNA
nucleases like Cas12a. Moreover, the
strategy presented should be applicable to other algae species, when
conditions of synchronization have been identified and nuclear transformation
is possible, especially if the genetic handling
of species is problematic, enabling more efficient nuclear transformation
and genome editing strategies, necessary for basic research and biotechnological
applications. Chemicals, Reagents, and
Enzymes If not otherwise stated,
all the chemicals and reagents used were provided by Sigma-Aldrich
and AppliChem and all the enzymes used were supplied by New England
Biolabs, Promega and Thermo Fisher Scientific. The phytozome database () was used for . relevant data. Database
entry for  is Cre05.g241450. Strains, Cell
Culture, and Transformation The  strain CW15 was used in all the experiments
described and was cultivated
in 20 mL flasks containing TAP-medium, supplemented with 100 μg/mL of ampicillin. Normal growth conditions
were set to 25 °C with 200 μmol photons m s of white light for 16 and 8 h of darkness.
Synchronizing growth conditions were adjusted to ref () with 200 photons m s of white light for 12 h at
28 °C, followed by 12 h of darkness at 18 °C. Cell number
was determined using a Countess II FL cell counter (Life Technologies)
and the results were divided by a calibration factor of 2. For optimized transformation of . CW15
based on ref (), the
respective number of cells (unsynchronized:
5 × 10; synchronized: 10) were harvested
at 8000 for 7 min and resuspended in 50 μL
of TOS-Medium (80% v/v TAP, 40 mM Sucrose). The suspension was mixed
with different amounts of linearized plasmid DNA (pHyg3: NdeI; HCP:
XbaI; for unsynchronized cells: 250 ng; for synchronized cells: in
general 150 ng, 60 ng for time point +4 HCP-GE (see A) and 400 ng for time points
+8 h as well as +12 h (see A,B). For genome editing experiments, a further 3 μg
Cas9 (deviating amounts see B) and 5.4 μg sgRNA, each consisting of 50% sgRNA
for  target1 and target2 (deviating amounts
see B), were
added and the mixture incubated on ice for 5 min. Transformation was
carried out in 0.4 cm spaced cuvettes by electroporation using a Gene
Pulser II (Bio-Rad) set to 200 Ω, 50 μF and 0.6 kV. Recovery
was achieved in 1.5 mL TOS-Medium containing reaction tubes kept in
darkness overnight on a mixing rotator. After subsequent centrifugation
at 8000 for 7 min, cells were resuspended in 1 mL
30% starch containing TAP-Medium, supplemented with 60 μg/mL
hygromycin and 100 μg/mL ampicillin. This solution was distributed
on two 60 μg/mL hygromycin and 100 μg/mL ampicillin containing
1.5% Agar-TAP-plates to obtain selection. strain Top10 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and BL21 (Stratagene) were
transformed with constructs using the standard heat shock method and
selection was achieved by using 100 μg/mL ampicillin on 1.3%
Agar-LB-plates (1% tryptone, 0.5% yeast extract and 0.5% NaCl). Subsequent
cultivation was carried out at 37 °C for 16 h in LB-medium. Plasmid isolation from  was carried out using the GeneJet Miniprep
Kit (Thermo Scientific). Contrary to the supplier’s instructions,
the elution buffer was prewarmed to 55 °C and elution was repeated
once using the eluate. Isolation of genomic DNA from  CW15 was carried out after ref (). Harvested cells (12 000 for 30 s) of 1–2 weeks old cultures grown in plastic
multiwells of 2–3 mL TAP-Medium each were resuspended in 700
μL 2× CTAB buffer, supplemented with 100 μg Proteinase
K and 50 μg RnaseA. After incubation for 2–5 h at 60
°C, genomic DNA was extracted using 1 unit of chloroform/isoamyl
alcohol (24:1) after centrifugation at 12 000 for 5 min. This step was repeated with 1 unit of phenol (10 mM Tris-HCl
buffered at pH 8)/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol (25:25:1) and 1 unit
of chloroform. Precipitation was achieved using 0.3 M sodium acetate
pH 5 and the addition of 1 unit of isopropanol at −20 °C
for 1 h. After centrifugation at 12 000 for
15 min, the supernatant was removed and the sediment was washed twice
with 70% ethanol at 12 000 for 5 min. Sediments
were dried at 42 °C for 1 h and resuspended in 20–50 μL
10 mM Tris-HCL pH 8. Isolation of  transcribed
sgRNA was carried
out in the same way as described for genomic DNA, starting by increasing
the final volume after the reaction to 1 mL with DEPC-HO and continuing with phenol (Tris-HCl buffered pH 5)/chloroform/isoamyl
alcohol (25:25:1) extraction. Concentration of nucleic acids
was determined using a Nanodrop
One (Thermo Scientific). In the case of plasmid DNA for transformation
of , concentration was precisely
determined on 1% agarose gels compared to the marker GeneRuler 1kb
Plus (Thermo Scientific) using the ImageJ software (). Amplification,  Transcription, Restriction,
and Cloning Taq polymerase was expressed in  Bl21 and isolated according to the literature. As a general buffer, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 50 mM KCl and
4 mM MgCl were chosen, while special amplifications based
on GC rich templates like those present in  (5′ Flanking region, see ) were performed using 75 mM Tris-HCl pH
8.3, 20 mM (NH)SO and 4 mM MgCl. Reactions also contained 10 pmol of each primer, 0.53 mM
dNTPs (each) and 0.26 M Betain. Annealing temperatures 2–5
degrees below the supplier’s reported melting temperature of
primers were chosen, with elongation to 1 min/kb at 72 °C. All
amplifications for cloning were achieved by using Hybrid Polymerase
(EURX) in accordance with the supplier’s instructions. In addition,
target sequence analysis of  using flanking
regions surrounding primers (see ) was carried out using the same buffer,
containing (NH)SO as that for
Taq amplifications of GC rich templates. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00390/suppl_file/sb0c00390_si_001.pdf Amplification of template
DNA for  transcription of sgRNA was obtained
using Taq polymerase with the NH buffer, as mentioned
above, using primers (see ) sg_CP_fw1
and T7_CP_fw1 (for target T1, see ) as well as sg_CP_fw2 and T7_CP_fw2 (for
target T2, designed using , see ). As
a first step, target sequence (5′) elongated primers binding
the Cas9 required RNA sequence (sg_CP_fw1, sg_CP_fw2) on plasmid pDGE277 were used. After dilution of the PCR products
obtained to about 0.1–1 ng/μL, a second amplification
was performed with primers binding the target sequence and containing
a 5′ addition of the T7 polymerase motif (T7_CP_fw1, T7_CP_fw2).
After determining the concentration of the PCR products obtained,
1 μg of template DNA was used for  transcription,
using the Hi Scribe T7 Quick High Yield RNA Synthesis Kit (New England
Biolabs) at 37 °C overnight, with subsequent purification of
sgRNA as mentioned above. Recombinant Cas9 activity was tested at
37 °C for 1 h using 100 ng of PCR product created with Primers
Cp_fw and Cp_rv (see ), 400 ng sgRNA for  target 1 and 2
(see ), and
750 ng of recombinant Cas9 (see chapter below) in cleavage buffer
(20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 20 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl). Plasmid
DNA was restricted using the enzymes XhoI, SpeI, NdeI,
XbaI, NheI, and EcoRV at 37 °C for 3–16 h, with subsequent
heat inactivation at 65 °C for 10 min. Isolation of PCR products
for cloning was achieved using the GeneJET Gel Extraction Kit (Thermo
Scientific) and initially cloned into Blueskript KS- (Snapgene) for
sequencing (Eurofins), subsequent restriction and ligation using T4
Ligase into final constructs. Expression and Purification
of Recombinant Cas9 strain
BL21 was transformed with the Cas9 nuclease
(160 kDa) encoding plasmid pET- NLS-Cas9-6xHis (Addgene). After expression,
the recombinant Cas9 contained a nuclear localization signal and a
C-terminal his-tag for purification using nickel affinity chromatography.
After overnight cultivation of a 5 mL culture containing 25 μg/mL
chloramphenicol and 100 μg/mL ampicillin, 1 L LB-Medium containing
the same antibiotics was inoculated and the culture grown to an OD of 0.5. Expression of recombinant Cas9 was induced with
0.5 mM isopropyl β--1-thiogalactopyranoside, and cultivation
continued overnight at 20 °C. Cells were harvested at 5000 for 10 min and purified in accordance with ref () using Nickel NTA affinity
chromatography. In order to remove nucleic acids from  from the protein solution, the latter was supplemented with 10 mM
EDTA and incubated for 1 h. Subsequent concentration using centricons
(10 kDa cutoff) was carried out twice to a small volume and again
diluted in order to remove nucleic acids and EDTA, achieving a final
volume of 750 μL. Thereafter, the protein solution was analyzed
on SDS-page and immunoblotting was carried
out. Protein concentration was determined using a Nanodrop One with
an extinction coefficient at 280 of 120.450 M cm. Construction of Knock-In Construct HCP http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00390/suppl_file/sb0c00390_si_001.pdf All the elements
necessary for creating HCP (5′ flanking (5F): chromosome_5:3459480–3461402,  cassette, 3′ flanking (3F): chromosome_5:3461425–3463347;
see ) were
amplified as described above using 5F_fw/rv (5F), pBT_fw/rbsc2_rv
( cassette) and 3F_fw/rv (sequences see ), cloned into bluescript vector KS-
and sequenced. The 5′ flanking region (5F) was amplified using
a reverse primer (5F_rv) that also carried nucleotides for an in-frame
stop codon after sequence-specific knock-in into . The  cassette from the transformation vector
pHyg3, conferring resistance to hygromycin,
consisted of the promoter from the β-tubulin gene, the  gene itself and the 3′ UTR of the RubisCO small
subunit 2 gene. Further sequence extension of used primers provided
restriction motifs for RI and XbaI (5F) as well
as NheI and XbaI ( cassette and 3F). All elements
were cloned again into bluescript KS- in the order shown (), leading to the
HCP construct..