Over the
last 15 years, researchers
in the emerging discipline of dynamic DNA nanotechnology have developed
striking capabilities for engineering pathway-controlled hybridization
cascades in which small conditional DNAs (scDNAs) execute dynamic
functions by autonomously performing interactions and conformation
changes in a prescribed order. These mechanisms are
powered by the enthalpy of base-pairing and the entropy of mixing,
exploiting diverse design elements to effect assembly, disassembly,
and pathway control (a). While considerable effort has been invested in exploring
dynamic DNA nanotechnology in a test tube, comparatively little attention
has been paid to dynamic RNA nanotechnology, which offers profound
opportunities for introducing synthetic regulatory links into living
cells and organisms. We envision small conditional RNAs (scRNAs) that
interact and change conformation to transduce between detection of
an endogenous programmable input, and production of a biologically
active programmable output recognized by an endogenous biological
pathway (b).
In this scenario, the input controls the scope of regulation and the
output controls the target of regulation, with the scRNA leveraging
programmability and conditionality to create a logical link between
the two. As a motivating example, consider
conventional RNA interference
(RNAi), which offers the benefit of programmability, but lacks conditionality.
RNAi mediated by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) enables knockdown
of a gene of choice, executing the molecular logic:
silence gene Y. Because siRNAs are constitutively active, it is difficult
to confine silencing to a subset of the cells under study (, c top). To enable cell-selective silencing, we envision scRNAs that
mediate “conditional RNAi” corresponding to the molecular
logic: if gene X is transcribed, silence independent gene Y. Upon
detection of mRNA input X, the scRNAs perform shape and sequence transduction
to form a Dicer substrate that is processed by Dicer to yield siRNA
output anti-Y targeting an independent mRNA Y for destruction. In
this scenario, Y would be silenced only in tissues where X was expressed
(., c bottom). Several groups have made contributions toward the still outstanding goal of engineering
scRNAs that perform shape and sequence transduction to implement conditional
RNAi (X  Y).
In this endeavor, we previously developed five scRNA mechanisms for
conditional Dicer substrate formation, each exploiting a different
combination of design elements from a. In the presence
of full-length mRNA input X in buffer, these mechanisms produced an
OFF/ON conditional response yielding an order of magnitude increase
in production of a Dicer substrate targeting independent mRNA Y. By
appropriately dimensioning and/or chemically modifying the scRNAs,
only the product of signal transduction, and not the reactants or
intermediates, was efficiently processed by recombinant Dicer, yielding
siRNA outputs anti-Y. In broad terms, this work demonstrated that
design elements previously developed and explored in the context of
dynamic DNA nanotechnology could be adapted for dynamic RNA nanotechnology,
providing a molecular vocabulary for pursuing the regulatory goals
of b. The simplest and most promising of these mechanisms employed a
duplex scRNA A·B, that upon detecting mRNA input X, produced
an shRNA Dicer substrate B that was processed by Dicer to yield siRNA
output anti-Y. With this scRNA mechanism
(d), X partially
displaces A from B  toehold-mediated 3-way branch
migration (Step 1a), exposing a previously sequestered internal toehold,
“c”, within B, mediating a further 3-way branch migration
(Step 1b) that promotes spontaneous dissociation of B from X·A
to yield shRNA Dicer substrate B. This mechanism has the desirable
property that the scRNA A·B is stable rather than metastable
(i.e., if scRNAs are allowed to equilibrate in the absence of X, they
will predominantly remain in the A·B reactant state rather than
producing product shRNA B). Hence, there
is a thermodynamic rather than a kinetic limit on the amount of spurious
output that will be produced in the absence of input, providing the
conceptual basis for engineering a clean and reliable OFF state. When
we measured the OFF/ON conditional response for production of shRNA
B in a test tube, the OFF state was undetectable (i.e., smaller than
the gel quantification uncertainty), illustrating the benefits of
using a stable scRNA. The OFF/ON conditional response with a full-length
mRNA input X was >50-fold. On the other hand, using a short RNA
input
X corresponding to only the portion of the mRNA that binds
the scRNA, the OFF/ON ratio was >200-fold, suggesting that the
secondary
structure of the full-length mRNA inhibited interactions with the
scRNA to some degree. Here, as a
stepping stone toward validating scRNA signal transduction
in living cells and organisms, we tested this scRNA mechanism in human
cell lysate. Compared to our previous test tube studies in buffer
using recombinant Dicer, lysate with functional endogenous Dicer more closely mimics the cellular environment,
as it includes cellular proteins and nucleic acids that can inhibit
scRNA function, and RNases that can degrade the scRNAs (we specifically
avoided adding RNase inhibitors to the lysate in order to preserve
the challenge of overcoming RNase-mediated degradation). Notably,
working in lysate eliminates the need to deliver scRNAs across the
cell membrane, removing a potential failure mode in order to focus
attention on the performance of the signal transduction mechanism
itself. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf Our previous experiments were performed using scRNAs
and full-length
mRNA inputs at 0.5 μM in buffer, assayed with native polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis and fluorescent staining. Because previous RNAi
studies suggest the need for an siRNA concentration in the range of
0.15–7 nM within the cell for effective gene knockdown () (), we set out to test scRNA A·B at 2.5 nM
in our lysate studies. To provide the sensitivity needed for gel assays
at this low concentration, as well as to discriminate between scRNA-derived
and lysate-derived nucleic acids, we radio-labeled strand B with P (), enabling tracking
of state changes between (1) duplex scRNA A·B, (2) monomer shRNA
Dicer substrate B, (3) Dicer-processed siRNA output anti-Y, and (4)
RNase-mediated degradation of B. The full-length mRNA input X (or
short RNA input X) was introduced at 4× the scRNA
concentration. With scRNAs at the low 2.5 nM concentration in buffer,
we observed strong conditional production of shRNA B in response to
short RNA input X but minimal response to the full-length
mRNA input X (). Furthermore,
in human cell lysate, the response to the short RNA input X was substantially weakened, and there was negligible response to
the full-length mRNA input X (). These initial failures provided the embarkation point for the
present work, in which we use human cell lysate as an engineering
testbed to optimize scRNA performance for full-length mRNA detection
at low concentration in the presence of cellular proteins, nucleic
acids, and RNases. These initial results
suggested the need to redimension the scRNA
sequence domains to optimize the energetics of the mechanism for detection
of full-length mRNA input X at low concentration in lysate. Over several
rounds of sequence design and experimental testing, we made the following
adjustments to scRNA A·B: (1) increased toehold “a”
by 4 nt to enhance nucleation between A·B and X and better mediate
subsequent partial opening of duplex A·B  toehold-mediated three-way branch migration (Step 1a of d), (2) increased
duplex “c/c*” by 2 bp
to enhance self-nucleation within B and better mediate subsequent
further opening of duplex A·B  toehold-mediated
3-way branch migration (Step 1b of d), (3) addition of 2-nt duplex “y/y*”
to A·B to require spontaneous dissociation of B from A·B
to reduce spurious production of shRNA B in the absence of input mRNA
X. For each design cycle with new scRNA domain dimensions, sequence
design was performed using the reaction pathway designer within NUPACK; sequence design was formulated as a multistate optimization problem
using target test tubes to represent reactant, intermediate, and product
states along the reaction pathway (a). Each target
test tube contains the depicted on-target complexes corresponding
to the on-pathway products for a given step (each with the depicted
target structure and a target concentration of 2.5 nM) as well as
off-target complexes (all complexes of up to four strands, each with
a target concentration of 0 nM; not depicted) corresponding to on-pathway
reactants and off-pathway crosstalk for a given step. Sequence design is performed subject to complementarity constraints
inherent to the reaction pathway (d; domain “b” complementary
to “b*”, .), as well as to biological
sequence constraints imposed by the mRNA input X (DsRed2) and the
mRNA silencing target Y (d2EGFP). For the current scRNA mechanism,
every nucleotide in the design is constrained to be a subsequence
of either X or Y (see constraint shading in a), reflecting the simplicity of the mechanism,
and placing severe demands on sequence design. The sequence
is optimized by reducing the ensemble defect, quantifying
the average fraction of incorrectly paired nucleotides over the multi-tube
ensemble. Optimization
of the ensemble defect implements both a positive design paradigm,
explicitly designing for on-pathway elementary steps, and a negative
design paradigm, explicitly designing against off-pathway crosstalk.
The ensemble defect can be decomposed into two types of contribution:
“structural defect” (fraction of nucleotides in the
incorrect base-pairing state within the ensemble of the on-target
complex) and “concentration defect” (fraction of nucleotides
in the incorrect base-pairing state because there is a deficiency
in the concentration of the on-target complex). b displays
the target test tubes for a completed sequence design of the redimensioned
scRNA A·B. Concentration defects are negligible (each on-target
complex forms with quantitative yield at the desired 2.5 nM target
concentration). On the other hand, the structural defect is above
6% for scRNA A·B (see probability shading in b indicating undesired base-pairs
between toeholds “a*” and “z” with probability
greater than zero) and for intermediate B (indicating
desired base-pairs in duplex “c/c*” with probability
less than one). These defects reflect the real-world challenges of
designing sequences that execute a dynamic reaction pathway, yet are
fully constrained by the sequences of mRNAs X and Y. Operating
at 2.5 nM in human cell lysate, the redimensioned scRNA
exhibits strong OFF/ON conditional siRNA production (a). In the absence of mRNA
input X, there is minimal production of siRNA output anti-Y (lane
2), while in the presence of X, there is strong production of anti-Y
(lane 4). To verify that siRNA production is Dicer mediated, we depleted
Dicer from the lysate (Dicer knockdown in cells using an siRNA pool
followed by lysate immunodepletion with an anti-Dicer antibody). The
Dicer-depleted lysates show minimal siRNA production (lanes 1 and
3) relative to wildtype lysates (lanes 2 and 4), producing shRNA B
instead of siRNA anti-Y as the product of signal transduction. To
verify that A·B signal transduction is triggered by the intended
subsequence of mRNA input X, we preincubated X with a 2′OMe-RNA
blocker strand, L, that binds to the nucleation site “a”
on X (lanes 5 and 6), effectively blocking interaction with A·B
and restoring the OFF state (. lanes 1 and 2). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf The data of a demonstrate conditional siRNA production for the forward
molecular
logic “if X then not Y” (X  Y), where X is a full-length
mRNA input and Y is an independent mRNA silencing target. With the
intention of demonstrating the programmability of scRNA signal transduction,
we repeated sequence design for the reverse molecular logic “if
Y then not X” (Y  X), using Y as the mRNA input and X as the mRNA silencing target.
For multiple sequence designs, we ran into the difficulty that the
designed scRNAs functioned properly in detecting the short RNA input
Y (the targeted subsequence of Y), but were ineffective
in detecting the full-length mRNA input Y (see two examples in ). This failure mode highlights
the inherent difficulty in attempting to engineer scRNAs that detect
full-length mRNAs. The RNA secondary structure model underlying NUPACK is not as accurate for predicting structural
properties of (long) mRNAs as for (short) scRNAs, presumably due to
a combination of pseudoknotting, long-range tertiary interactions,
and (in lysate) protein/RNA interactions–none of which are
accounted for in the physical model. In effect, the sequence design
pipeline succeeds in engineering the portion of the problem that is
present in the model, but it fails to overcome the challenges of mRNA
structure that are omitted from the model. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf After repeatedly
encountering this problem while attempting to
engineer the reverse logic Y  X, we came to realize that mRNA accessibility
is a major issue that should be addressed experimentally as a preprocessing
step prior to sequence design. To measure base-pairing accessibility
directly, we developed a simple cost-effective method, termed “RNAhyb”,
that measures hybridization between a full-length mRNA and individual
20-nt P-labeled DNA probes that each bind to a different
subsequence along the mRNA (see ). We discovered that most 20-nt windows within mRNA Y are relatively
inaccessible (<10% hybridization yield) and that the most accessible
regions permit hybridization yields of 20–40% (a). Using RNAhyb, we identified
a 94-nt window of mRNA Y that is relatively accessible (as well as
several other shorter accessible windows). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf It is interesting to compare these
RNAhyb probe hybridization yields
to NUPACK-calculated subsequence free energies (b). In the context of the full-length mRNA,
there will be base-pairing between subsequences as well as within
subsequences, so examining the free energy of each subsequence represents
only a simple computational proxy for accessibility. Subsequences
predicted to be inaccessible computationally (large negative free
energy) are observed to be poor binders experimentally, while subsequences
predicted to be accessible computationally (free energy near zero)
are observed to have a wide range of binding strengths experimentally.
To reduce future experimental effort, these data suggest the approach
of first computationally screening mRNA subsequences to identify promising
candidates with free energy near zero and then using the RNAhyb assay
to experimentally identify accessible windows from within this reduced
set of subsequences; further study is warranted. By contrast, other
computational proxies for mRNA accessibility did not provide useful
information (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf In the
present case, we provided NUPACK with the RNAhyb-generated
94-nt accessible window as a sequence constraint in place of full-length
mRNA Y. The resulting NUPACK sequence design yielded an scRNA A·B
that successfully detected full-length mRNA input Y. However, fixing
the mRNA accessibility issue revealed a new degradation issue, as
the functional scRNA A·B for reverse logic Y  X was rapidly degraded by RNases
in the lysate (). Interestingly,
we had not observed this degradation issue to nearly the same degree
with the forward logic scRNA (). To this point, both in previous work and for the forward logic X  Y, we had used a fully modified 2′OMe-RNA
A strand to prevent Dicer processing of scRNA A·B, but an unmodified
B strand to permit Dicer processing of shRNA output B. Now, for the
reverse logic Y  X,
we found that B was resistant to degradation as a monomer shRNA but
susceptible to degradation as part of dimer scRNA A·B. To simultaneously
prevent degradation of A·B and maintain Dicer cleavage of shRNA
B, we tested a variety of chemical modifications to B including various
subsets of 2′OMe-RNA nucleotides, phosphorothioate backbone
modifications, and DNA nucleotides (). Conveniently, we discovered that using a 1-nt 2′OMe-RNA
cap at either end of the B strand, in conjunction with 2′OMe-RNA
for all of strand A yielded the desired properties for the reverse
mechanism () as well as for the
forward mechanism (). Leveraging
the mRNA accessibility sequence constraints provided
by RNAhyb in combination with the new scRNA chemical modifications
yielded the reverse mechanism data shown in b. This scRNA executes the logic “if
Y then not X” (Y  X) with nearly the same characteristics as the initial X  Y mechanism. In the OFF state, scRNA
A·B produces minimal shRNA B (lane 1) or siRNA output anti-X
(lane 2). In the ON state, scRNA A·B incubated with full-length
mRNA Y produces shRNA B (lane 3), which is cleaved by Dicer into siRNA
output anti-X (lane 4). Blocking the nucleation site on mRNA Y restores
the OFF state (lanes 5 and 6), demonstrating that scRNA signal transduction
is triggered by the intended subsequence of mRNA input Y. Programmability,
the ability to redesign scRNAs to interact with
mRNAs X and Y of choice, and orthogonality, the ability to engineer
scRNAs that operate independently without crosstalk, are key conceptual
goals of dynamic RNA nanotechnology. Both properties are highlighted
in a side-by-side demonstration of the forward system (X  Y) and reverse system (Y  X) in a. Each system produces a strong ON state
when presented with its cognate mRNA input (X for X  Y; Y for Y  X), and a clean OFF state when presented
with the wrong input (Y for X  Y; X for Y  X) even though both scRNAs are constrained
by the sequences of both X and Y. Quantification of the siRNA output
bands for both forward and reverse systems reveals a strong OFF/ON
conditional response with low crosstalk, corresponding to a ≈20-fold
increase in production of the siRNA output in response to the cognate
vs noncognate full-length mRNA input. In the long run, we are working toward the goal
of establishing
a technology development pipeline for scRNA signal transduction in
living organisms. Starting with a functional goal for programmable
conditional regulation (, cell-selective gene
silencing, gene activation, or cell death), the first step is to decide
which programmable input and endogenous pathway to leverage (b), followed by invention
of an scRNA signal transduction mechanism exploiting design elements
from dynamic RNA nanotechnology (a), computational sequence design (), and then experimental
validation in increasingly complex experimental settings: buffer,
cell lysate, cell culture, and finally, living organisms. Here, we
established human cell lysate as an scRNA testbed intermediate between
the chemically pristine environment of buffer in a test tube and the
more challenging compartmentalized setting of the living cell. Radioactive
labeling of scRNA B allowed the use of a biologically relevant scRNA
concentration (2.5 nM) in lysate containing cellular proteins and
nucleic acids including RNases. The lysate environment enabled optimization
of domain dimensions for scRNAs that were functional in buffer but
nonfunctional in lysate as well as optimization of scRNA chemical
modifications to inhibit off-pathway degradation while retaining on-pathway
Dicer processing. These design changes are likely also necessary (but
probably not sufficient) for scRNAs to be functional in living cells,
an environment where pathway interrogation is much more difficult. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00424/suppl_file/sb8b00424_si_001.pdf While lysate offers the key benefit of eliminating the need for
scRNA delivery, this simplicity comes with some drawbacks. Any design
challenges related to cellular compartmentalization are lost in lysate.
Dilution of cellular components in lysate decreases protein and nucleic
acid concentrations below those in the cell by an estimated 2 orders
of magnitude (), limiting our
ability to characterize off-target sequence effects, and likely also
contributing to our inability to detect cellular mRNA inputs in lysate.
Here, we spiked  transcribed mRNA inputs
into the lysate. mRNA accessibility was
another important stumbling block, limiting
the utility of multiple scRNAs that performed the intended signal
transduction when presented with a short RNA input, but failed to
detect the same short sequence when it was embedded in a full-length
mRNA. To overcome this difficulty, we developed the RNAhyb assay to
directly characterize the most accessible windows within an RNA input
as a preprocessing step prior to sequence design. Automated
scRNA sequence design was performed using the NUPACK
multistate designer subject to biological sequence constraints as
well as those imposed by the dynamic scRNA reaction pathway. With
this approach, we achieved conditional siRNA production with a ≈20-fold
OFF/ON response in human cell lysate for both the forward molecular
logical X  Y and the
reverse molecular logic Y  X, where X and Y are full-length mRNAs. These results illustrate
the programmability and conditionality that make scRNA signal transduction
an alluring goal. If the challenges of engineering and delivering
scRNAs in living
organisms can be overcome, they offer the potential to serve as powerful
new research tools, leveraging diverse endogenous pathways including
RNAi and CRISPR/Cas9. For example, conditional gene
silencing (“if gene X is transcribed, silence independent gene
Y”) would probe genetic necessity, conditional gene activation
(“if gene X is transcribed, activate independent gene Y”)
would probe genetic sufficiency, and conditional cell death (“if
gene X is transcribed, induce apoptosis”) would probe developmental
compensation. In each case, conditional regulation would be mediated
by scRNAs that interact and change conformation to transduce between
detection of programmable input X and activation of the desired regulatory
output function. By selecting a transcript X with desired spatial
and temporal expression profiles, the regulatory function could be
restricted to a desired cell type, tissue, or organ within a model
organism. To shift conditional regulation to a different tissue or
developmental stage, the scRNAs would be reprogrammed to recognize
a different input X. The same molecular logic would have attractive
therapeutic potential, with X as a programmable disease marker and
the downstream regulatory output chosen to be an independent therapeutic
pathway, enabling selective treatment of diseased cells. Because of
this research and therapeutic potential, dynamic RNA nanotechnology
for scRNA signal transduction merits significant engineering effort
from the molecular programming and synthetic biology research communities. Dynamic RNA nanotechnology for programmable conditional regulation
with small conditional RNAs (scRNAs). (a) Design elements for dynamic
RNA nanotechnology. (b) Opportunities for programmable conditional
regulation  scRNA signal transduction. (c) Molecular
logic of conventional RNAi (“not Y”;  Y) vs conditional RNAi (“if
X then not Y”; X  Y). In this conceptual illustration, conventional RNAi silences
Y in all tissues, while conditional RNAi silences Y only in tissues
where and when X is expressed, exerting spatiotemporal control over
regulation. (d) scRNA mechanism implementing molecular logic X  Y. scRNA A·B detects mRNA input
X (containing subsequence “a–b–c”), leading
to production of shRNA Dicer substrate B that is processed by Dicer
to produce siRNA output anti-Y (targeting mRNA silencing target Y
containing subsequence “y–z”). scRNA A·B
is stable in the absence of X. X partially displaces A from B  toehold-mediated 3-way branch migration, exposing a
previously sequestered internal toehold “c” within B
(Step 1a). Internal nucleation of duplex “c/c*” within
B mediates a further internal 3-way branch migration to form duplex
“z/z*”, facilitating disassembly of B from X·A  spontaneous dissociation of short duplex “y/y*”
(Step 1b). Dicer processing of the resulting canonical shRNA Dicer
substrate B yields siRNA output anti-Y (with guide strand “z*–y*”).
Domain lengths: || = 16, || =
14, || = 5, || = 2, || = 19. RNA strands are denoted by uppercase letters, sequence domains
are denoted by lowercase letters with complementarity indicated by
an asterisk (∗). P internal radiolabel is denoted
by dot on the B strand. Chemical modifications (2′OMe-RNA):
A (dashed backbone), B (5′ and 3′ nucleotides only). Computational scRNA sequence
design using NUPACK. (a) Sequence
design is formulated as a multistate optimization problem using target
test tubes to represent reactant, intermediate, and product states
along the reaction pathway (d). Each target test tube contains
the depicted on-target complexes corresponding to the on-pathway products
for a given step (each with the depicted target structure and a target
concentration of 2.5 nM) as well as off-target complexes (all complexes
of up to 4 strands, each with a target concentration of 0 nM; not
depicted) corresponding to on-pathway reactants and off-pathway crosstalk
for a given step. The Intermediate tube (Step 1a) contains a truncated
version of strand B to facilitate design of the “c/c*”
self-nucleation duplex. Every nucleotide in the design is constrained
by the sequence of either the mRNA input X (DsRed2) or the mRNA silencing
target Y (d2EGFP) (see domain shading). (b) Analysis of design quality
over the design ensemble. Tubes depict the predicted
concentration and target structure for each on-target complex, with
nucleotides shaded to indicate the probability of adopting the depicted
base-pairing state at equilibrium. For this design, all on-targets
are predicted to form with quantitative yield at the 2.5 nM target
concentration (negligible concentration defects) but some nucleotides
have unwanted base-pairing interactions (non-negligible structural
defects for nucleotides not shaded dark red). Bar graphs depict the
residual defect for each on-target complex in each tube (blue shading,
structural defect component; green shading, concentration defect component
[negligible for this sequence design]). RNA at 37 °C in 1 M Na. Conditional
siRNA production  scRNA signal
transduction in human cell lysate. (a) Forward molecular logic (X  Y): if mRNA input X is detected,
generate siRNA output anti-Y targeting mRNA Y for silencing. (b) Reverse
molecular logic (Y  X): if mRNA input Y is detected, generate siRNA output anti-X targeting
mRNA X for silencing. (a,b) scRNA signal transduction in lysate (HEK
293T) that is either Dicer-depleted (−) or wildtype (wt; containing
endogenous Dicer). Strand B internally radiolabeled with P (dot in d) to enable native PAGE assay with scRNA at 2.5 nM; mRNA input spiked
into lysate at ≈10 nM. OFF state: minimal production of siRNA
output in the absence of mRNA input (lanes 1, 2) or in the blocked
state where the mRNA input is preincubated with a blocker strand L
that binds to the scRNA nucleation site on the mRNA (lanes 5, 6).
ON state: strong production of siRNA output in the presence of mRNA
input (lanes 3, 4). shRNA B provides a control illustrating Dicer
processing to generate siRNA output (lanes 7, 8). siRNA size markers
(lane 9). mRNA X, DsRed2; mRNA Y, d2EGFP. RNAhyb: experimental
determination of mRNA accessibility for input
Y (d2EGFP). (a) RNAhyb fraction of probe bound. 20-nt DNA probe at
2.5 nM (labeled with P), mRNA input Y at 10 nM. Total
of 118 probes tested at intervals along mRNA input Y to identify an
accessible window for engineering reverse logic mechanism (Y  X). (b) Comparison between RNAhyb
fraction of probe bound (yield; mean over replicates of panel a) and
mRNA subsequence free energy calculated using NUPACK (Δ ≈ 0 for a subsequence predicted to have negligible
base-pairing; Δ increasingly negative as the
probability of equilibrium base-pairing increases). Calculations performed for one 20-nt mRNA subsequence at a time in
1 M Na at 37 °C. Signal transduction using orthogonal scRNAs
in human cell lysate.
(a) Conditional siRNA production in the presence of cognate mRNA input
(ON state) or noncognate mRNA input (OFF state) for forward logic
(X  Y: cognate mRNA
input X, siRNA output anti-Y, noncognate mRNA input Y) and reverse
logic (Y  X: cognate
mRNA input Y, siRNA output anti-X, noncognate mRNA input X). Wildtype
lysate containing endogenous Dicer. (b) Quantification of siRNA output
bands in panel a. The ON:OFF ratio is ≈20 for both forward
and reverse scRNAs. Normalized signal (siRNA signal/total lane signal)
for three replicate gels. mRNA X, DsRed2; mRNA Y, d2EGFP. Sequence design was performed using the reaction
pathway designer
within NUPACK. Oligonucleotides (RNA and 2′OMe-RNA)
were synthesized and RNase-free HPLC purified by IDT. Target mRNAs
were  transcribed. Cell lysates were made
by sonication of HEK 293T cells. Dicer-depleted lysates were generated
by knocking down Dicer using an siRNA pool prior to lysis and Dicer
immunodepletion following lysis. P was incorporated in
the backbone of B to enable discrimination of scRNA reactants, intermediates,
and products from lysate nucleic acids, as well as to enable gel assays
at low concentration. scRNA A·B was PAGE purified as a duplex.
scRNA signal transduction was tested by incubating 2.5 nM scRNAs and
10 nM short RNA input or full-length mRNA input in 1× Buffer
D or 1.25 μg/μL lysate at 37 C for
4 h. For experiments with a blocked nucleation site, the mRNA input
was preincubated with blocker L. Reactions were separated by native
PAGE and imaged  autoradiography. RNAhyb was used
to assay mRNA accessibility using 20-nt P-labeled DNA
probes at intervals along the mRNA input..