The biobased
production of chemicals,
materials, and fuels represents one important building block to overcome
the dependency on fossil feedstocks. Apart from the replacement of
petrochemical feedstocks with biorenewable resources, this includes
the development and use of biochemical conversion systems to synthesize
value-added products. Biochemical production processes often rely
on microbial fermentation where specifically selected or/and genetically
(re)designed micro-organisms convert a given substrate to the target
product. The optimization of suitable cell factories with superior
performance is a key topic of metabolic engineering. This top-down approach has proven successful for biosynthesis
of a number of industrially relevant products. An alternative—mainly bottom-up—approach is the use
of cell-free production systems, where purified enzymes and selected
metabolites are combined  to facilitate bioconversion. While cell-free systems initially consisted only of a single or
a few enzymes (, in the classical field of biocatalysis),
the complexity and scope of cell-free bioproduction systems has grown
rapidly in recent years. This includes the successful  reconstruction of entire central metabolic pathways and of cell-free production systems for a range of chemicals, for
example, ethanol, isobutanol, 1,3-propanediol, and monoterpenes. Moreover, cell-free systems allow the construction of completely
new (synthetic) pathways such as the recently published CETCH cycle
for carbon dioxide fixation which involves 17 reaction steps. As detailed in the literature, both cell-based and cell-free production processes have particular
advantages and weaknesses. For example, while cellular systems provide
a robust environment for enzyme operation and enable a cheap and integrated
synthesis of the required pathway components, cell-free systems allow
one to assemble completely new pathways, to precisely control system
parameters, and to circumvent the intricate cellular (, genetic) regulation often impeding higher yields and productivities
of whole-cell systems. Furthermore, since biomass synthesis does not
take place in cell-free systems, up to 100% conversion of the substrate
into the desired product is possible and pathways involving toxic
compounds can be used  that would not be
feasible . However, one particular challenge
for cell-free systems is the balancing and regeneration of cofactors
(mainly but not exclusively ADP/ATP and NAD(P)/NAD(P)H) consumed or
produced by the  metabolic pathway. While cells can balance the net consumption or
net production of those cofactors  multiple dedicated
metabolic pathways, their imbalance in cell-free systems will quickly
stop the operation of the  system. Accordingly,
different regeneration submodules have been used to replenish cofactor
pools. For example, for regenerating ATP from ADP, Schwander () added polyphosphate
and a polyphosphate transferase to the carbon dioxide fixing CETCH
cycle. A similar approach has been used for cell-free production of
nucleotide sugars. Although this kind
of ATP regeneration system is simple and relatively cheap and worked
sufficiently in these examples, it has the disadvantage of accumulation
of inorganic phosphate which, for thermodynamic reasons, may slow
down the ATP regeneration step and thus negatively affect the efficiency
of the whole system in longer batch runs. Similar negative effects
arise when using other compounds with high-energy phosphate bonds
(such as PEP), which have frequently been used for cell-free protein
synthesis. Alternative ATP regeneration
systems have therefore been developed, for example,  generation of acetyl-phosphate from pyruvate (possibly extend by several upstream glycolytic steps), which is then used to produce ATP  acetate kinase. This approach circumvents net production
of inorganic phosphate but leads in turn to the accumulation of acetate,
which may again have adverse (, inhibitory) effects
on the efficiency of the ATP regeneration cycle or/and of the whole
process when running over longer time periods. Regarding regeneration
of NAD(P)H, Schwander () used formate as an electron donor to replenish the NADPH pool  a formate dehydrogenase. While this one-step module
is simple and cheap and was fully sufficient to demonstrate the CO-fixing capability of the synthetic CETCH cycle, it would,
in a realistic application, negatively affect the overall stoichiometry
of CO fixation because CO is released as side
product of the formate dehydrogenase reaction (however, if formate
is produced electrochemically (from CO), then its use
would be carbon neutral). These examples underline the necessity
of a systematic approach
to identify suitable regeneration modules for cell-free production
systems. As a minimal requirement, a regeneration module must fulfill
certain stoichiometric and possibly further specifications so that
its coupling with the actual production module leads to an optimal
balancing of all cofactors in the entire system.  illustrates the situation
for the CETCH cycle, which will serve as a running example in this
study. As mentioned above, this synthetic cycle is a collection of
enzyme-catalyzed reaction steps that assimilate CO to form glyoxylate as primary product. Since its first conception it has been improved
in many iterations, and in this study we focus on version 5.0, which
includes also reactions that combine glyoxylate with externally provided
acetyl-CoA to produce the end product malate. CETCH 5.0 comprises 17 enzyme-catalyzed reactions, thereof 14 core
reactions, a catalase reaction decomposing hydrogen peroxide (produced
as side product during the CETCH cycle) to water and oxygen, as well
as the two aforementioned reactions for regenerating ATP ( polyphosphate and polyphosphate kinase) and NADPH ( formate and formate dehydrogenase). Leaving out the
two reactions for cofactor regeneration the net stoichiometry of the
CETCH cycle reads:Assuming external provision of oxygen and
carbon dioxide, the CETCH cycle thus requires for one iteration the
provision of 1 ATP, 4 NADPH, and 1 acetyl-CoA (). In the original work, ATP and NADPH were
regenerated with the two described mechanisms, whereas acetyl-CoA
was externally provided. However, since acetyl-CoA is very expensive
and because its consumption leads to net accumulation of CoA and thus
potentially to inhibitory effects over longer batch runs, we will
herein consider the task to find a suitable regeneration module that
replenishes not only the pools of ATP (from ADP and P)
and NADPH (from NADP) but also of acetyl-CoA (from CoA). For the special
context of the CETCH cycle we demand in addition (1) that no carbon
dioxide is released as this would compromise the ultimate goal of
the CETCH cycle, namely carbon dioxide fixation, (2) that malate is
the only allowed organic byproduct of the regeneration module (but
its production is not mandatory), and (3) that the algorithm may choose
from a given set of possible (typical) substrates (including glucose,
glycerol, acetate, and others). Constraint (2) renders the problem
significantly harder but ensures that malate is the only organic product
of the CETCH cycle when being coupled with the regeneration module,
which will simplify downstream processing. Herein we present MEMO, a computational method to find smallest
metabolic modules with specified stoichiometric and thermodynamic
constraints. MEMO supports the design of cell-free systems in various
regards, and the design of cofactor regeneration modules is one particular
application on which we will focus herein. In this context, MEMO takes
as input a universe of metabolic reactions and identifies smallest,
thermodynamically feasible regeneration modules delivering cofactors
with specified stoichiometric requirements, ,
as posed for the CETCH cycle (). MEMO is generically applicable and based on constraint-based
modeling techniques. We demonstrate its applicability for the CETCH
cycle example showing that even for this case with rather specific
requirements metabolic regeneration modules can be found with as few
as 8 reactions. As reaction universe we use modified versions of the
BiGG and the MetaCyc databases (), where reactions between different compartments (and within
the membrane compartment) have been removed as their use would complicate
the cell-free production system. Apart from the application to find
regeneration modules, at the end we will demonstrate that MEMO can
also be used to find entire cell-free systems with integrated production
pathway and regeneration module ensuring balanced overall conversions. Application of the MEMO
algorithm for finding suitable regeneration
modules for the cell-free operation of the CETCH cycle. Mixed-Integer
Linear Program for Calculating Metabolic Modules In the following,
we describe MEMO, a method to compute, from a
given reaction database, metabolic modules fulfilling certain specifications.
The method is based on an extended version of OptMDFpathway, which is a mixed-integer linear program (MILP)
originally developed to identify pathways with highest thermodynamic
driving force (according to the max-min driving force (MDF) definition
given in) within a given metabolic reaction
network. Using OptMDFpathway as a starting point ensures that the
computed metabolic modules are (1) balanced and (2) thermodynamically
feasible with a (maximal) overall driving force (MDF) exceeding a
specified threshold. However, here we need to extend OptMDFpathway
in order to enforce the required stoichiometries of the metabolic
modules to be identified and to ensure that we find the  module (in terms of number of reactions) with these properties.
Furthermore, while the original OptMDFpathway implementation was based
on the standard Gibbs free energies Δ′ of reactions, the extended
formulation can alternatively use the Gibbs free energies of formation
Δ′ of the metabolites. Given a metabolic network (in our
application, this will be a reaction database), we consider the following
equations of a classical flux balance analysis (FBA) problem on the
reaction rates :As usual, the matrix  comprises
the internal metabolites that are considered to be in steady state
(). We assume that
the network contains only irreversible reactions ( ≥ 0), that is, reversible reactions
have been split into forward and backward directions. Furthermore,
for technical reasons we demand that the upper flux bounds  must be finite. Constraint  can be used to add other
inequality constraints (like yield constraints) to specify desired
properties. Importantly,  and  will later also be used to incorporate
desired stoichiometric requirements of the metabolic module (in the
context of regeneration modules, these will be the required cofactor
stoichiometries). The thermodynamic driving forces of the reactions
are defined as their negative change of Gibbs free energy and collected
in vector . If the standard Gibbs free energies changes
of the reactions (Δ) are available and used as thermodynamic parameters
then the driving force of reaction  is given by is the
transposed -th column (reaction) of the full stoichiometric
matrix .  extends the stoichiometric
matrix of the internal metabolites () with external
metabolites which need not be in steady state.  is
the ideal gas constant,  the temperature used for
determining the Gibbs free energies, and  contains the
logarithmized metabolite concentrations. As the exact concentration
values are typically not known one demands that  must
comply with certain concentration ranges: can be alternatively
written with the Gibbs free energies
of formation of metabolites (Δ′):If the standard Gibbs free energy of formation
of metabolite  (Δ) is known thenotherwise
the value of Δ is allowed to assume an
arbitrary value within a specified range bywhere  is a sufficiently
large constant (, 10 000). Using constraint  together with  or  ensures that no thermodynamically infeasible cycles will
arise in the identified solutions for the rate vector . This even holds true for  where the Δ is practically unspecified (this approach is similar
to st-FBA as proposed by Noor). In a preprocessing step we determine the minimum () and maximum () values for each driving force , which depend on the concentration
ranges  and/or on
the value of  in case constraints of type  are present. Each
reaction is associated with a binary variable  that must be 1 when there is a flux
through this reaction. This is achieved by the constraintsIn order to ensure
that the minimal driving
force of all  reactions ( > 0) is greater than a given value  > 0 (the driving force of inactive reactions with zero
flux is not taken into account) the following constraints are added
to the optimization problem: With  = max(), we set  =  – , and with  ≤ , these constraints are always fulfilled
for all reactions with  =  = 0. For
all reactions
with  = 1 it must hold
that  ≥ . Thus,  acts as a demanded lower bound
on the MDF of the solution. Finally, in order to minimize the
number of active reactions in
a given solution the objective functionis imposed, subject to the
relevant constraints
in –. Its solution (, , ) will deliver a flux distribution  where,
given the calculated logarithmized concentration vector , each active reaction has a driving force of at least . With the enforced minimization of the number of active reactions,
the rate vector  of the solution will represent an elementary
flux vector (EFV) (. also ref ()).
This means that in networks, where a full enumeration of EFVs is computationally
feasible, the optimal solution could be identified by screening the
set of these vectors, and even a ranking of all possible minimal solutions
could be generated. However, herein we will deal with large networks
with thousands of reactions where this is not possible. Instead, the
optimal solution of the mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) problem
posed by – (with  and  as continuous
and  as integer variables) will be identified with appropriate
MILP solvers. Incorporation of Required Stoichiometries
of Regeneration Modules Generally, when using MEMO to find
certain metabolic modules, the
stoichiometric input/output requirements (, the
net conversion) of the module must be specified appropriately. In
particular, employing MEMO to identify suitable cofactor regeneration
modules for a given cell-free production system, one needs to specify
(a) a set of possible substrates that can be used, (b) certain stoichiometries
of the cofactors to be regenerated, and (c) allowable byproducts of
the regeneration module. The set of allowed substrates and byproducts
can be easily specified by setting the respective upper bounds  of the substrate uptake
and product excretion reactions either to  > 0 (allowed substrate or byproduct)
or to zero (not allowed). Compared to classical metabolic network
models, which often allow synthesis of, , certain
fermentation products, typically only very few (or even no) byproducts
will be allowed for regeneration modules. To finally consider the
demanded net synthesis of cofactors such as ATP, NAD(P)H, or others,
we need to include appropriate demand (pseudo)reactions. For example,
the provision of ATP by the regeneration module (and its consumption
in the cell-free production system) is modeled by including a reaction
that consumes (hydrolyzes) ATP yielding ADP and orthophosphate:Likewise,
for the provision (regeneration
module) and consumption (production module) of NADH and NADPH, we
may include the reactionsandOther cofactors or metabolites to
be regenerated
can be included as well. In certain applications, NAD(P)H might occur
as byproducts of the production module, in this case the regeneration
module would need to replenish the NAD(P) pool; hence, the  or  would be specified in the reverse direction. Finally, the
concrete requirements of the cofactor stoichiometries are configured
by setting the respective bounds of these exchange reactions in . For example, a demanded
stoichiometric ATP/NADH ratio of 2:1 would be enforced by setting  =  = 2 and  =  = 1 effectively
fixing  = 2 and  = 1. Sometimes the sum of the produced reduction
equivalents must give a certain number (,  +  = 4); such constraints can be incorporated in . Reaction Databases (Universal Networks) An essential
input for MEMO is a metabolic network or, more generally, a reaction
universe or database, within which the metabolic module can be identified.
Due to the here intended use of MEMO to identify metabolic regeneration
modules for cell-free production systems, we are free to compile enzymatic
reaction steps from different organisms. On the other hand, we assume
that the use of cellular compartments (, mitochondria,
chloroplasts .) within the cell-free production
system is not possible or to be avoided as they would add an additional
layer of complexity. We therefore do not consider reactions that involve
metabolites from different compartments. Likewise, reactions involving
quinone metabolites (which reside in membranes) are not taken into
account. Of course, these constraints can be adapted or relaxed for
certain applications. In the following we describe the setup
of two such universal network models, which were derived from the
BiGG and from the MetaCyc database, respectively. The
BiGG model is a fusion of the 85 models
present in the BiGG database (accessed
February 2018). As a first step, the models were successively merged
while at the same time technical reactions (exchanges, demands, sinks)
were removed. For model merging the mergeTwoModels function of the
COBRA toolbox was used. This function
removes duplicate reactions  the checkDuplicateRxn
function, which we extended with a new option that recognizes duplicate
reactions by their stoichiometry (up to a scalar factor) and also
properly handles the reaction reversibility. Next, reactions that
involve metabolites from different compartments were removed for the
reasons described above. Although the metabolite IDs in the BiGG models
are largely unique, some of them have different formulas in different
compartments (mostly due to different protonation states). Such IDs
were semiautomatically disambiguated by choosing either a common formula
or by making the IDs explicitly distinct. After this the mass balance
for the elements C, H, O, N, S, P as well as the charge balance for
all reactions were determined and the unbalanced reactions removed.
Metabolites occurring in different compartments were mapped onto one
ID and the compartment information was removed. Reaction duplicates
that had been produced during this process were afterward merged with
the extended checkDuplicateRxn function. Finally, reactions that involve
any quinone metabolites (which reside in membranes) were deactivated
for the calculations. The resulting adapted BiGG network model comprises
5863 metabolites and 8983 reactions. The Δ′ values [kJ/mol] for
the metabolites were retrieved, as far as available, from the eQuilibrator
API by applying a mapping from BiGG metabolite
IDs to KEGG IDs. For reactions in which all involved metabolites have
a known Δ′, reaction reversibility was restricted according to their
minimal/maximal driving force. The reversibility of the remaining
reactions was left as defined in the BiGG models. For the calculations,
driving forces were set up according to  together with Δ′ constraints of the form  or  (accordingly,  was left out). This model was constructed
from the flat
file distribution of MetaCyc version
22.6, which contains the files compounds.dat (metabolites) and metabolic-reactions.xml,
which were parsed for this purpose. As for the BiGG model, only those
reactions were kept whose metabolites all come from the same compartment,
and the compartment information for the metabolites was then removed.
Duplicate reactions were removed, the mass balance for the elements
C, H, O, N, S, P as well as the charge balance were determined, and
the unbalanced reactions were removed. Furthermore, reactions that
involve metabolites without known Δ′ values were removed, and Δ′ values
(in MetaCyc given in [kcal/mol]) for the remaining reactions were
calculated from the Δ′. For each reaction, its reversibility was restricted
in accordance with its minimal/maximal driving force. Because in this
model all reactions have a defined Δ′ value, constraints of type  were used for the driving
forces (accordingly, , , and  were left
out). It should be noted that although the Δ′ values in MetaCyc have
been determined by a predecessor of the eQuilibrator method, the actual values for the same reaction can
be quite distinct between both. The adapted MetaCyc network model
comprises 8964 metabolites and 11634 reactions. Implementation
and Availability https://github.com/ARB-Lab/MEMO.git https://github.com/ARB-Lab/MEMO.git Calculations were performed
using dedicated functions from (version 2019.3) CellNet-Analyzer, including the OptMDFpathway function, which was extended as described
in the  section. A package with the
MATLAB script files for the calculations and with the models (in COBRA
format) is available from the following GitHub repository: . CPLEX 12.8 was used as MILP solver. The calculations were performed
on a cluster node with two Intel Xeon 8-core processors and 192 GB
RAM. Computing Regeneration Modules for the CETCH
Cycle To demonstrate the applicability of our MEMO method
we employed it,
together with the two adapted BiGG and MetaCyc reaction databases
(see ), to compute regeneration modules
that perfectly complement the CETCH cycle. The precise stoichiometric requirements of the CETCH 5.0 cycle were
already described in the introduction section and are illustrated
in . The following
constraints were accordingly set for the MEMO optimization problem: In one iteration, the CETCH cycle consumes 4 NADPH,
1 ATP, and 1 acetyl-CoA (). Accordingly, the flux through the NADPH consumption  was fixed to 4,
and the NADH consumption reaction was fixed to zero flux. The consumption
of acetyl-CoA was accounted for by introducing another artificial
consumption reactionand
by fixing its flux value to 1. When computing
regeneration modules, it is important
to precisely specify the allowed end products (apart from the cofactor
requirements). An accumulation of undesired byproducts may not only
slow down the regeneration module (and possibly also the actual production
system) but also compromise the economic viability of the whole process,
for example, due to necessary separation of the main product from
byproducts in downstream processing. The main product of the CETCH
cycle is malate, and we therefore allowed a net synthesis of this
metabolite in the regeneration module as well. Thus, a malate exchange
reaction was introduced in the model but without fixing its flux (its
synthesis in the regeneration module is thus permitted but not mandatory ). Additionally, water and oxygen can be exchanged
with the environment. Since the CETCH cycle aims to fix carbon dioxide,
we did not permit net production of carbon dioxide as this would compromise
the efficiency of the whole process. Furthermore, in the BiGG model,
protons can also be exchanged while in the MetaCyc model charged metabolites
are balanced with protons in their exchange reactions (, when acetate is exchanged this occurs together with one proton).
Because all non-exchange reactions are H- and charge-balanced any
proton exchange flux in the BiGG model only reflects the difference
between the dissociated protons of substrate and product. We separately computed regeneration modules for
9 simple and cheap substrates yielding a set of distributed entry
points in the central metabolism: acetate, glycerol, glucose, sorbitol,
formate, xylose, lactate, methanol, and succinate. The lower bound  for the thermodynamic driving force (MDF) in  was set to 0.01 kJ/mol. The metabolite
concentrations were allowed to vary between 100 mM and 1 μM,
except for CO and bicarbonate for which the lower/upper
bound was set to 0.1 μM/1 mM. We aimed to calculate the 10 shortest
regeneration modules for each substrate. Computation time for each
single optimization was limited to 1 h, which, in several cases, was
sufficient to reach the guaranteed optimum. Typically, the optimum
becomes more difficult to prove with an increasing number of reactions
in the smallest regeneration module. Nonetheless, even if the optimum
was not proven within 1 h one can usually get a good solution. This
can then be evaluated together with the best bound (minimum number
of reactions required for any solution) to decide whether or not it
may be useful to invest more computation time to try and search for
a smaller solution. In a few cases the solver was neither able to
prove the infeasibility of the problem nor able to find a feasible
solution within 1 h. In such cases the optimization might be repeated
with different solver settings and/or the time limit be extended to
see if a solution can be found. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00434/suppl_file/sb9b00434_si_001.xls The results of the computations
are shown in  and in the . Within
the given time frame, CETCH regeneration modules were found for 6
out of the 9 substrates in both networks (glucose, glycerol, sorbitol,
xylose, lactate, and methanol). All found solutions require between
8 and 16 reactions (excluding the exchange/consumption reactions),
which is thus in all cases less than the 17 reaction steps of the
entire CETCH cycle. Where both networks offered solutions, they are
of the same size or shorter in MetaCyc. In contrast, no solutions
were found in either network for the substrates acetate, succinate
and formate. In the MetaCyc network, flux variability analysis (without
thermodynamic constraints) already reveals that no solution is possible
for formate. The shortest regeneration modules were found with glycerol as substrate
and require only 8 reactions (proven by the solver to be optimal)
in both networks. One of the MetaCyc solutions of size 8 is shown
in . In this
solution, glycerol is oxidized in two steps to glycerate which in
total yields two NADPH. Glycerate is then phosphorylated to 2-phospho-glycerate
(2-PG)  the backward direction of the phosphoglycerate
phosphatase. Interestingly, this phosphatase has a Δ′ of 6.7 kcal/mol
and thus favors actually the kinase direction. 2-PG is then converted
by the enolase to phosphoenol-pyruvate (PEP) where the pathway splits
into two branches. In the first branch PEP is dephosphorylated to
pyruvate from which acetyl-CoA, CO, and NADH are produced.
In the second branch PEP is carboxylated to oxaloacetate with concomitant
ATP formation. Under consumption of NADH from the first branch oxaloacetate
is then converted to malate. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00434/suppl_file/sb9b00434_si_001.xls For the BiGG network, one of the two solutions with 8 reactions
(solution 1 in )
is shown in . Here, three molecules of glycerol (with concomitant NADPH production)
are converted to dihydroxyacetone which is then phosphorylated. From
dihydroxyacetone-phosphate (dhap) the pathway splits in two branches.
In the first branch two dhap are converted to methyglyoxal from which
pyruvate and NADPH are produced. By two separate reactions, pyruvate
is converted to acetyl-CoA and malate respectively. In the second
branch from dhap, this compound is converted to glycerol-3-phosphate
from which ATP and glycerol are produced. Therefore, this regeneration
module contains a cyclic (sub)pathway through glycerol constituted
by reactions GLYCD, r0242, r0202, and GLYK. However, this does not
constitute a thermodynamically infeasible cycle because its net stoichiometry
is not empty:Although the Δ′ of
this partial overall
reaction is 27.4 kJ/mol, its Δ′ can indeed become negative under a suitable metabolite
concentration profile, which is compatible with the concentration
bounds used for the calculations here. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00434/suppl_file/sb9b00434_si_001.xls To further analyze the regeneration modules we
calculated the elementary
modes within each module (. ). This revealed
that each of the two solutions described above is the only steady-state
solution within its regeneration module. However, there are also regeneration
modules that contain more than one elementary steady-state solution,
and therefore can potentially realize multiple cofactor regeneration
requirements. As an example, consider the second glycerol solution
found in the MetaCyc model (), where two elementary modes exist. The difference
between the modes is that in the first mode the phosphorylation of
(the two) glycerate molecules requires no ATP (reaction (c) in ), whereas ATP is
consumed in the second mode (reaction (d) in ). The first mode thus has a 2:4:1 (ATP:NADPH:acetyl-CoA)
ratio, while the second mode produces a 0:4:1 ratio. When both modes
operate together in a 1:1 ratio the result is the desired 1:4:1 ratio,
which was enforced by setting the respective fluxes of the cofactor
exchange reactions when computing the modules. While the variability
with two modes may, at a first glance, appear disadvantageous, it
should be noted that when coupling production and regeneration module,
operation of the production module will push the net stoichiometry
of the regeneration module toward what is consumed in the net by the
production module. Moreover, regeneration modules consisting of multiple
elementary modes have the advantage that they can, through variation
of the flux ratio between the modes, compensate for potential fluctuations
in the ATP level, caused, , by its spontaneous
hydrolysis. Thereby, this regeneration module may act in a similar
manner as the ATP rheostat described in ref (). Of all glycerol solutions, the
discussed MetaCyc solution 2 in  actually is one
of those with the highest MDF for this substrate (18.01 kJ/mol, ). The MetaCyc solution
in  has an
MDF of only 3.22 kJ/mol, which is similar to that for the BiGG solution
in  (3.34 kJ/mol).
Therefore, from a thermodynamic standpoint, MetaCyc solution 2 would
be preferable. It has been suggested that a MDF of 3 kJ/mol should
be sufficient to allow large net fluxes through all participating
reactions. shows that not for all substrate/network
combinations considered here this threshold can be reached with the
solutions we calculated so far. However, such a criterion could be
enforced during the calculations by setting the value of  in  to a desired
minimum threshold. Following glycerol, methanol is the substrate
that allows for the
next smallest regeneration modules with 11 reactions in MetaCyc and
12 reactions in BiGG. Exemplarily we discuss the first solution found
in MetaCyc and BiGG. In both solutions, the first step after methanol
uptake is its conversion to formaldehyde with the concomitant formation
of NADH. After this, formaldehyde is bound to a tetrahydrofolate species
as a methyl-group. From a part of the methylated tetrahydrofolate
the methyl-group is released as glycine under the consumption of CO, NH (which will be released again in later steps),
and NADH. A part of this glycine combines with the remaining methylated
tetrahydrofolate to produce serine. The remaining glycine is converted
to glyoxylate and with acetyl-CoA further to malate, using different
reactions in the two models. In the CETCH cycle, the fusion of glyoxylate
and acetyl-CoA takes place as well, and
it is conceivable that the enzymes involved there could perform the
same function if combined with the other reactions from the regeneration
modules thereby reducing the number of additional regeneration enzymes
needed. In both regeneration modules, serine is converted to pyruvate,
which is the basis for acetyl-CoA formation  the
pyruvate dehydrogenase. Also, both solutions include a NADH to NADPH
transhydrogenase. Nonetheless, there are some differences: The MetaCyc
solution requires one reaction less because ATP regeneration occurs
together with malate formation and NADPH regeneration in the pyruvate
dehydrogenase reaction, while in BiGG both regenerations are coupled
to an alpha-keto-glutarate/glutamate/glutamine conversion cycle. Furthermore,
the BiGG solution requires 4 methanol (and yields 0.5 malate), while
the MetaCyc solution uses 5 methanol and 1 CO (and produces
1 malate). Both solutions have a relatively low MDF (3.33 kJ/mol for
the MetaCyc and 0.54 kJ/mol for the BiGG solution). Of the three
carbohydrates glucose, xylose, and sorbitol, the last
allows for the smallest regeneration modules with 12 reactions in
both networks, making it the preferable substrate of these three.
Despite the fact that an acetyl-group must be generated for the CETCH-cycle,
acetate as substrate turned out not to be promising because in neither
network a solution was found. Formate alone cannot be used for the
regeneration tasks, probably because of its highly oxidized nature
and the restriction that no net CO must be produced. For
succinate no solutions were found either, despite the fact that its
conversion to malate should quite easily render the required reduction
equivalents. Lactate is then the only of the four acids for which
regeneration modules were found. In MetaCyc, the smallest module contains
only 11 reactions, while in BiGG it needs 14 reactions. Smallest CETCH Regeneration Modules
(Number of Reactions) and Their Largest Thermodynamic Driving Force
(MDF) Found for the Different Substrates in the MetaCyc and in the
BiGG Network number of reactions in smallest module number of reactions in smallest module not found (proven to be infeasible) Computation time limited to one
hour per solution; at most 10 solutions per substrate were computed.
The unit of the MDF values from the MetaCyc model were converted from
[kcal/mol] to [kJ/mol]. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00434/suppl_file/sb9b00434_si_001.xls CETCH regeneration module of size 8 found with
glycerol as substrate
in the MetaCyc database (. MetaCyc solution 6 for
glycerol in ). Including
the CETCH cycle, the overall reaction is 2 CO + 2 glycerol
+ O → 2 malate + 2 HO (+ 4 protons).
The reactions (MetaCyc identifiers) are (a) GLYCEROL-DEHYDROGENASE-NADP+-RXN,
(b) RXN-15115, (c) PHOSPHOGLYCERATE-PHOSPHATASE-RXN, (d) 2PGADEHYDRAT-RXN,
(e) PHOSPHOENOLPYRUVATE-PHOSPHATASE-RXN, (f) PYRUVDEH-RXN, (g) PEPCARBOXYKIN-RXN,
(h) MALATE-DEH-RXN. The red numbers indicate the (relative) fluxes
needed to deliver the cofactors in required stoichiometries to the
CETCH cycle (indicated in blue). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00434/suppl_file/sb9b00434_si_001.xls CETCH regeneration module
of size 8 found with glycerol as substrate
in the BiGG database (. BIGG solution 1 for glycerol
in ). Including the
CETCH cycle, the overall reaction is 2 CO + 2 glycerol
+ O → 2 malate + 2 HO (+ 4 protons).
The reactions (BiGG identifiers) are (a) GLYCDy, (b) r0242, (c) r0202,
(d) GLYKm, (e) MGSA, (f) ALR, (g) PDHm, (h) ME_x. The red numbers
indicate the (relative) fluxes needed to deliver the cofactors in
required stoichiometries to the CETCH cycle (indicated in blue). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00434/suppl_file/sb9b00434_si_001.xls CETCH regeneration module
of size 8 found with glycerol as substrate
in the MetaCyc database (. MetaCyc solution 2 for
glycerol in ). Including
the CETCH cycle, the overall reaction is 2 CO + 2 glycerol
+ O → 2 malate + 2 HO (+ 4 protons).
The reactions (MetaCyc identifiers) are (a) GLYCEROL-DEHYDROGENASE-NADP+-RXN,
(b) RXN-15115, (c) PHOSPHOGLYCERATE-PHOSPHATASE-RXN, (d) GKI-RXN,
(e) 2PGADEHYDRAT-RXN, (f) PEPDEPHOS-RXN, (g) PYRUVDEH-RXN, (h) RXN-19748.
The red numbers indicate the (relative) fluxes needed to deliver the
cofactors in required stoichiometries to the CETCH cycle (indicated
in blue). Thermodynamics
of the Combined Production (CETCH) and Regeneration
Modules http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00434/suppl_file/sb9b00434_si_001.xls The MDF in  and discussed above are given for the stand-alone
regeneration modules and can decrease when the modules are integrated
with the CETCH cycle. However, it is straightforward to calculate
the resulting MDF of the integrated system by taking the union of
the regeneration module reactions (without the consumption pseudoreactions)
and the CETCH reactions and recalculating the MDF. The results are
shown in the , and
it turns out that the regeneration modules shown in – are still thermodynamically feasible when combined with the CETCH
cycle, although with reduced MDF. However, several of the other solutions
have an MDF < 0 when combined with the CETCH cycle, which means
that they would not be suitable regeneration modules in this context.
It is possible to exclude such solutions during the MILP optimization
directly by enforcing, , the CETCH reactions
to be active with the required fluxes (using α and β of ) instead of the consumption
pseudoreactions (–). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00434/suppl_file/sb9b00434_si_001.xls For the regeneration modules
that are thermodynamically feasible when combined with the CETCH cycle,
we also calculated the concentration ranges of the participating metabolites
that are necessary to keep the MDF ≥ 0.01 (. , only those metabolites
are listed whose lower or upper concentration bound differs from the
default concentration bound). Such results are potentially useful
for assessing the overall practicality of the pathway. Regeneration
Modules with Multiple Substrates and Alternative
Cofactor Requirements http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00434/suppl_file/sb9b00434_si_001.xls So far, we only considered single inputs,
but it is also possible to have multiple substrate uptakes open together
to see whether this would allow for smaller regeneration modules.
We therefore calculated 20 solutions in each network with all 9 substrate
uptakes open (. ). It turns out that all these solutions require
8 reactions which means that, in this setting, multiple substrates
do not make smaller regeneration modules possible. In fact, for the
BiGG model, all 20 solutions use glycerol as single substrate only.
All MetaCyc solutions also use glycerol, but there are some that co-utilize
acetate or acetate and formate. Interestingly, neither acetate nor
formate are usable as single substrate, but might be useful in conjunction
with glycerol. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00434/suppl_file/sb9b00434_si_001.xls All the results above fulfill the requirements
of the CETCH 5.0 cycle, but earlier CETCH versions had different cofactor
requirements. For instance, if the second
reductive carboxylation step (acrylyl-CoA to methylmalonyl-CoA) is
replaced by an ATP-dependent carboxylation step (propionyl-CoA to
methylmalonyl-CoA) as in CETCH 1.0, then one iteration of this modified
cycle requires 3 NADPH, 2 ATP and 1 AcCoA (instead of 4 NADPH, 1 ATP,
and 1 AcCoA in CETCH 5.0). We repeated the single substrate calculations
with these new requirements to assess the changes in minimal regeneration
module sizes. The results (. ) show that, depending on the network
and the substrate, the minimal module sizes differ by at most one
reaction. In the BiGG model, the minimal size increases slightly for
glycerol and lactate while it remains unchanged for the other substrates.
For the MetaCyc model, the size decreases for glucose, sorbitol, and
methanol, but increases for xylose and lactate. Thus, whether trading
one NADPH for one ATP is favorable or not depends on the substrate
used in the regeneration module. Computing Modules with
Integrated Production and Regeneration http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00434/suppl_file/sb9b00434_si_001.xls http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00434/suppl_file/sb9b00434_si_001.xls So far, the focus
of MEMO has been on regeneration modules for
cofactors, which are often required for cell-free production system.
However, MEMO is more general and can search for any metabolic module
as long as the module specification can be formulated with the type
of constraints used in MEMO. In fact, with MEMO it is also possible
to design entire production systems with desired input-output stoichiometries
where production and cofactor regeneration are integrated. Computing
such integrated modules comes with the advantage that thermodynamic
infeasibilities cannot arise when merging production and regeneration
module (as seen for some regeneration modules computed for the CETCH
cycle). As an example, we consider the production of the monoterpene
limonene from glucose which has recently been achieved with a cell-free
system. This particular conversion comprises
23 reaction steps and produces one mol limonene per three mol glucose
(Supporting Figure 1 in the original ref ()). It basically consists of two parts, the glycolysis
which converts glucose to acetyl-CoA and cofactors and the mevalonate
pathway that uses acetyl-CoA together with the cofactors to produce
limonene. Because the glycolysis produces more reduction equivalents
than needed for the mevalonate pathway the system has been designed
to incorporate a purge valve that (i) removes excess reduction equivalents
( NoxE, an NADH oxidase) and (ii) produces balanced
amounts of NADH/NADPH (by a combined use of a NAD-specific and of
a NADP-specific glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase). We checked
whether this system is in the solution space of the MetaCyc network
by fixing the fluxes of the glycolysis, mevalonate pathway, and purge
valve to the values required to the production of one limonene from
three glucose ().
This leads to a solution which is the same as in ref (), which shows that this
limonene production system can in principle be found by MEMO. To look
for alternative production systems, we specified a minimal yield of
1/3 limonene per glucose as sole constraint and then calculated 10
smallest solutions (. ). All the found solutions require 21 reactions
and thus less than for the original system. However, the MDF of the
original system is higher (1.03 kcal/mol = 4.31 kJ/mol) than the best
MDF of the identified alternative solutions (0.75 kcal/mol = 3.14
kJ/mol). One of the computed solutions is similar to the original
system in that it uses many reactions
from the glycolysis, but the others mix glycolytic reactions with
those of the Entner–Doudoroff pathway. There also are variations
as to how cofactor production and consumption are tied together, but
in all cases excess reduction equivalent removal proceeds  NAD(P)H oxidases. In
this work, we presented MEMO, a generic approach to identify
smallest metabolic modules fulfilling specified stoichiometric and
thermodynamic constraints. Although MEMO has many possible applications,
herein we focused on its use for finding regeneration modules for
cell-free production systems. As exemplified with the CETCH cycle,
MEMO is very flexible in taking into account diverse requirements
(, regeneration of two cofactors plus one acetyl-group
with specific stoichiometry, net production of CO not
permitted, net synthesis of malate allowed, minimum threshold for
MDF) and is able to enumerate multiple solutions in reasonable time
also in very large universal networks. A method that may hold similar
capabilities but was so far not used for the design of cell-free (regeneration)
modules is optStoic. For some predefined
reactants and products, this two-step approach identifies in a first
step overall conversions that maximize a given objective function
(, maximization of product yield). The calculations
in this first step are solely based on stoichiometric balance and
Gibbs energy changes of the reactants and products without taking
into account the reaction steps between them. The actual metabolic
pathway or network (generating the overall conversions found in the
first step) is identified in the second step by searching for suitable
combinations of reactions from a given reaction database. While the
applicability of this approach has been proven in several case studies,
for example, for finding alternative pathways in metabolic networks, our approach is simpler and requires only one
single optimization step to identify stoichiometrically and thermodynamically
feasible solutions. In fact, overall conversions found in the first
step of optStoic might not have a corresponding pathway in the reaction
database used in the second step. Moreover, even if a stoichiometrically
balanced pathway has been identified in the second step of optStoic,
it may happen that it is thermodynamically infeasible within the defined
concentration ranges of the intermediate metabolites (optStoic tests,
in a preprocessing step, separately for each reaction whether it can
proceed in a certain direction with the given metabolite concentration
ranges, however, it does not ensure that a metabolite concentration
vector within the specified concentration ranges exits where all reactions
of the found pathway are active in the required direction). MEMO directly
accounts for thermodynamic feasibility  the MDF
approach and it even allows one to set lower thresholds for the MDF
thus providing a flexible approach for an integrated search of metabolic
modules. The regeneration modules found for the CETCH cycle
appear very
interesting and, in contrast to the original system, they all avoid
accumulation of side products and use of expensive compounds such
as acetyl-CoA. The modules found with glycerol as substrate are especially
promising and would require only 8 metabolic reactions (enzymes) which
is even less than the half of the enzymes used so far in the CETCH
cycle. The analysis of the glycerol solutions also revealed that the
modules, although with identical net stoichiometry, may nevertheless
have different properties. Apart from their thermodynamic driving
force, this concerns in particular the phenomenon that the modules
may either consist of a single elementary mode or of a combination
of modes. In the first case, the demanded stoichiometry will be exactly
fulfilled when the substrate is converted by the module. In the second
case, the demanded stoichiometry is  with
the respective module, however, alternative output stoichiometries
would also be possible. When coupling production and regeneration
module, operation of the production module will push the net stoichiometry
of the regeneration module toward that of the production module. However,
regeneration modules consisting of multiple elementary modes have
the advantage that they can balance the spontaneous loss (decay) of
cofactors (, oxidation of NAD(P)H or hydrolysis
of ATP), which, in the long run, may lead to problems in modules with
fixed stoichiometries (single modes). Such flexible regeneration modules
have thus similar (desired) functionalities as the recently published
ATP rheostat or as purge valves. Although the application focus herein was on regeneration
modules,
MEMO is much more general and can be used to search for other types
of cell-free (or even intracellular) metabolic modules as well. As
one additional application for cell-free systems, we used the example
of limonene synthesis to demonstrate that MEMO also supports the design
of entire cell-free production systems with  production and regeneration: instead of fixing first the production
module and finding then a suitable regeneration module, MEMO can also
directly—in one step—identify the smallest integrated
cell-free system with desired input–output stoichiometries.
Overall, together with the adapted MetaCyc and BiGG master networks,
our MEMO approach thus provides a powerful and flexible framework
for designing cell-free production systems and can likewise be used
for detecting or/and designing (intra)cellular metabolic modules with
desired properties..