Synthetic
biology employs synthetic
genetic networks to re-engineer organisms for a range of applications.
Synthetic genetic circuits have been designed to display higher-order
temporal functions, perform logic operations in cells, and produce
heterologous proteins in microorganisms. A major difficulty faced by synthetic biology
concerns the implementation of synthetic genetic networks in living
organisms, which presents an unnatural load for the host organism
and affects the cell growth, often leading to the poor performance
of engineered circuits. Cell-free
protein synthesis (TX-TL) has the potential to serve
as a biochemical breadboard that allows for the rapid prototyping
of genetic networks without interference from cellular hosts. Numerous works have focused on the optimization of protein expression
from bacterial cell-free systems, which has resulted in a well-characterized toolbox
of genetic elements comprising a range of transcriptional and translational
regulators. This toolbox extends the variety of synthetic genetic
networks that can be constructed by allowing the use of essential
bacterial machinery that would be difficult to achieve  (), as they are important
to the native functionality of the cell. Synthetic cascades, which
use transcriptional machinery such as the T7 RNA polymerase (RNAP)
and bacterial RNAP, have been engineered using this cell-free toolbox. Since such circuits exhibit linear
behavior, they can be prototyped in batch TX-TL conditions, as their
functioning does not depend on the balance of rates between the individual
steps. To engineer networks that exhibit complex behavior—such
as oscillations—batch conditions are insufficient primarily
because the resources available for the synthesis of mRNAs and proteins
are finite and the utilization of these resources results in byproducts
that can inhibit critical TX-TL components. To extend the lifetime of TX-TL reactions, microfluidic platforms
have been designed wherein the TX-TL components can be replenished,
thereby creating an open system wherein the transcription and translation
rates are sustained in a steady state. Karzbrun  studied oscillatory behavior in
continuous TX-TL reactions by immobilizing DNA networks within two-dimensional
microfluidic compartments. Separated from the central flow channel,
their system relied on the diffusion of TX-TL reagents components
through capillary channels to reach the DNA compartments, enabling
the dynamics of a cell-free oscillator to be tuned by changing the
dimensions thereof. Niederholtmeyer  utilized pneumatically controlled microfluidic flow
reactors to study numerous ring oscillators under steady-state TX-TL
conditions, showing that the qualitative and quantitative performance
of the oscillators  reflect those in  conditions. Despite
the availability of a well characterized cell-free toolbox
and long-lived TX-TL platforms, the full repertoire of available elements
has not been used to engineer higher-order genetic networks. In order
to expand the toolbox, it is necessary to implement the toolbox elements
to design complex genetic networks, such as oscillators, in open systems
where key TX-TL resources are not limiting. Oscillatory networks are
important as they control key aspects of life such as circadian rhythms,
cell division, metabolism and cell signaling. However, engineering oscillators is challenging because their design
requires an optimal balance of rates of the various regulatory processes
involved. To aid the systematic engineering
of oscillators, mathematical models can be used to provide a mechanistic
understanding of the system and facilitate the design of higher-order
network topologies. In our research,
we focused on engineering a synthetic genetic oscillator in an open
TX-TL system, leveraging an important regulatory component of  machinery: the endogenous RNAP and its associated
sigma factors. Bacterial RNAP is a multisubunit enzyme that uses sigma
factors to help in transcription initiation. Despite the regulatory role of sigma factors  being well understood, their potential in engineering
complex genetic networks is only starting to be realized. Recently
it has been shown that bacteria use sigma factors to alter the transcriptional
landscape under stressed conditions by time-sharing the core RNAP,
thereby modulating its function. Bervoets  have recently engineered a sigma factor toolbox belonging
to  as an orthogonal transcriptional
control mechanism that can be used in other bacterial species such
as . Karzbrun  and Tayar  have implemented
sigma-factor based oscillators in TX-TL systems to demonstrate the
emergence of collective behavior such as entrainment and synchronization
between coupled oscillators. Since sigma factors
allow convenient reprogramming of the transcriptional machinery and
exhibit versatile properties with respect to binding to RNAP and DNA,
using them as regulatory molecules in oscillators will improve our
ability to modulate systems-level behavior of genetic networks. Furthermore,
the competition of sigma factors for the core RNAP allows for the
facile coupling of multiple networks driven by different sigma factors
and thereby enables the engineering of synthetic genetic networks
displaying higher-order regulatory functions. Here, we present
the characterization of a two-component oscillator
with an activator–repressor motif and a delayed negative feedback
topology based on genetic elements from the  cell-free Toolbox 2.0. Our initial
network ()
is based on the sigma factor 28 (σ) serving as
the activator, the C1 protein serving as a repressor, and deGFP as
a reporter. We have quantitatively characterized every genetic element
as well as the behavior of the network, by optimizing a mathematical
model with experimental data using an evolutionary algorithm. This
has enabled us to map the characteristics and behavior of this oscillator.
Subsequently we replaced σ with sigma factor 19
(σ) to modify the oscillatory regime of the network
and proceeded to investigate the influence of competition-driven passive
transcriptional control between sigma factors on network behavior
by coupling the two oscillators. All oscillators were characterized
experimentally in a -based TX-TL system
operating under steady-state conditions in microfluidic flow reactors. (a) The oscillator has an activator–repressor motif
with
the σ and C1 serving as activator and repressor,
respectively. Critical to the functioning of the oscillator is the
competitive binding between the two sigma factors to the core RNAP
to form their respective holoenzymes. (b) Schematic representation
of the σ-oscillator. The network topology comprises
three DNA constructs: , , and . The σ binds to the RNAP to form the RNAP-σ holoenzyme, which binds to the P promoter and
initiates the expression of σ and deGFP. σ competitively binds to RNAP to form the RNAP-σ holoenzyme, which binds to the P promoter and
initiates the expression of C1-ssra. C1-ssra exclusively binds to
the P promoter and represses the production of σ and deGFP. Bottom-Up Engineering of the σ-Oscillator The oscillator presented here is based
on a delayed negative feedback
topology (a)
as introduced by Stricker () The oscillatory network constitutes an activator–repressor
motif, as also found in several natural systems, and utilizes the σ as an activator and
the C1 protein as the repressor (b). In contrast to previous works, which
have been performed in diffusion-limited TX-TL environments, we have implemented this design under well-mixed conditions in order
to study fundamental mechanisms in the system such as the asymmetric
competition between sigma factors for core RNAP. This asymmetric competition
determines the amount of holoenzyme of each sigma factor—the
complex formed by the association of sigma factor and RNAP—available
to transcribe genes from their respective promoters. Furthermore, the sharing of critical catalytic resources, such as
RNAP, in biochemical circuits plays an important role in affecting
network behavior. The oscillatory network comprises three DNA
constructs: , , and  (b). The
expression of σ is regulated by the P promoter. Transcription from this promoter is initiated when sigma
factor 70 (σ) binds to the core bacterial RNAP
to form the RNAP-σ holoenzyme, which can subsequently
bind to the P promoter. Once expressed, the σ protein binds competitively to the core RNAP to form the
RNAP-σ holoenzyme and activates expression of genes
under control of the P promoter. This promoter regulates
the production of the λ phage protein C1, which binds exclusively
at the P promoter, thereby inhibiting the transcription
and the eventual production of σ. Additionally,
the C1 protein contains a C-terminal ssra tag for targeted protein
degradation by ClpXP proteases. These proteases, along with the σ, bacterial RNAP, and the necessary translational machinery
(ribosomes, elongation factors, .) are present
in the  cell lysate. Finally a reporter protein, deGFP—also under the control of P promoter—is
incorporated as a fluorescent readout. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf Since designing oscillators
is a challenging process and involves
a fine balance of rates among regulatory components, we implemented
an ordinary differential equation (ODE)-based mathematical model to
quantify our system and inform our experiments. We described the network
using a kinetic model () that takes into consideration the four key processes: (i) transcription
and translation of each DNA construct, (ii) competition between σ and σ for RNAP, (iii) repression by the
C1 protein, and (iv) dilution (under steady-state TX-TL conditions)
and degradation of mRNA and protein species. Having determined an
upper and lower boundary for each model parameter based on literature,
we sampled the parameter space using Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS)
to test if this motif yielded oscillatory dynamics under steady-state
TX-TL conditions (). The analysis
revealed that 29% of the sampled parameter sets showed oscillations,
indicating that the motif is robust in its ability to oscillate (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf In order to identify individual
parameters in our model, the key regulatory
mechanisms of our network
were implemented separately under batch TX-TL conditions (). First, we added
increasing concentrations of the  template to the TX-TL reaction mix (a). We observed an increased expression of
deGFP upon increasing template concentration confirming the presence
of σ in the lysate. Next, we implemented a two-step
cascade to test transcriptional activation by σ (b) by adding
increasing amounts of  template to a fixed concentration of  template. No deGFP fluorescence was observed in the absence of the  template indicating the
absence of σ in the lysate. We observed deGFP fluorescence
upon addition of 0.5 nM of  template indicating the production of functional σ, which activates protein production from the P promoter. The onset of deGFP expression and the final yield did
not improve remarkably upon increasing the  template concentration from 0.5 to 5 nM, highlighting
the potency of σ as a transcriptional activator.
Since the design of the network involves two sigma factors competing
for the RNAP, we quantified the extent of this competition by adding
increasing amounts of  template to a fixed concentration of  template (c). The sequestration of core RNAP by σ and the
subsequent decrease in deGFP expression serves as an indirect measurement
for sigma factor competition. We observed that the addition of 0.5
nM of the  template
is enough to produce sufficient σ to outcompete
σ for the core RNAP, reducing the deGFP yield by
approximately 50% when compared to the control (without any  template). To verify that
this decrease resulted from competition between sigma factors and
not from depletion of TX-TL resources, we repeated the same experiment
using the  template
instead of the  template
(). The addition of 1 nM of the  template did not result
in any significant reduction in the expression of the deGFP, indicating
that the previously noted decrease is indeed caused by the competition
of σ with σ for the core RNAP
and is not the result of depletion of resources. The final regulatory
mechanism tested is the transcriptional repression by C1 (d). We fixed the
concentration of  template at
5 nM and  template
at 0.1 nM, thus ensuring that any decrease in the expression yield
of deGFP is the result of inhibition  the C1 protein
as opposed to competition from σ, and added increasing
concentrations of  template. We
observed that the C1 protein inhibits protein production from the
P promoter, thereby decreasing the yields of deGFP for
concentrations of  template as
low as 0.4 nM. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf Since the lifetime of reactions in batch TX-TL conditions
is limited,
we used the initial expression kinetics to provide us with estimates
of reaction rates and binding constants. We implemented an evolutionary
algorithm () adapted from Smith () to evolve model parameters
to fit the batch TX-TL data ().
Using this initial parameter ()
set we predicted an oscillatory regime for our network described by
three experimentally controlled parameters— template concentration,  template concentration, and refresh rate
()—with experimentally feasible
upper and lower boundaries for each parameter, which guided our initial
experiments in steady-state TX-TL conditions (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf Steady-state TX-TL experiments were conducted
in a PDMS-based,
pneumatically controlled, bilayer microfluidic chip. Each chip comprises eight independent, 11 nL, ring reactors
in which unique TX-TL reactions can be performed. The periodic inflow
of fresh TX-TL reaction solutions and the simultaneous outflow of
used reagents allows the system to operate such that the transcription
and translation rates are in steady state and extends the lifetime
of TX-TL reactions. The period between subsequent dilutions (injection
of fresh reagents into reactor while removing used reagents) and the
volume fraction of the reactor being replenished per dilution is represented
by the refresh rate (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf Variation
of the control parameters regulates the transition of
the network through three qualitatively different outputs: sustained
oscillations, damped oscillations, and single-peak behavior under
steady-state TX-TL conditions (a(i–vi) and ). While the period of oscillations varied marginally (between 74
and 88 min), the amplitude of the oscillations showed significant
variations, with the largest oscillation amplitude being observed
at  and  concentrations of 0.6 and 6.5 nM, with a
refresh rate of 0.026 min (a(iii)). Lowering the refresh rate for comparable
concentrations of  and  templates resulted in the
dampening of oscillations ().
Increasing the concentration of  template, for a fixed  concentration and refresh rate, increased the amplitude of damped
oscillations (). These results
indicate that since σ is a transcriptionally strong
sigma factor (b) it produces C1 protein rapidly and the refresh rate needs to be
sufficiently high to remove σ thereby generating
the sufficient time delay for the negative feedback needed to observe
oscillations. These results are in general agreement with our LHS
analysis and previous work on similar systems. Increasing the concentrations of the  and  templates to 3 and 10 nM, respectively, results in a loss of oscillations
and leads to a single transient peak (). Time traces of deGFP production as readout for the key
regulatory
mechanisms of the σ-oscillator under batch TX-TL
conditions. (a) Linear DNA template () at different concentrations. (b) Two-step σ-activation
cascade. Increasing concentrations of  template were added to 5 nM of  template. Expression of σ from  activates deGFP production.
(c) Expression from  under competition
for core RNAP between sigma factors σ and σ. Increasing concentrations of  template were added to 5 nM of . (d) Transcriptional repression by C1. The concentrations
of  and  were fixed at 5 and 0.1 nM, respectively,
to which increasing concentrations of  template were added. Shaded error bands are standard error of three
separate measurements. Characterization of the σ-oscillator. (a) (i–vi)
Experimentally obtained deGFP time courses for the σ-oscillator exhibiting sustained oscillations under steady-state
TX-TL conditions for various values of [, ]. (b) Contour
plot showing the model-predicted amplitude of oscillations mapped
on to [, ] phase space for a given refresh rate (0.026
min). All points in a(i–vi) have been mapped
on to the contour plot in (b). Since a(iii) was used to re-estimate
model parameters and obtain the contour plot, it has been shown in
blue.  template concentration and
refresh rate were fixed at 8 nM and 0.026 min,
respectively, in all experiments. Characterization and Modification of Oscillator Properties http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf Although our initial parameter estimates from batch TX-TL data
aided in finding an oscillatory regime, they did not fully capture
the dynamics of the oscillator completely. To improve the accuracy
of our model parameters, we re-estimated them by fitting the model
to the steady-state TX-TL data using a data point within (a(iii)) and outside
() the oscillating regime (). Using this optimized parameter
set we characterized the behavior of the σ-oscillator
by simulating a control parameter space consisting of 15,625 combinations
of the control parameters and estimated the subset of this control
parameter space for which the model predicts stable oscillations (). The amplitude of oscillations, as
predicted by the model, were plotted against the  and  template concentrations for a fixed refresh rate (0.026 min) (b). In order to test the predictive ability of the model,
we compared the predicted and observed oscillation amplitudes for
the sustained oscillations in a. We found that the model predicts a decrease in amplitude
of oscillations with increasing  template concentrations, for a constant  template concentration (b). Upon increasing the concentration of  template in the experiments
from 1 to 2 nM (a(ii) and (i)), for a  concentration
of 6.5 nM, we observed a decrease in the amplitude of oscillations
(78 and 76 nM), although the extent of decrease was much less compared
to the model prediction. Furthermore, the model predicts that increasing
the  template concentration, for
a fixed concentration of  template, from 2 to 4.3 nM should lead to an increase in
oscillation amplitude and upon increasing the concentration further
to 8 nM should marginally decrease the oscillation amplitudes. Upon
experimental verification, we observed a similar trend (a(iv,v,vi)) wherein the amplitude
increases from 69.5 nM ( = 2 nM)
to 99.25 nM ( = 4.3 nM) and then
decreases marginally to 93 nM ( = 8 nM). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf A sensitivity analysis was performed to assess the
impact of changing a single system parameter on the oscillation amplitude
and size of the oscillating regime (). The analysis indicated that decreasing the competitive
strength of the activator to the RNAP as a possible modification to
increase the size of the oscillatory regime and the robustness of
oscillations. Since the  transcriptional
machinery is composed of a variety of sigma factors, each with different
affinities for the core RNAP, we replaced σ with
σ as the activator. σ has been
reported to be transcriptionally less potent and a weaker competitor
for RNAP when compared to σ, which we confirmed in batch TX-TL experiments (). In order to compare the behavior
of the two oscillators we repeated the simulations from  and b by
assuming a lower value for σ binding and accounting
for increased expression dynamics that was observed in the new TX-TL
mixture batch. Herein, it was found that
the model predicts a larger oscillatory subset, in particular a broader
activator template concentration range, when using σ as the activator in the network (). When characterizing the behavior of the σ oscillator
in a phase space with a fixed refresh rate (0.026 min) (a), we
found that it indeed exhibited oscillations for a higher range of  template concentrations
(from 5 to 10 nM) compared to the σ-oscillator
(from 0.6 to 2 nM) (b(i–ii) and ). However, the model fails to accurately capture the  template concentration
range for which the network exhibits oscillations, as it also predicts
oscillations for the conditions in b(iii). Variation of the  template concentration, while fixing the  template concentration at 5
nM, yielded sustained oscillations for a concentration of 10 nM, while
at 3.3 and 15 nM the system does not display any oscillations despite
model predictions indicating otherwise (b(iv–vi)). Characterization of the
σ-oscillator. (a) Contour
plot showing the model-predicted oscillation amplitudes mapped on
to the  phase space for a given refresh rate (0.026 min). (b) (i–vi) Experimentally obtained deGFP time courses for
the σ-oscillator exhibiting oscillatory and non-oscillatory
behavior for various values of [, ]. All points have been
mapped on to the contour plot (a).  template concentration and refresh rate were fixed at 8 nM and 0.026
min, respectively, in all experiments. Effect of Passive Transcriptional Control
on a Coupled Oscillator As mentioned above, multiple sigma
factors compete for the same
pool of core RNAP, and thus an increase in activity of one sigma factor
can exert an indirect repression on the binding of another sigma factor
to the RNAP. This mechanism is referred
to as passive transcriptional regulation. Although present between σ/σ and σ in the individual oscillators, this effect
is difficult to investigate as the concentration of σ is fixed in the lysate. To investigate the extent of such competition-induced
regulation among σ and σ, we
allowed the sigma factors to directly compete for the core RNAP in
batch TX-TL, as shown in a(i). Comparing deGFP fluorescence in the absence or
presence of 10 nM , we observed that with 0.85 nM of  template, the σ only marginally
decreases deGFP yield (a(ii)). In contrast, lowering the concentration of  template from 0.85 to 0.4 nM
resulted in a decrease of approximately 40% in yield of deGFP due
to passive transcriptional repression on the σ-activation
cascade by σ (a(iii)). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf In genetic networks, competition
for common catalytic resources
has been shown to alter network dynamics. Coupling the two oscillators within the same network, allows σ and σ to drive their respective networks
while simultaneously competing for core RNAP. Both sigma factors produce
C1 protein that represses the expression of σ,
σ, and deGFP from their respective templates (b(i)). Although multiple
factors govern the behavior of such a system, a crucial factor is
the competition-induced transcriptional regulation between σ and σ. Under steady-state TX-TL conditions,
we observed that for a concentration of 0.85 nM of  the σ-oscillator
displayed a single-peak behavior and at 10 nM of  the σ-oscillator
showed sustained oscillations. Upon coupling the networks, we found
that the system exhibited single-peak behavior (b(ii)). However, by decreasing the concentration
of the  to 0.4 nM
we found that the σ-oscillator exhibited damped
oscillations and the coupled system showed sustained oscillations
(b(iii)). This
result indicates that decreasing the  concentration from 0.85 to 0.4 nM allows the system
to enter a regime where σ can better compete for
the core RNAP, thereby exerting greater passive transcriptional control
over σ, leading to the emergence of sustained oscillatory
behavior in the coupled system. To ensure that the preservation of
oscillations in the coupled system results from the coupling of oscillators
and is not a consequence of extraneous factors such as pressure fluctuations
within the microfluidic setup, we coupled the oscillators under conditions
for which the isolated σ-oscillator exhibited no
oscillations—sustained or damped—while the σ-oscillator exhibited sustained oscillations (). The concentrations of the  and  templates were identical to those used
in the experiments depicted in b(iii), , 0.4 and 10 nM respectively.
We found that the coupled system exhibited sustained oscillations
confirming that the behavior of the coupled system is caused by the
passive transcriptional control exerted by σ over
σ. (a) (i) Schematic diagram showing the
passive transcriptional regulation
exerted by σ on the σ activation
cascade resulting in the decrease of the deGFP yield due to competition
for RNAP by σ. (ii, iii) End-point measurement
of deGFP yields for the batch TX-TL reactions shown for two different
concentrations of : 0.85 and 0.4 nM, respectively. The concentration of  DNA template was fixed at 5 nM, and the concentration
of  was varied between
0 and 10 nM. (b) (i) Schematic of the coupled oscillatory network.
σ and σ regulate the expression
of the C1 protein that inhibits the expression of both sigma factors
and deGFP. (ii, iii) Experimentally obtained deGFP time traces of
the σ-oscillator, σ-oscillator,
and the coupled system under steady-state TX-TL conditions. The concentration
of , , and  were kept
fixed at 8, 6.5, and 10 nM, respectively. The respective concentrations
of  and  were (ii) 0.85 and 6.5 nM and (iii) 0.4 and
1.5 nM. In this work we have
implemented cell-free genetic oscillators
with an activator–repressor motif leveraging endogenous  RNAP and sigma factors. Using an evolutionary
algorithm, we optimized a kinetic model with batch and steady-state
TX-TL data to characterize a phase space wherein the network exhibits
oscillations. Since the sigma factors of both oscillators presented
here share a common catalytic resource—RNAP—we were
able to observe the behavior of two individual oscillators as well
as the behavior of a coupled network wherein both oscillators compete
for a common resource. Higher-order systems in synthetic biology are
frequently engineered by combining multiple modules downstream of
one another, analogous to electrical circuits. In our work, we rely on the RNAP to combine and thereby
couple oscillators driven by different sigma factors. We found that
the behavior of the coupled oscillator system depends on the extent
of passive transcriptional regulation between sigma factors. Together
with better understanding of the role of resource sharing and more robust routes to measure kinetic parameters
of networks, our study describes a methodology
to engineer complex  genetic networks. PCR for linear DNA templates
was performed using Phusion High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase from ThermoFisher
Scientific. PCR was carried out in a thermocycler according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. DNA templates were purified using
QIAGEN PCR purification kits, and concentrations were measured using
a Nanodrop.  template was ordered
from IDT as a gBlock fragment. All other DNA templates for this study
were obtained from Arbor Biosciences. The energy mixture and cell
lysate were prepared using protocols described previously by Sun () and Caschera () Briefly, BL21 Rosetta2
cells were grown to an OD of 1.8 in LB medium supplemented
with a phosphate buffer (0.22 M sodium dihydrogen phosphate and 0.4
M disodium hydrogen phosphate, pH 7). The cells were washed with S30A
buffer (14 mM magnesium glutamate, 60 mM potassium glutamate, 2 mM
DTT, titrated to pH 8.2 with Tris-base). The pellet was resuspended
in S30A buffer in a volume equal to 0.8 times the cell pellet weight
and passed through a cell press at 16 000 lb. The extract was
spun down from which the supernatant was collected, incubated at 37 °C,
dialyzed in S30B buffer (14 mM magnesium glutamate, 150 mM potassium
glutamate, 1 mM DTT, titrated to pH 8.2 with Tris-base) and aliquoted.
The density of the cell lysate was determined to be 40 mg/mL using
the Pierce BCA assay. The Energy
Mixture was added
to the cell lysate along with 3 μM GamS, 3% w/v PEG-8000, 6
mM magnesium Glutamate and 80 mM potassium Glutamate to obtain the
TX-TL reaction mixture. The final concentrations were 11 mg/mL cell
lysate, 50 mM Hepes (pH 8.0), 0.9 mM cytidine triphosphate and uridine
triphosphate, 1.5 mM each of adenosine triphosphate and guanosine
triphosphate, 0.5 mM of each amino acid, 1 mM spermidine, 0.75 mM
cyclic adenosine monophosphate, 0.33 mM nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide,
0.26 mM coenzyme A, 30 mM 3-phosphoglyceric acid, 0.067 mM folinic
acid, 0.2 mg/mL tRNAs. For batch TX-TL reactions the DNA templates
and necessary volume of MQ HO were added and mixed well.
Ten μL of the final reaction solution was pipetted into a Nunclon
384 well plate and the deGFP fluorescence was measured using a Tecan
M200 Infinite Plate-reader. GamS was prepared using protocols described
previously by Sun () During the steady-state TX-TL experiments, microfluidic devices
were placed within an incubator set to 30 °C. The TX-TL reaction
mixture, was stored within a water-cooled Peltier element, maintained
at 4 °C. A short piece of tubing was used to connect the Peltier
element to the microfluidic device allowing for the injection of the
cooled TX-TL mix into the device. The remaining reaction components
(, MQ HO and DNA solutions) were
stored in Tygon tubing (0.02′′ ID, 0.06′′
OD) that was inserted directly into the microfluidic device. These
solutions were maintained at 30 °C for the entirety of the experiment.
Over the course of the experiments, fluorescence images were periodically
captured using an inverted microscope (Nikon Eclipse) to monitor the
fluorescence within the microfluidic reactors. Fluorescence was determined
from the obtained images using MATLAB software. Amplitude of sustained
oscillations were determined by measuring the difference between the
fluorescence maxima and minima of the final two oscillations in the
steady-state TX-TL experiments. Fabrication and Design
of Microfluidic device http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00300/suppl_file/sb8b00300_si_001.pdf The microfluidic
devices used throughout this research were based on designs published
by Niederholtmeyer , and were manufactured according to previously described protocols.
For more details refer to the ..