The high-level
heterologous
production of membrane proteins in  and other
hosts has proven challenging, especially due to oversaturation of
the membrane protein biogenesis machinery. Common systems for recombinant protein production, such as those
based on the strong T7 promoter, often lead to the jamming of chaperones
and membrane translocation systems, consequently making it impossible
to produce correctly folded membrane proteins at high levels. Several  strains and expression systems
have been developed to improve the production of especially bacterial
membrane proteins. Commonly used systems include the  Walker strains (C41(DE3),C43(DE3)), BL21-AI, and the more
recently developed  Lemo21(DE3). These systems rely on downregulating the levels of T7 RNA polymerase
(T7RNAP), consequently reducing expression rates to better accommodate
translocation and folding of membrane proteins. Particularly,  Lemo21(DE3) has
been constructed to fine-tune transcription through an indirect control
of T7RNAP activity through -rhamnose-inducible production
of its inhibitor, T7-lysozyme (LysY). The system has proven
successful and has been recently streamlined into a one-plasmid system
named pReX, but it requires the properly
timed addition of two different inducer compounds: -rhamnose
and the expensive IPTG (isopropyl β--1-thiogalactopyranoside).
Additionally, to date, neither Lemo21(DE3) nor any other currently
available system has successfully demonstrated long-term (>24 h)
continuous
production of membrane proteins in . Realizing
inducer-free, stable production remains a major challenge, which is
relevant for many synthetic biology applications. This includes, for
example, the heterologous production of transporter membrane proteins
in microbial cell factories to be used in (continuous) production
processes, or signal-transduction membrane proteins in strains that
need to function as a biosensor over a long time. Another limitation
in heterologous protein production relates to
ribosome binding site (RBS) accessibility. Several proteins,
including membrane proteins, have been categorized as “difficult-to-produce”
due to strong mRNA secondary structures in the 5′ untranslated
region (5′-UTR) and in the start of the coding sequence (CDS),
which impede the proper translation initiation at the RBS. Some efforts aimed at resolving such structures rely on fusing well-expressed
short peptide tags to the N-terminus of membrane proteins. However, fusion peptides can
affect protein stability, structure, and function. Furthermore, translation initiation has been successfully
improved by randomly mutating nucleotides around the start codon, which enhanced the production
of several “difficult-to-produce” membrane proteins,
but this method requires a high-throughput screening or selection
approach. To overcome the limitations of state-of-the-art membrane
protein
production, we explored an alternative method for protein expression:
the so-called bicistronic design elements (BCDs). The system is based on a constitutive promoter and tuning
by using two RBSs that are translationally coupled. The first RBS
mediates strong translation initiation of a short leader peptide,
while the second RBS, which is located within the leader peptide’s
CDS and drives the translation of the protein of interest, has a tunable
strength ().
It is hypothesized that the intrinsic helicase activity of the ribosomes
translating the leader peptide can unwind potential secondary structures
of the mRNA, thereby eliminating translation initiation problems near
the second RBS and the start of the target CDS. In this work, we employ a library
of translational coupling elements
to tune and optimize the constitutive production of several bacterial
membrane proteins. A medium-strength, constitutive promoter (P14)
and 22 variable-strength translational coupling elements (BCDs) were
selected from the work of Mutalik et al.; the BCD elements can be inserted seamlessly in the expression vector
using a simple golden gate-based cloning method (). We tested our system for the expression of four different
membrane
proteins: YidC, AraH, and two rhodopsins. YidC is a membrane-translocation
chaperone in , which has been frequently used
as a model for studying membrane protein production. AraH is the integral membrane
component of the  arabinose ABC transporter,
which is considered a “difficult-to-produce” protein
because of its translation initiation limitations in a typical pET
vector; GR is a proton-pumping rhodopsin photosystem
from the cyanobacterium , and
TR is a thermophilic rhodopsin from . For the two first proteins, YidC and AraH, GFP was fused
to their
C-terminus, rendering YidC-GFP and AraH-GFP. All the 22 BCD variants
were cloned separately into expression vectors carrying YidC-GFP and
AraH-GFP. We then estimated levels of membrane inserted YidC and AraH
by measuring fluorescence levels. C-terminal GFP only folds properly
and results in fluorescence when membrane proteins fused to the GFP
are integrated into the membrane and do not end up in inclusion bodies,
hence providing a quantitative approximation for membrane-embedded
expression. The expression of YidC-GFP and
AraH-GFP by different BCD elements was ranked in order of the translation
initiation strengths previously observed for each BCD element in the
work by Mutalik et al., in order to allow
for a systematic analysis of their fluorescence (a,e). For both fusion proteins,
the tested BCD variants resulted in a
range of GFP fluorescence-signals, suggesting different levels of
functional membrane protein production. In the case of YidC-GFP, a
rough pattern was observed considering the correlation between the
fluorescence and the expected translation initiation strength of the
different BCD constructs. BCD elements up to BCD19 generally resulted
in increased levels of production, whereas elements stronger than
BCD19 mostly resulted in lower production levels (a). Some of the strongest translation
initiation variants resulted in negligible and/or highly irreproducible
production levels. For example, in some replicate cultures the strong
BCD2 gave high expression but in several other cultures expression
was completely absent (ranging from no expression to 70 000
RFU/mL). When the BCD-based expression was compared to the optimized
Lemo21(DE3)-based expression of YidC-GFP, the latter gave rise to
an emerging nonproducing subpopulation of cells after 22 h, as indicated
by flow cytometry analysis, whereas the production by the highest-producing
BCD19-YidC-GFP remained homogeneous (c). In agreement with this observation, Western
blot analysis revealed that the formation of YidC-GFP in inclusion
bodies was reduced for the BCD19 versus optimized Lemo21(DE3)-expression
(b). Moreover,
the medium-strength BCD19 yielded approximately twice as much production
per cell than  Lemo21(DE3), which was previously
proven to be a superior production system for YidC-GFP over other
commonly used systems such as  C41(DE3) and
C43(DE3). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00101/suppl_file/sb9b00101_si_001.pdf In the case of AraH-GFP,
a similar trend was observed, that is,
increasing levels of fluorescence were measured up to BCD19. However,
unlike for YidC-GFP, no large decrease or unstable AraH-GFP production
was observed for stronger BCD elements, and the strongest BCD2 produced
at similar high levels as BCD19 (e). AraH-GFP production by BCD19 and BCD2
was compared to the production by a previously optimized pET vector
(pET-opt-AraH-GFP), which was obtained by screening a large library
of vectors with mutations around the start codon. The volumetric production by both BCDs was found to be
higher than that of pET-opt-AraH-GFP under the originally optimized
conditions, mainly due to a higher biomass yield (e, ). Production by the BCDs also resulted in less inclusion
body binding protein than pET-based production, while a nonfolded
protein could not be clearly detected in Western blot for any
construct (f). Additionally, production by pET-opt-AraH-GFP resulted in a small
emerging nonproducing population of cells after 22 h of cultivation,
as revealed by flow cytometry analysis, while production by the BCD
elements was still fully homogeneous (g). Notably, by screening a library of only
22 BCD variants, we were able to find clones for which the production 
was comparable (per cell) or even better (per volume) than that of
the previously optimized pET-opt-AraH-GFP, which required the high-throughput
screening of a large library of variants (1.6 × 10) through fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00101/suppl_file/sb9b00101_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00101/suppl_file/sb9b00101_si_001.pdf To further estimate the production stability
of the medium-strength,
high-producing BCD19 and the strongest translation initiation element
BCD2, we assessed production per cell by flow cytometry during longer
serial cultivation experiments up to 72 h. Remarkably, BCD19-YidC-GFP,
and for AraH both BCD19 and BCD2, result in stable homogeneously producing
populations, even after 72 h (d,h, ). For BCD2-YidC-GFP,
however, only 2 out of 4 precultures prepared for the stability experiment
maintained their initial production level, despite the fact that the
colonies used for initial inoculation were selected on the basis of
high fluorescence. This demonstrated again an unstable production
phenotype for the strong BCD2 with YidC, as observed we observed in
earlier experiments. The two stably producing precultures were further
inoculated for the long-term experiment in fresh medium, and their
production decreased over the course of time (d, ).
The strong translation initiation of YidC-GFP driven by BCD2 seemed
to stress the cells, favoring the emergence of nonexpressing cells
in the population (d), which may have been caused by suppressing mutations in
plasmids or the genome (not further characterized). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00101/suppl_file/sb9b00101_si_001.pdf The BCD
system was further employed to optimize the production
of bacterial rhodopsin proteins. These simple membrane-bound light-harvesting
energy systems can be employed for light-driven cell-factories or optogenetic regulation. When properly folded in the cytoplasmic membrane, rhodopsins
are known to bind the retinal pigment, leading to red pigmentation
of the host cells. Rather than cloning all the BCDs
in parallel, this time the 22 BCD variants were pooled, cloned into
the vectors containing GR or TR, and transformed as a library. Clones
of the resulting transformation were then randomly picked and grown
in 96-well plates with retinal (). For both GR and TR, 11 clearly red-pigmented pellets were identified
out of 89 and 96 screened clones, respectively. For each of the rhodopsin
proteins, three intensely red clones were selected for further characterization.
In the case of GR, one of the selected clones contained BCD14 and
the other two carried BCD15. For TR, BCD9, BCD12, and BCD21 were identified.
All these variants are in the medium-strength range of the BCD system. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.9b00101/suppl_file/sb9b00101_si_001.pdf Production of GR and TR by the best rhodopsin-producing BCD variants
was scaled up from deep-well plates to 10 mL cultures in 50 mL tubes.
While all elements rendered very similar levels of GR expression (i), the production
of TR significantly differed from one BCD to another; BCD9 performed
significantly better than BCD12, while BCD21 gave the lowest production
(j). These
three variants performed very similar when grown in deep-96-well plates,
while the results of the production assays in 50 mL tubes are significantly
different. This indicates that results are not always comparable when
scaling-up from deep-well plates (0.5 mL culture) to test tubes (10
mL culture). The previously discussed  strains of YidC-GFP and
AraH-GFP were  initially grown directly in 10 mL cultures
in 50 mL tubes, and now compared with their performance in deep-well
plates (0.5 mL culture) (), confirming
differences in performance depending on culture conditions. This reflects
the common challenge of optimizing and scaling up recombinant production.
However, the optimization for the BCD system in scaled-up conditions
is quite feasible given the limited number of tuning variants that
need to be tested. We then compared the production of GR and
TR to the levels produced
by the Lemo21(DE3) system, which was optimized in tubes. Compared
to rhodopsin production by the Lemo21(DE3) system, the best performing
BCD variants for GR and TR resulted in at least 2-fold and 3-fold
higher volumetric rhodopsin production, respectively (i,j). The here employed
BCD system outperforms the membrane protein productivities
of previously established approaches. Moreover, the BCD system provides
stable membrane protein production for at least 72 h, a stability
never reported to date. While most current systems for membrane protein
production are limited to specific  strains,
the applied P14 constitutive promoter allows our system to be generally
applicable in all  strains. By applying the
principles of our method and potentially including different promoters
and/or BCDs, our system is likely feasible for bacterial membrane
protein production in other bacterial hosts as well. The BCD system
may also be applicable for producing certain eukaryotic membrane proteins
in  although expression of eukaryotic proteins
in bacterial hosts may lead to issues that cannot be solved just by
tuning expression strength and tackling RBS-accessibility, this includes
issues  as glycosylation or the requirement of eukaryotic-like
membrane lipids. Overall, it is anticipated
that the here described approach for bacterial membrane protein production
will be useful for many future studies, ranging from biochemical characterization
to cell factory and biosensor engineering. Expression vector design and assembly. (a) The standard expression
vector contains a medium-strength constitutive promoter, RBS1, which
allows for strong translation initiation of a leader peptide, and
a translationally coupled, variable RBS2, mediating translation initiation
of the coding sequence (CDS) of the membrane protein of interest. (b) Vectors are assembled with different BCD
elements. First, the vector is amplified by PCR, subsequently it is
digested by type IIS restriction enzymes. The latter allows for seamless
assembly with a library of annealed oligo pairs (encoding the different
BCD variants), which have overhangs complementary to the digested
vector. Production of YidC-GFP,
AraH-GFP, and rhodopsins by BCD elements
and comparison to state-of-the art systems. (a) Volumetric YidC-GFP
production based on whole-cell fluorescence measurements and final
growth yields for the BCD constructs, and a comparison to Lemo21(DE3)-based
production at optimized (2 mM -rhamnose) and nonoptimized
(0 mM -rhamnose) conditions. BCD variants are ordered in
the -axis based on previously reported translation
initiation strength. (b) Western blots
performed with antihis-tag antibody (upper panels) to visualize both
inclusion body and well-folded YidC-GFP-his, and anti-IbpB (lower panels) to visualize inclusion body binding protein B. (c)
Single-cell production of YidC-GFP analyzed by flow cytometry for
several increasing strength BCD elements and optimized Lemo21(DE3).
(d) Single-cell production of YidC-GFP by BCD19 and BCD2 in a 72 h
stability experiment. (e) Volumetric AraH-GFP production based on
whole-cell fluorescence measurements and final growth yields for the
BCD constructs, and a comparison to pET-opt-AraH-GFP. BCD variants are ordered in the -axis
based on previously reported variant strength. (f) Western blots performed with antihis-tag antibody (upper
panels) to visualize both AraH-GFP-his, and anti-IbpB (lower panels) to visualize inclusion body binding protein. (g)
Single-cell production of AraH-GFP analyzed by flow cytometry for
several increasing strength BCD elements and pET-opt-AraH-GFP. (h)
Single-cell production of AraH-GFP by BCD19 and BCD2 in a 72 h stability
experiment. (i) Volumetric Gloeobacter Rhodopsin (GR) and (j) Thermophilic
Rhodopsin (TR) production determined by spectroscopy, and pictures
of red-pigmented pellets. All cultivations were performed in 10 mL
of medium in 50 mL tubes, for YidC-AraH and AraH-GFP at 30 °C,
for rhodopsins GR and TR at 37 °C, and for pET-opt-AraH-GFP in  BL21(DE3) pLysS at 25 °C (as optimized for
in original work). BCD-based production was measured after 22 h of
cultivation, while Lemo21(DE3) and pET based production was measured
after 22 h of induction. Whole-cell fluorescence or rhodopsin quantification
data are based on at least three biological replicates. For 72 h stability
experiments  BL21(DE3) harboring BCD vectors
were reinoculated 1:50 into fresh LB kanamycin medium every 24 h.
Notation: RFU, relative fluorescence units; OD, optimal
density of 600 nm..