The CRISPR (clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats) system, a natural adaptive
immunity system found in bacteria, has recently been repurposed as
a novel method for sequence-specific gene regulation. A catalytically dead version of the Cas9 nuclease, dCas9,
combined with a short chimeric single guide RNA (sgRNA), can bind
and repress specific genes through sgRNA-mediated DNA binding. Guide
RNAs are easily designed and expressed, allowing for simple yet specific
gene targeting. Natural horizontal gene transfer of CRISPR loci
has been previously
observed between bacterial species. However,
it has not been repurposed for specific gene regulation using engineered
target specificity. This project takes advantage of a natural horizontal
gene transfer mechanism in bacteria–conjugation–to deliver
an inducible CRISPRi system to repress a specific gene, mRFP, in a
target  reporter strain. This work
establishes a basic synthetic biology tool for gene regulation between
bacterial species that could be elaborated for more complex manipulation
of bacterial populations in future applications. Design
of Conjugative CRISPRi System For the conjugative
donor, we used the  strain S17-1 (ATCC). It
contains chromosomal copies of genes from the natural conjugative
plasmid RP4 that encode for enzymes (e.g., relaxase), structural proteins
(e.g., pili formation), and other regulatory proteins necessary for
conjugation. This allows for tighter control
of conjugation as the plasmid can only be transferred by the chosen
donor. We utilized a compatible 5.5 kilobase pair (kb) plasmid, pARO190
(ATCC), which contains an origin of transfer (oriT) required for conjugation
from a donor to a recipient. All  strains are competent to receive conjugative transfer,
so we chose a reporter strain containing chromosomal insertions of
mRFP and sfGFP to measure CRISPRi gene repression efficiency in our
recipient strain. To transfer the
CRISPRi system to the recipient strain, we cloned a previously described
∼100 bp chimeric sgRNA specific to mRFP and  dCas9 protein-coding gene into pARO190.The sgRNA was placed under a constitutive promoter (iGEM Parts Registry
BBa_J23119), while dCas9 was placed under an anhydrotetracycline (aTc)-inducible
promoter (pLTetO-1)(Figure B). Once conjugated into a recipient strain and induced to
produce dCas9, sgRNA and dCas9 form a complex that blocks transcription
of mRFP (Figure A). Design of CRISPRi Conjugative
System. (A) Design of CRISPRi conjugation
system. The conjugative donor strain S17–1 contains chromosomal
copies of genes necessary for conjugation from natural conjugative
plasmid RP4, and the recipient strain
contains chromosomal insertions of mRFP and sfGFP. The conjugative plasmid encodes a CRISPRi system specifically
targeting mRFP. Once the CRISPRi plasmid is conjugated from the donor
into the recipient and induced to produce dCas9, sgRNA and dCas9 form
a complex and block the transcription of mRFP. (B) Design of CRISPRi
conjugative plasmid. The CRISPRi system was cloned into the pARO190
plasmid, which is competent for conjugative transfer by the presence
of an origin of transfer (oriT). dCas9 was placed under an aTc-inducible promoter
(P) while the sgRNA to mRFP
was placed under a medium-level constitutive promoter (P, iGEM Parts Registry BBa_J23119). Plasmid contains ampicillin/carbenicillin
resistance and is approximately 10.5 kb. Assay for Conjugative Transfer of CRISPRi System To
test for successful conjugation between  strains,
donor and recipient strains were grown to saturation overnight in
the appropriate selective media. The cultures were washed three times
by pelleting and resuspending in LB without antibiotics. The donor
and recipient strains were then each diluted to OD 0.05
in a 10 mL coculture without antibiotic selection. The cocultures
were incubated at 37 °C for 8 h to allow for conjugation and
then plated and selected for trans-conjugant cells (recipient strain
with the conjugated plasmid) by antibiotics specific for both the
recipient strain and transferred plasmid. Conjugation efficiency was
estimated at 0.44% after 8 h of coculture (Table S2, ). Conjugated CRISPRi System
Can Specifically Repress the Target
mRFP Gene Fluorescence was measured by flow cytometry to
determine whether the conjugated CRISPRi system specifically repressed
mRFP while leaving sfGFP unaffected in the recipient strain. After
conjugation in coculture and selection for transconjugants, liquid
cultures were inoculated at OD 0.05 and dCas9 production
was induced by 10 ng/μL aTc (8 h, 37 °C). Cultures were
washed and resuspended in PBS and run on a LSRII flow cytometer (BD
Biosciences) equipped with a high-throughput sampler. Significant
repression of mRFP expression (330-fold reduction compared to that
of control cells lacking the CRISPRi system) was observed when the
dCas9 and a mRFP-specific sgRNA were expressed, but sfGFP expression
remained high (1.2-fold reduction). Constructs expressing dCas9 alone
(i.e., without the sgRNA) showed similar slight reductions in both
mRFP and sfGFP expression (1.5-fold). This slight reduction correlated
with dCas9 expression, potentially by contributing to metabolic burden
or nonspecific targeting (Figure A). By microscopy, the cells containing the sgRNA
against mRFP showed no red fluorescence, while the sfGFP signal remained
high (Figure B). Interestingly, induction
of dCas9 did not increase repression, suggesting leaky expression
of the dCas9 protein that can be optimized for future applications
(data not shown). Taken together, these data demonstrate the transfer
of the CRISPRi system by conjugation, and that it can result in repression
of a specific reporter gene in the recipient strain. Conjugated CRISPRi Causes
Specific mRFP repression. (A) Specific
repression of mRFP is seen only in the presence of the sgRNA complementary
to mRFP, but sfGFP is not affected. Fluorescence results represent
geometric mean ± s.t.d. of three biological replicates after
induction by aTc. Control (−) is reporter strain without a
conjugated plasmid. Flow cytometry data were analyzed by FlowJo 7.6.1.
(B) Microscopic images of mRFP and sfGFP expression in target strains.
Top panels are mRFP and lower panels are sfGFP. mRFP expression is
selectively reduced with the presence of the sgRNA, as almost no fluorescence
is observed. sfGFP expression remains high for all cells. Control
shows cells with no fluorescent reporters. Scale bar, 10 μm. The
development of engineered CRISPR/Cas systems has allowed for
specific genome-editing capability by introducing DNA double-strand
breaks at target sequences; mutants without
nuclease function provide further functionality both by causing gene
repression or when used as targeting domains for delivery of other
transcriptional regulators. Because the CRISPR system
only requires a short sequence of RNA to target nuclease binding,
it provides advantages over established genome-editing systems like
TALENs and zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs) which require unique protein
domains to achieve binding to the desired sequences. CRISPR sgRNAs are easily produced and can be multiplexed
to seek out many targets with a single Cas9 adaptor, resulting in a gene-regulation platform of a compact size
that could be transferred between cells. Here, we demonstrate
the ability to deliver a targeted gene silencing
system through conjugation between  strains.
CRISPR systems have been shown to have highly specific recognition
of particular DNA sequences and can distinguish individual strains
from mixed populations of bacteria, even between highly similar strains. However, to our knowledge no methods of delivery
of the CRISPR system to a natural mixed population of bacteria have
been developed. The technique we
describe is the first instance of cell-mediated
transfer of the CRISPRi system in bacteria. Our novel design relies
upon the engineering of a cell distinct from the target cell for gene
knockdown, allowing for downstream manipulation of a target population
of cells without direct intervention. Owing to the universality of
conjugation among Gram-negative bacteria, the potential scope of targets
is vast. While we have not yet demonstrated conjugative transfer in
a natural microbiome, as a naturally occurring process we believe
it could be optimized for therapeutic application. Alternatively,
we see high potential for using bacteriophage as a delivery mechanism. In addition to gene regulation by CRISPRi
(either by repression
or activation), we imagine future elaborations
on this system such as targeted cell killing by DNA cleavage with
catalytically active Cas9, or even transmission
of CRISPRi circuits that allow for more nuanced cellular responses. Combining multiple guideRNAs to multiple target
sites could also provide robustness to the design not currently available
with other strategies. This broad range
of downstream effects that can be mediated by the CRISPR machinery
provides a variety of powerful tools to fine tune the control of bacterial
populations..