Complex and
sophisticated phenotypes
in eukaryotic cells manifest from layered regulatory networks and
specific expression programs involving the regulated transcription
of many genes. As major players in these
networks, eukaryotic transcriptional factors (TFs) can integrate multiple
signals and perform complex, combinatorial functions on promoters,
where regulatory information is encoded in the form of binding sites
for TFs and interactions between TFs, to modulate gene expression
patterns. Rewiring endogenous transcriptional networks
by natural or synthetic
TFs is a powerful strategy for interrogating cellular functions and
controlling cellular phenotypes. Previously, natural DNA-binding domains (DBDs, mainly from bacterial
sources, such as TetR, LacI, and LexA) have been used to recruit effector
(e.g., activator and repressor) domains to the regulatory regions
of eukaryotic genes in order to modulate their transcription. This necessitates the placement of DBD-specific operator site(s)
in the -regulatory region of the promoters for
specific genes which is a labor- and time-intensive process, especially
if the regulation of multiple genes is desired. Moreover, engineering
and modulating complex transcriptional networks requires tunable,
extensible, and orthogonal transcription factors. However, only a
few orthogonal variants of natural DBDs are well-characterized and
changing their specificity has proven to be challenging. As such, the use of natural DBD-based TFs for
wiring complex transcriptional networks and synthetic gene circuits
has been limited. To address these limitations, synthetic TFs
based on Zinc Fingers
(ZFs) and Transcriptional Activator-Like Effectors (TALEs) have been
developed. The ability to program the specificity of ZFs and TALEs to potentially
target any sequence makes these DBDs appealing for designing libraries
of orthogonal transcription factors. Synthetic ZF- and TALE-based
TFs have been shown to work in a wide range of eukaryotes; however, obtaining a TF for a
given target site requires tedious selection processes or multistage
DNA assembly protocols. Furthermore, the scale
of regulation that can be achieved by these TFs is potentially limited
by the metabolic burden imposed on the cells and the number of TFs
that can be simultaneously encoded in a given cell. Here, we present a strategy for modulating eukaryotic
transcription
at natural and synthetic promoters using programmable and tunable
synthetic transcription factors based on a bacterial CRISPR (Clustered
Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats)/Cas system. Many
bacteria use CRISPR-based immune systems to degrade genetic materials
of invading phages. In these systems, short RNAs
expressed from CRISPR loci are used to target an endonuclease protein
(Cas9) against invading genetic material. Recently, it has been shown
that Cas9 can be used as a programmable tool for genome editing across
various organisms. In this context, small customizable guide RNAs (gRNAs) can be used
to program and target Cas9 endonuclease to specific loci in living
cells to induce double (or single)-stranded breaks in DNA. Upon cleavage,
error-prone or template-directed repair pathways are triggered, generating
variants of the original target loci. Recently, Qi et al. showed that an endonuclease-deficient Cas9 (dCas9,
with D10A H841A mutations relative to the wild-type Cas9) can be used
as a programmable “CRISPRi” tool for gene silencing
in . When targeted
to a promoter or ORF of a gene of interest, dCas9 can block progression
of RNA polymerase and hence silence expression of the targeted gene.
They also provide evidence that CRISPRi is functional in human cells,
albeit with much lower efficiency compared with . In addition, Bikard et al. demonstrated that
along with programmed transcriptional repression, transcriptional
activation can be achieved in  by fusing the omega subunit of RNA polymerase to the endonuclease-deficient
Cas9. Here, we achieved versatile,
programmable, and multiplexable tools
for gene regulation in eukaryotes by functionalizing dCas9 with effector
domains and targeting both natural and synthetic promoters. As a proof
of concept, we made an RNA-guidable transcription factor by fusing
dCas9 to an activator domain. Using this CRISPR-based transcription
factor (crisprTF), we teased apart the regulatory maps of several
natural eukaryotic promoters (in  and HEK293T cells) without the need to modify promoter architectures.
Unlike previous generations of customizable DBDs (i.e., ZFs and TALEs)
that require multistage design and cloning strategies, crisprTFs can
be readily customized and retargeted to different loci and regulatory
regions  using specific gRNAs with homology
to target sites (Figure ). dCas9 thus offers
a powerful tool for targeting functions of interest to specific genomic
loci in living cells, which can potentially be used to regulate gene
expression at will, construct scalable synthetic gene circuits, or
rewire endogenous regulatory networks. To implement crisprTFs in , we fused the SV40 nuclear
localization sequence (NLS) and four
tandem copies of Herpes Simplex Viral Protein 16 (VP64, a commonly
used eukaryotic transcription activator domain) to a codon-optimized  dCas9 (Figure A). The crisprTF cassette was then cloned
under the control of pTPGI, a synthetic promoter which can be induced
by growing cells in galactose + anhydrotetracycline (aTc) media and integrated into the yeast genome. To assess
the activity of crisprTF,  was placed under the
control of a minimal CYC1 promoter (pCYC1m) and the whole cassette
was integrated into the yeast genome. pCYC1m retains one of the two
endogenous TATA boxes of the wild-type CYC1 promoter and lacks binding
sites for endogenous regulatory factors in the upstream activating
sequence (UAS). gRNAs were expressed constitutively
from the RNA polymerase III-dependent pRPR1 promoter and the 3′-ends
of the gRNAs were defined by the pRPR1 terminator. Figure S1, Supporting Information Figure S1, Supporting
Information Figure S2, Supporting Information The expression of gRNAs targeting different regions
in the pCYC1m
(as shown in Figure B) resulted in various
statistically significant levels of reporter fluorescence compared
to the no gRNA control (Figure C, left panel).
Targeting crisprTFs to the sequences upstream of the TATA boxes (by
c3, c4, and c8 gRNAs) led to the activation of the reporter. However,
targeting crisprTFs to the sequences spanning the TATA box and the
Kozak sequence (KS) resulted in the repression of  expression to various degrees. Stronger repression was achieved
when crisprTFs were targeted to the proximity of TATA box (using c7
gRNA) and to the vicinity of the TATA box and the transcription start
site (using c2 and c6 gRNAs), likely due to interference of crisprTFs
with the formation of the transcriptional initiation complex. No activation was observed with any of the eight
tested gRNAs when dCas9, without a fused activator domain, was targeted
to pCYC1m (). All the tested gRNAs in this strain repressed  expression to some extent (), with highest repression observed with c6 and
c7. These results demonstrate that dCas9 is able to repress transcription
but requires an activation domain (VP64) to activate transcription
of a target locus and further supports the hypothesis that dCas9 (or
as a fusion to VP64) can act as a repressor by interfering with the
formation of the transcriptional initiation complex. Similar results
were achieved with the GAL1 promoter (pGAL1) and its variants, where
targeting crisprTFs to sequences upstream and downstream of TATA box
led to activation and repression of the GFP reporter, respectively
(). These
results indicate that a single crisprTF can be programmed to act as
both an activator and a repressor by targeting it to different positions
across endogenous promoters. The activity of a promoter is determined
by combinatorial interactions
between transcriptional regulatory factors bound to that promoter.
We thus investigated the effects of binding of multiple crisprTFs
targeted to the same promoter. To this end, pairwise combinations
of gRNAs with non-neutral effects (those that showed either activation
or repression in the left panel of Figure C) were coexpressed. As shown in the right panel of Figure C, coexpression of repressor gRNAs resulted in synergistic
repression of the reporter (up to 7× repression was achieved
with coexpression of the c5 and c6 pair as well as the c6 and c7 pair).
On the other hand, when a repressor gRNA was coexpressed with an activator
gRNA (e.g., the c3 and c6 pair), an intermediate level of GFP expression
was achieved, indicating an antagonistic interaction between the two
gRNAs. Moreover, the effects of repressor gRNAs were dominant over
activator gRNAs, suggesting that interruption of the formation of
the transcription initiation complex has a stronger effect than activation. Coexpression of two activator gRNAs (e.g., c3
and c4) did not result in synergistic activation of the reporter,
which suggests that the relative positions and interactions of bound
activators are important for determining synergistic activation. Consistent with our results, it has been shown
that synergistic activation from synthetic promoters with multiple
GAL4 operator sites depends on the distance and helical phase of the
operator sites. Furthermore, in another
study it has been shown that not all of the combinations of TALE-activators
targeted to the same promoter result in synergistic activation. We next sought to investigate the activity
of crisprTFs in human
cells. To this end, a human-codon-optimized crisprTF cassette was
placed on a plasmid under the control of the constitutive cytomegalovirus
immediate-early promoter (pCMV). The gRNAs were expressed constitutively
from a separate plasmid by the RNA polymerase III-dependent U6 promoter
(pU6), as previously described (Figure A). After transfection of these plasmids into HEK293T cells,
we investigated the regulatory architecture of the minimal adenovirus
major late promoter (pMLPm) by targeting
crisprTFs to different positions across this promoter (Figure A). YFP was used as the readout for pMLPm promoter
activity. Consistent with the results obtained
in , crisprTFs activated
gene expression when targeted to sequences
upstream of the pMLPm TATA box (using m1, m2, m6, or m7 gRNA) or downstream
of the transcription start site (m8 gRNA) (Figure B and C). Since the basal expression level of the pMLPm promoter
is low, it was challenging to detect significant repression from this
promoter. Thus, to demonstrate that crisprTFs can function as transcriptional
repressors in mammalian cells, we placed mKATE under the control of
a constitutive mammalian promoter, phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (pPGK1), and targeted crisprTFs to this promoter (Figure A). pPGK1 is a strong, constitutive, TATA-less promoter
that contains a CCAAT box and five GC-boxes. These sites are the binding sites for the endogenous
human transcription factors CBP and SP1, respectively. Targeting dCas9
alone, dCas9 fused to VP64 domain, or dCas9 fused to KRAB domain to
the CCAAT box or the GC-boxes resulted in significant repression of
the reporter gene (Figure B), presumably by
preventing endogenous transcription factors from binding to specific
DNA recognition elements within the pPGK1 promoter. We further sought to explore the tunability of crisprTFs in the
context of synthetic promoters. In order to do so, we engineered multiple
artificial binding sites (operators), pCYC1m separated by 20 base-pair
sequences, upstream of the pCYC1m promoter in  (Figure A). Expression of a gRNA, which
targeted these arrayed operator sites resulted in synergistic activation
of the  reporter (Figure B). Higher levels of  expression (up to 70-fold
activation with 12× gRNA operator sites) were achieved by increasing
the number of gRNA binding sites upstream of the engineered pCYC1m.
This level of activation in yeast is comparable to the activation
reported for commonly used endogenous yeast promoters (e.g., pGAL1 and pCUP1) and
synthetic promoters that are modulated by engineered bacterial DNA
binding domains (e.g., TetON/TetOFF promoters). Our results are consistent with previous observations that arraying
multiple binding sites for a transcriptional activator upstream of
a promoter results in longer transcriptional bursts from the promoter
and thus leads to higher levels of expression from the targeted promoter. We saw similar synergistic activation in HEK293T
cells when multiple gRNA operator sites were placed upstream of pMLPm
(Figure C and D), with up to 56× activation
attained with 3× gRNA operator sites. The level of activation
that is achieved by crisprTFs in human cells is comparable to the
levels of activation reported for ZF- and TALE-activators, where higher activation levels
can be achieved by increasing the number of operator sites or by targeting
multiple synthetic transcription factors to the same locus. These results demonstrate that crisprTFs can be used to build synthetic
promoters with tunable strengths by the straightforward engineering
of gRNA-binding sites. In many applications, control of the activity of a transcription
factor by an inducer (e.g., a small molecule) is desired. With crisprTFs,
one viable strategy is to constitutively express the protein component
of the system (i.e., dCas9) and then modulate the amount of gRNA available
for binding to dCas9 and thus the activity achieved at the target
DNA. To test this strategy, we constructed an anhydrotetracycline
(aTc)-inducible pRPR1 promoter by placing a TetR operator site (1xTetO)
in the pRPR1 promoter, as previously described, and constitutively expressing Tet repressor (TetR) (Figure A). Furthermore, to make the expression of dCas9_VP64
independent of aTc, we placed it under the control of pGAL1. We tested
this system in cells containing a pCYC1m promoter with six a1_gRNA
operator sites, named 6x(a1_op)_pCYC1m, controlling expression of . As shown in Figure B,  expression increased about 20-fold when  cells were induced with galactose and
aTc, compared with galactose only, thus demonstrating external control
of crisprTF activity. Although the exact parameters that determine the
sequence specificity
of Cas9 are not yet well-characterized, it has been shown that the
specificity of Cas9 for target loci is mainly determined by the PAM
motif (NGG) and the 12 base-pairs preceding this motif (seed sequence).
Mutations in any of these 15 positions can severely affect the targeting
efficiency and binding specificity of Cas9. To test whether
this property can be used to create orthogonal synthetic promoters,
new PAM motifs or single or multiple point mutations (marked with
asterisks, Figure A) were introduced into
the wild-type pCYC1m sequence to design a modified pCYC1m promoter
(pCYC1m(modified), Figure A). As shown in
the left panel of Figure B, the modified promoter
did not respond to the wild-type gRNAs (except for c4, which still
perfectly matched target sites within this modified promoter). However,
this modified promoter responded to a new set of gRNAs (cm1, cm2,
and cm5) that were designed to match the modified target sites. The
wild-type pCYC1m promoter did not respond to the new set of gRNAs
(cm1–cm6) (Figure B, left panel). These
results demonstrate that as little as a single base-pair mismatch
is sufficient to direct the crisprTF to one locus while preventing
activity at another locus. To further demonstrate the potential
of crisprTFs toward constructing
synthetic promoters and gRNAs that are orthogonal with respect to
each other, we tested three randomly designed gRNAs (a1, a2 and a3
gRNAs) for their ability to activate each other’s target sequences.
As shown in Figure C, each of the gRNAs exhibited
high activity at their cognate target sequences but low activity at
noncognate sequences. These results suggest that one can construct
synthetic promoters and gRNAs that are orthogonal with respect to
each other and to the host genome, especially within eukaryotes with
smaller genomes, such as yeasts. During the course of the peer-review
for this work, similar systems
for transcriptional control in eukaryotic cells were described. Gilbert
et al. demonstrated that CRISPR-mediated
gene repression and activation can be achieved in both yeast and mammalian
cells by using fusions of dCas9 with repressor and activator domains
respectively. Furthermore, Maeder et al. and Perez-Pinera et al. showed synergistic
CRISPR/Cas-based gene activation in human cells with multiple gRNAs.
In this paper, we additionally show that both activation and repression
functions can be achieved with only one transcription factor, by targeting
dCas9_VP64 fusions to different regulatory sequences along a promoter.
Our finding that one can activate or repress the expression of a gene
of interest by directing a single protein to different positions of
a promoter is advantageous for the efficient design of synthetic transcriptional
networks or rewiring natural ones. This property obviates the need
for using separate orthogonal Cas9 protein fusions as activators and
repressors. Furthermore, we demonstrate that more sophisticated regulatory
motifs, such as small-molecule responsive modules can be built for
crisprTFs, thus enabling external control of crisprTF-based transcriptional
circuits. Such synthetic modules can be interfaced with other regulatory
elements to achieve more complex regulation for synthetic biology. Our results show that dCas9 can be used as a customizable RNA-guided
DNA-binding platform for the regulation of gene expression at natural
and synthetic promoters in eukaryotic cells. The ease of design and
expression of customized gRNAs in comparison to ZFs and TALEs make
CRISPR-based transcription factors appealing as synthetic TFs for
modulating endogenous gene expression as well as for synthetic biology.
The ability to customize the target site of dCas9 via the expression
of short gRNAs obviates the need to engineer multiple orthogonal DBDs
in order to construct complex transcriptional circuits. This could
potentially reduce the overall metabolic burden on cells and enable
the integration of more complex synthetic computation and logic within
living cells. More complex regulatory and logic
circuits, such as cascades and complex digital logics gates can be
built by layering crisprTFs. The possibility of integrating multiple
inputs at a single promoter expands the regulatory potential and provides
us with increased flexibility that can be leveraged while designing
synthetic transcriptional networks or rewiring endogenous pathways. Furthermore, since both activation and repression functions can
be achieved with crisprTFs, the crisprTF platform may be advantageous
compared to noncoding RNA-based gene regulatory platforms where only
repression can be achieved. In a way, crisprTFs combine the multiplexability
of RNA-based regulatory approaches with the flexibility and rich functionality
repertoire of protein-based gene regulatory approaches: Cas9 can be
functionalized with regulatory domains of interest (e.g., activation,
repression, or epigenetic effector) and then be targeted to multiple
loci using different gRNAs. Future work is needed to define
the range of effector domains that
can be used with dCas9 for a variety of regulatory functions, including
transcriptional regulation and epigenetic modifications. In addition,
the identification, characterization, and optimization of Cas9 homologues
or evolved variants may enable enhanced activity and specificity of
this system. Moreover, the ability to synthesize random libraries
of gRNAs opens the possibility for high-throughput perturbations of
transcriptional networks and screening for desirable phenotypes. Ultimately,
we envision that crisprTFs will enable the regulation and perturbation
of natural transcriptional networks as well as the construction of
complex synthetic circuits at an unprecedented speed and scale. Schematic view of the
programmable CRISPR/Cas-based eukaryotic
transcriptional regulation system implemented in . (A) CrisprTF (dCas9_VP64) expression is
induced by growing cells in galactose (Gal) + anhydrotetracycline
(aTc) media. CrisprTFs are guided to the target sites by guide RNAs
(gRNAs), which are constitutively expressed from the pRPR1 promoter
and bind to the respective target sites. Specificity of crisprTFs
is primarily determined by the 20 bp Specificity Determinant Sequence
(SDS) at the 5′-end of the gRNA along with the presence of
a Proto-spacer Adjacent Motif (PAM) (NGG) at the target site. (B)
Map of pCYC1m illustrating the relative positions of known regulatory
elements. TATA: TATA box. TSS: Transcription Start Site. KS: Kozak
Sequence. Blue lines indicate target sites for each gRNA (c1-c8).
(C) Left panel: Regulation of  expression from
pCYC1m by crisprTFs based on the individual gRNAs shown in (B). Yeast
cells expressing crisprTFs and containing the reporter construct were
transformed with plasmids expressing gRNAs labeled as shown in the -axis. Targeting crisprTFs to sequences upstream of the
TATA boxes (by c3, c4, and c8 gRNAs) resulted in higher  expression than the no gRNA control. On the other hand, targeting
crisprTFs to sequences spanning the TATA box and the Kozak sequence
(by c1, c6, and c7 gRNAs) resulted in reduced  expression relative to the no gRNA control. Error bars indicate
the standard error of the mean for three independent biological replicates.
Asterisks (*) on each bar indicate statistically significant changes
in  expression relative to the no gRNA control
(based on the two-sided Welch’s  test, p-value
< 0.05). Right panel: Coexpression of multiple gRNAs resulted in
synergistic gene regulation. Pairwise combinations of non-neutral
gRNAs were expressed from pRPR1 promoters on pRS423 and pRS425 backbones.
Green and red asterisks (*) indicate statistically significant changes
in  expression in samples with coexpressed gRNAs
relative to the first gRNA only and the second gRNA only, respectively
(two-sided Welch’s  test, p-value < 0.05). Regulation of  expression from a minimal MLP
promoter (pMLPm) by crisprTFs in HEK293T cells. (A) dCas9_VP64 is
expressed in HEK293T cells by the pCMV promoter and directed to target
sequences in pMLPm. The mKATE (red) and mBFP2 (blue) fluorophores
act as flow-cytometry gating controls for successful plasmid transfections.
(B) Map of pMLPm illustrating the relative positions of known regulatory
elements. Blue lines indicate target sites for each gRNA. (C) Regulation
of  expression from pMLPm by crisprTFs based on
the gRNAs shown in (B). HEK293T cells were cotransfected with the
plasmids shown in (A), with specific gRNAs labeled as shown in the -axis. Targeting crisprTFs to sequences upstream of the
TATA box (by m1, m2, m6, and m7 gRNAs) resulted in higher  expression compared with the no gRNA control. Error
bars indicate the standard error of the mean for three independent
biological replicates. Asterisks (*) on each bar indicate statistically
significant changes in  expression relative to
the no gRNA control (based on the two-sided Welch’s  test, p-value <0.05). CrisprTF-mediated repression of the constitutive pPGK1 promoter
in HEK293T cells. (A) Map of the pPGK1 promoter illustrating the relative
positions of known regulatory elements. (B) CrisprTF-based targeted
repression of the constitutive pPGK1 promoter. Constructs expressing
different dCas9-based proteins (dCas9, dCas9_VP64, and dCas9_KRAB)
were cotransfected with plasmids containing pPGK1_mKATE and constructs
expressing no gRNAs or gRNAs targeting the CCAAT box or the GC-box
gRNA. Significant repression of the pPGK1 promoter relative to the
no gRNA control was observed with all of the three different dCas9
constructs (dCas9, dCas9-VP64, and dCas9-KRAB). Error bars indicate
the standard error of the mean for three independent biological replicates. Synergistic and tunable activation of synthetic promoters
with
arrayed operator sites upstream of pCYC1m in  and pMLPm in HEK293T cells using crisprTFs. (A) A schematic view
of the pCYC1m synthetic promoter with three a1_gRNA operator sites
(3× DNA sequences recognized by the a1_gRNA) arrayed upstream
of pCYC1m, thus named 3x(a1_op)_pCYC1m. (B) Increasing the number
of arrayed a1_gRNA operator sites upstream of pCYC1m resulted in higher  expression in  cells expressing the a1_gRNA compared to the no gRNA controls. Error
bars indicate the standard error of the mean for three independent
biological replicates. (C) A schematic view of the pMLPm synthetic
promoter with three a1_gRNA operator sites arrayed upstream of pMLPm,
thus named 3x(a1_op)_pMLPm. (D) Increasing the number of arrayed a1_gRNA
operator sites upstream of pMLPm resulted in higher  expression in HEK293T cells when cotransfected with a1_gRNA and
dCas9_VP64 versus when cotransfected with a1_gRNA and dCas9. Error
bars indicate the standard error of the mean for three independent
biological replicates. Inducible crisprTF-guided activation of synthetic promoters.
(A)
Schematic of the aTc-inducible pRPR1_TetO promoter. Expression of
dCas9_VP64 is driven by the galactose-inducible pGAL1 promoter. A
TetR operator site (1xTetO) was placed in the pRPR1 promoter to make
an aTc-responsive pRPR1_TetO promoter. Addition of aTc releases TetR-mediated
repression on the pRPR1_TetO promoter and results in a1_gRNA expression.
(B) aTc-dependent  expression from a synthetic
6x(a1_op)_pCYC1m promoter.  cells containing the circuit shown in (A) were grown in galactose
media with either 250 ng/mL aTc or no aTc. Error bars indicate the
standard error of mean for three biological replicates. Constructing orthogonal crisprTF-responsive
promoters. (A) A schematic
view of gRNAs targeting the wild-type and modified pCYC1m promoters
in yeast. Only the c1-c8 gRNAs have perfect homology to the target
sequences in pCYC1m. On the other hand, c1, c4, c5, and cm1-cm6 gRNAs
have perfect homology to the sequences in the pCYC1m(modified) promoter.
Mismatches between pCYC1m and pCYC1m(modified) are marked by asterisks
(*). (B) pCYC1m only responds to gRNAs that are perfectly matching
gRNAs (c1-c8 gRNAs) and not to those that contain mismatches (cm1–cm6
gRNAs). The pCYC1m(modified) promoter responds to the cm1–cm6
gRNAs. Those gRNAs that bind to the sequences upstream of the TATA
boxes activate  expression and those that target
sequences downstream of the TATA boxes repress  expression. The c1 and c5 gRNAs have similarly neutral effects on
both the wild-type and modified promoters. Error bars indicate standard
error of the mean for three independent biological replicates. Asterisks
(*) on each bar indicate statistically significant activation or repression
relative to no gRNA controls (based on the two-sided Welch’s  test, p-value < 0.05). (C) Heat map illustrating the
orthogonality of crisprTFs in human cells. Plasmids encoding three
orthogonal gRNAs (a1, a2, and a3 gRNAs) were cotransfected into HEK293T
cells along with one of the three reporter plasmids (each encoding
4× operator sites for a given gRNA) upstream of pMLPm promoter
driving  expression. Only cognate interactions
between gRNAs and target binding sites resulted in significant activation.
The standard error of the mean of YFP fluorescence for three independent
biological replicates is indicated in each cell of the heat-map plot. Strain
and Plasmid Construction dCas9 (endonuclease-deficient Cas9, with D10A and H841A
mutations
relative to the wild-type sequence of  Cas9) with an N-terminal SV40 nuclear
localization signal (NLS) was codon-optimized for expression in  and cloned into a pRS314 backbone under
control of the pTPGI promoter. The RNA-guided
transcription factors (crisprTFs) were built by fusing four repeats
of the minimal domain of the herpes simplex viral protein 16 (VP16)
to the C-terminus of dCas9 (dCas9_VP64). The crisprTF-expressing plasmid
was then integrated into the TRP1 locus of  W303. The reporter plasmids were built by cloning yeast-enhanced  under the control of the wild-type or modified pCYC1m
promoter into pRS406 using one-step Gibson assembly. The reporters
for the multiple-gRNA-binding-site experiment (Figure A) were built by cloning the corresponding number of binding
sites upstream of the pCYC1m promoter driving production of . All reporters were integrated into the  locus of the integrated crisprTF plasmid. Table S1, Supporting Information To build gRNA-expressing
plasmids, empty gRNA expressing vectors
were first made by cloning the pRPR1 promoter (an RNA-polymerase-III-dependent
promoter), the gRNA handle (flanked by dIII and Xho1 sites), and the RPR terminator into the
SacI and I sites of either the pRS423 or pRS425
plasmid using one-step Gibson assembly. The specificity determinant
sequence (SDS) for each gRNA was then cloned into the dIII site of these vectors by one-step Gibson assembly. Sequences
of the constructs used in this study are listed in . To construct the mammalian dCas9_VP64
expressing plasmid, we first introduced D10A and H841A mutations into
hCas9 (Addgene, Plasmid #41815). Then,
three repeats of SV40 NLS (3xNLS) were fused to the C-terminus of
the mutated hCas9 using a PCR-based assembly protocol. Using a multipart
Gibson assembly protocol, the immediate-early promoter of cytomegalovirus
(pCMV), dCas9_3xNLS, VP64, and SV40 polyA terminator were cloned into
the NotI site of the pG5-Luc plasmid (Promega). To monitor successfully
transfected cells by flow cytometry, we replaced the original luciferase
gene in pG5-Luc with  (Evrogen). The resulting
pPGK1_ cassette served as a constitutive fluorescent
protein control that was used to gate for the presence of the crisprTF-expressing
plasmid with flow cytometry. The gRNA expression plasmids were
constructed by cloning the 138 bp human U6 promoter (an RNA-polymerase-III-dependent
promoter), along with the gRNA handle
and terminator into a plasmid containing pPGK1- flanked by the SV40 polyA terminator (a gift from Lior Nissim).
A SacI site was placed at the 3′-end of the U6 promoter to
enable the cloning of different specificity determining sequences
for each gRNA. The reporters were assembled into the gRNA-expressing
plasmid through a one-step Gibson assembly reaction, where the upstream
polyadenylation signal and transcriptional pause site from pG5-Luc,
along with a 41 bp, minimal adenovirus type 2 major late promoter
(pMLPm), mYFP, and HSV polyA signal were cloned into the AatII site
of the gRNA-expressing plasmids. For the synthetic promoter
experiments, additional gRNA operator
sites were cloned in the NheI site upstream of the pMLPm promoter
(see ). For the repression
experiments, dCas9_KRAB was constructed by cloning a 366 bp KRAB domain
to the C-terminus of dCas9. GCCACC was used as the Kozak sequence
for the expression of dCas9_VP64, , , and . Unless directly targeted by gRNAs
for repression assays, the mKATE
fluorescent protein on the crisprTF-expression plasmid and the eBFP2
fluorescent protein on the reporter/gRNA plasmid served as our gating
controls for flow cytometry analysis. To assess expression of the reporter
constructs, yeast cells expressing different gRNAs (or no gRNA as
control) were grown overnight (900 rpm, 30C) in 96-deep-well plates
in yeast minimal media supplemented with glucose with appropriate
selection (three independent cultures for each sample). Ten microliters
of these cultures were then transferred into fresh media supplemented
with galactose +250 ng/mL anhydrotetracycline (aTc) and grown for
20 h (900 rpm, 30C) before analysis by flow cytometry. For the
human cell culture experiments, HEK293T kidney epithelial cells were
cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM)
supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% glutamine,
and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were grown under 5% CO at 37 °C. HEK293T cells were transfected with Fugene-HD transfection
reagent (Promega) and assayed for gene expression with flow cytometry
at 48 h post transfection. An LSR Fortessa II flow cytometer
equipped with 405 nm, 488 nm,
and 561 nm lasers was used for all the experiments. GFP/YFP, BFP,
and mKATE levels were detected using 488/FITC, 405/Pacific-Blue, and
561/TX-red laser/filter sets, respectively. All samples were uniformly
gated by forward and side scatter. Additional gating for the presence
of red and blue fluorophores was applied to the HEK293T samples to
ensure only cells successfully transfected with both the crisprTF
and the reporter/gRNA plasmids are analyzed. For each gated sample,
the mean fluorescence per cell was calculated. Three independent biological
samples were used to calculate the mean and standard error of the
mean for each data point..