The ability to robustly and
tunably control protein expression is central to the continued progress
of molecular bioengineering. Historically, techniques for recombinant
protein production have focused on maximizing overexpression, but
today the advancing complexity of synthetic gene networks demands
the optimization of complex pathways composed of multiple proteins.
Limited options are available in any host organism for controlling
protein concentrations. In mammalian cell systems, recent work has
dramatically expanded the transgene expression control toolbox, allowing researchers to begin to assemble simple synthetic parts
into complex devices such as synthetic band-detect networks and oscillators.
However, despite the significant progress, the shortage of parts to
enable quantitative control of protein expression remains especially
acute in mammalian systems. Feedback regulation is ubiquitous
in biology and fundamental to
many engineering applications. Synthetic biologists have designed
and characterized a wide range of engineered biological transcriptional
feedback regulation systems. Negative and positive
transcriptional feedback has been used to stabilize desired output
protein concentrations, accelerate system
dynamics, and generate biological oscillations. Less work has been done to this point to characterize translational
feedback systems, which are potentially superior to transcriptional
systems when a stable, optimal output concentration is desired. In nature, translational inhibition feedback loops are common in
both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. For instance, ribosomal and other
RNA-binding proteins often repress their own translation by binding
their encoding mRNAs at sites that mimic their functional targets.
Examples include the L30 protein, the
S15 protein, and the U1A protein. Mimicking this natural role of RNA–protein
(RNP) interactions in a synthetic translational feedback control system
is a promising strategy for regulating protein expression in mammalian
cells. RNA-based synthetic biology tools are a natural
fit for
translational control systems, and synthetic RNA-based systems have
been successfully demonstrated in mammalian cells. RNP-mediated synthetic translational systems that take advantage
of natural translational control mechanisms have also been constructed
in mammalian cells. In one system, translation of a target mRNA was
regulated by specific binding of the CNBP and La proteins to designed
sequences engineered into the 5′ untranslated region. However, none of these systems have been demonstrated
in a feedback configuration. Previously we described a synthetic
switch in which an RNA binding
protein represses the translation of a target mRNA. The switch exploits the ribosomal protein L7Ae of , which binds tightly to the K-turn
RNA motif. This motif was incorporated
into the target mRNA upstream of the open reading frame. The resulting
tight association between the L7Ae protein and the mRNA effectively
repressed translation. This translational repression system has been
successfully linked to output phenotypes such as cell fate. In this work, we demonstrate the first
synthetic translational
feedback regulatory system. An L7Ae fusion protein regulates the translation
of its own mRNA (Figure a and b) in HeLa human
cervical cancer cells. The resulting feedback-enforced fusion protein
concentration can be tuned by substituting mutants of the L7Ae protein
and the K-turn RNA sequence to adjust the strength of the RNA/protein
interaction. By mixing and matching RNP pairs, biological engineers
can choose the feedback repression strength (and the corresponding
target protein concentration) optimal for each application. The protein-mediated translational regulation of
our previous system
is ideal for constructing synthetic feedback loops. However, while the binary ON/OFF behavior that results
from the tight binding of L7Ae to the K-turn motif makes an excellent
switch, the strong repression limits the adaptability of the system
to other applications, including feedback. To tune the strength of
the translational inhibition, we replaced the L7Ae protein, the K-turn
RNA motif, or both with variants that bound with weaker affinity.
In place of L7Ae, we substituted L7Ae-K37A (referred to here as L7Ae-K),
L7Ae-D54A-K79A (L7Ae-DK), and L7Ae-K37A-K79A (L7Ae-KK), mutants containing
amino acid changes predicted to affect RNA binding from analysis of
the cocrystal structure and from high
degrees of conservation in a sequence alignment (). As an alternative to the K-turn
RNA motif we employed the K-loop, a related motif that forms a kinked
structure similar to the K-turn but binds less tightly to L7Ae. Supplementary Figures S2
and S3 We measured the  binding characteristics
of each RNA-protein pair by surface plasmon resonance (Table  and ). The on rate, off rate, and dissociation constant () varied among the different combinations of
L7Ae mutants and RNA motifs. As expected, the wild-type L7Ae/K-turn
pair, which caused strong translational repression in our previous
report, bound with the tightest affinity, and the measured  of 1.6 nM was consistent with previously published
measurements. The  of the protein/RNA permutations
ranged from 1.6 nM to 2.2 μM. We then tested the strength of the  feedback
repression that resulted from each protein/RNA pair. To construct
feedback control elements, we inserted an RNA motif (K-turn, K-loop,
or a nonfunctional RNA motif) upstream of an open reading frame encoding
the L7Ae protein (or one of its variants) fused to a model protein
of interest, enhanced cyan fluorescent protein (L7Ae-ECFP) (Figure b). In this configuration, the translated fusion
protein should feedback-inhibit the synthesis of additional copies
of itself by binding to its encoding mRNA. An internal ribosome entry
site (IRES) on the same mRNA allowed the translation of a second fluorescent
reporter protein, DsRed-Express (DsRed), to proceed unaffected
by L7Ae repression (Figure b). Fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS) of transfected HeLa cells revealed that the repression
strengths of the alternate binding pairs fell between the strong repression
of the wild-type L7Ae/K-turn interaction (Figure d and e, red) and the absence of repression (Figure d and e, green, measured using a K-turn mutant with
no affinity for L7Ae). Repression strength generally increased with
increasing binding strength (decreasing , Figure e and ). In cells harboring strong feedback
repression plasmids, ECFP fluorescence was lowered by more than an
order of magnitude. To describe the behavior of the feedback
repression system, we
derived a mathematical model:where variables  and  and constant  indicate the concentrations of DsRed, L7Ae-ECFP, and
mRNA, respectively; α and α are the synthesis rates of DsRed and L7Ae-ECFP from
mRNA; and λ and λ are their
degradation rates.  indicates the dissociation constant
between L7Ae-ECFP (or its mutants) and an RNA motif (K-turn or K-loop).
The coefficient  is defined such that  = 1 in the case of negative feedback regulation of the synthesis
of L7Ae-ECFP, and  = 0 when there is no feedback.
From a steady-state assumption (d/d = d/d = 0), we have the following
equation:where  and  are the experimentally observed fluorescence data for
DsRed and L7Ae-ECFP; κ is a pseudo dissociation
constant; and γ is a constant (see  for the full derivation and explanation). By fitting the K-turn construct data shown in Figure e and  to
eq  (Figure a), the
pseudo dissociation constant κ was obtained as κ = 4.6
× 10 (L7Ae), 7.6 × 10 (L7Ae-K),
1.1 × 10 (L7Ae-DK), and 9.7 × 10 (L7Ae-KK) (Table ). In the data fitting,
we used only those points with high DsRed values (above
10), in accordance with an assumption of the model (see
eqs S3 and S4 in ). These  constants increase with each mutation,
in agreement with the corresponding  dissociation
constants (Table , K-turn). For the K-loop
constructs (Figure b), we obtained κ
= 4.2 × 10 (L7Ae), 5.9 × 10 (L7Ae-K),
6.1 × 10 (L7Ae-DK), and 1.0 × 10 (L7Ae-KK). This trend did not match well the corresponding  dissociation constants for K-loop (Table , K-loop). The discrepancy may result from weaker
affinity between K-loop and L7Ae in the cellular environment compared
to ; our system may prove to be an effective
way to measure RNP affinity within cells. We next constructed a system in which a single
control protein
(L7Ae-ECFP) simultaneously regulated the expression of multiple target
proteins within the same cell. We cotransfected HeLa cells with a
plasmid encoding the enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) behind
a K-turn or defective K-turn motif in addition to one of the feedback
plasmids (Figure a). In the resulting system,
L7Ae-ECFP binds to its own mRNA and controls its own concentration  while simultaneously regulating  the translation of a second protein of interest, EGFP. FACS analysis
confirmed that the fluorescent reporters were simultaneously repressed
at levels that corresponded to the strength of the respective RNA-protein
interactions (Figure b). To predict the behavior of this complex system,
we extended the
mathematical model by adding the following equation to eq :where  and ′ indicate the concentrations of
EGFP and EGFP-coding mRNA; α and λ are synthesis and degradation rates of EGFP; and ′ is the dissociation constant between L7Ae-ECFP (or its mutants)
and a second (K-turn or defective K-turn) RNA motif. The coefficient ′ is defined such that ′
= 1 in the case of  repressive regulation
of the synthesis of EGFP, and ′ = 0 when
there is no regulation. Applying the steady-state assumption to eqs  and , and using the experimentally
obtained values for the pseudo dissociation constant κ derived
from Figure , we were able to correctly predict
the behavior of the system (Figure b, black
lines) (see  for
the full calculations). Additionally, we refit the κ parameters
using only the data shown in Figure  in order
to evaluate our prediction (see  for the full calculations). The resulting values of the pseudo dissociation
constant κ (for feedback) and κ′ (for L7Ae-ECFP
binding to the second reporter mRNA) were quite similar to those of
κ obtained from the single feedback configuration (), indicating that parameters
obtained from our simpler system are valid and sufficient to predict
the function of a more complex system. The predictability observed
here reaffirms that while purely  analysis
is not sufficient to predict system behavior in cells (κ values
for K-loop in Table  and Figure b), complex regulation systems can be modeled using experimentally
obtained parameters. The agreement of the results with simple mathematical
models implies that the system is orthogonal to cellular pathways
and is not disrupted by unknown factors. The result of Figure  confirms that a single
L7Ae protein can simultaneously control the concentrations of multiple
genes at different levels by interacting with RNA motifs of different
binding affinities. Expression levels can be adjusted globally by
the choice of L7Ae variant or individually by the choice of the RNA
motif. The strong L7Ae/K-turn binding pair and natural homologues
provide a starting point for the creation of a collection of intermediate-affinity
mutants. Replacing the RNA motifs used in this study with an aptamer
sequence that binds a protein of interest could simplify the system
by removing the requirement for an L7Ae protein fusion. A recent report described
a synthetic
incoherent feed-forward system that stabilizes a steady-state output
level against variations in the amount of DNA template. In the system,
post-transcriptional feed-forward regulation was achieved by employing
synthetic microRNAs (miRNA). The performance of the feed-forward system
matched the predictions of a model and was comparable to the performance
of our system. An advantage of the miRNA system is the specificity
of RNAi, which should facilitate the simultaneous regulation of multiple
outputs with different miRNAs. While it may be possible to tune the
strength of the feed-forward system by using miRNAs with different
RNAi potencies, fine-tuning was not attempted in the report. An advantage
of our system is the direct protein-mediated feedback regulation,
which allows a protein of interest expressed in cells to rapidly and
tunably regulate its own expression levels and those of multiple additional
outputs. Our regulatory system is triggered by a protein (rather
than a
small molecule) and controls translation (rather than transcription).
These unusual features enable direct translational feedback and render
the system orthogonal to and easily integrated with traditional control
systems. Such integration is common in nature, where the simultaneous
control of transcription and translation is frequently used to fine-tune
protein levels. Beyond serving as a useful synthetic
biology tool, we anticipate that the system described here will prove
useful in the study of natural regulation, just as synthetic circuits
have been used to study natural biological circuits. The strength
of the RNP interaction determines the level of protein
expression  translational regulation. (a) Translational
regulation creates a tighter feedback loop than transcriptional feedback,
in which protein synthesis continues from existing mRNA. nc: nucleus;
cyt: cytoplasm. (b) Schematic diagram of the feedback repression construct.
An IRES allowed the translation of a second fluorescent reporter protein,
DsRed, to proceed unaffected by L7Ae repression. (c) Comparison
of the secondary structures of the K-turn and K-loop motifs. (d) Log–log
FACS dot plot showing ECFP and DsRed fluorescence intensities
of cells transfected with feedback plasmids encoding indicated RNA
motif/protein pairs. Mock-transfected cells are shown in gray. Plots
of the other tested RNP pairs are shown in . (e) Average ECFP fluorescence intensity for cells
with DsRed fluorescence near the arbitrarily chosen value
10 (dotted lines shown in panel d). Lower values indicate
stronger feedback repression. Error bars indicate standard error of
the mean (SEM), where  = 216, 311, 266, 279, 398,
298, 284, 301, and 380 cells, respectively. Kt: K-turn; Kl: K-loop;
dKt: a defective K-turn with no affinity for L7Ae. Representative
data from one of four independent experiments are shown. A mathematical model
fit to FACS data. Green dots: no feedback;
orange dots: L7Ae-KK; blue dots: L7Ae-K; red dots: L7Ae; gray dots:
mock transfection. Four lines indicate the fitting results of the
model. Insets show the fitting results along with measured average
ECFP fluorescences; error bars indicate the standard deviation. (a)
K-turn construct data. (b) K-loop construct data. An L7Ae-ECFP control
protein simultaneously regulates two transcripts
with different RNA motifs. (a) L7Ae-ECFP simultaneously regulates
its own expression by feedback in  and the expression
of EGFP in . (b) FACS dot plot overlaid with
the prediction from the model. The four populations (identified in
the panel) form the corners of a square, with high (dKt) or low (Kt)
EGFP fluorescence and intermediate (Kl) or low (Kt) ECFP fluorescence.
Representative data from one of four independent experiments are shown.
The predicted behaviors of ECFP and EGFP fluorescence for each construct
are consistent with the experimental data. Surface Plasmon Resonance Measurements
of Binding Constants and In-Cell Measurements
of Pseudo Binding Constants (κ) between L7Ae Variants and RNA
Motifs Supplementary Figures S2 and S3 The parameter set from one of three
independent analyses is shown. Response curves are provided as . Proteins were expressed
and purified as previously described. Further purification was performed on a HiTrap Heparin HP column
using an ÄKTA explorer system (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont,
U.K.). Detailed methods are provided in the . DNA templates for  transcription
were generated by primer extension reaction with ExTaq (TaKaRa Bio,
Otsu, Japan) and purified with phenol-chloroform extraction and ethanol
precipitation. RNA fragments were transcribed  using MEGAshortscript (Ambion, Austin, TX), purified by denaturing
PAGE, and recovered from the gel slices. The transcripts were then
extracted with phenol-chloroform, precipitated with ethanol, and washed
by ultrafiltration using Microcon YM-10 (Millipore, Billerica, MA). SPR analysis was carried
out in binding buffer containing 5% glycerol, 2 mM DTT, and 0.01%
Tween-20 at 25 °C using a BIAcore 3000 instrument (GE Healthcare,
Little Chalfont, U.K.). Proteins were immobilized on the sensor chip
CM5  amine coupling according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. RNA solutions were prepared in the same buffer, denatured
at 96 °C for 5 min, refolded at room temperature, and serially
diluted. Thirty microliters of each RNA solution was injected onto
the sensor chip at a flow rate of 20 μL/min. The surface of
the sensor chip was regenerated by an injection of 0.1 N NaOH for
5 s and equilibrated with the buffer before the next RNA injection. HeLa cells (0.5 × 10 per
well) established in 24-well plates were cultured at 37 °C in
a 1:1 mixture of Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) and
nutrient mixture F-12 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The media were supplemented
with 10% (v/v) FBS and an antibiotic/antimycotic solution (A5955,
Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The incubator atmosphere was enriched
with 5% CO. Cells were established in multiwell plates.
After 1 day, the 70–80% confluent cells were transfected with
plasmids (1 μg) using 1 μL of Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Media
were changed 4 h after transfection. For Figure b, cells were cotransfected with two plasmids (each 0.5 μg)
using 1 μL of Lipofectamine 2000. Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting (FACS) Twenty-four
hours after transfection, HeLa cells were collected by trypsinization
and resuspension in 200 μL of DMEM/F12 media. A total of 30,000
cells per sample were analyzed by fluorescence-activated cell sorting
with a FACS Aria (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA); 408 and 488 nm semiconductor
lasers were used for excitation; and 450/40 nm, 530/30 nm, and 695/40
nm emission filters were used for ECFP, EGFP, and DsRed, respectively. Spectral overlaps were compensated using the FACS
Diva software. Dead cells were excluded by gating out events with
low FSC and SSC signals..