Therapies
based on engineered
mammalian or microbial cells are poised to revolutionize biomedicine. One of the major obstacles in applying engineered cells is the lack
of tools to control their behavior in live animals. Chemicals (drugs)
used for this purpose offer very limited spatial and temporal resolution
and often generate undesired side effects. Light, on the other hand,
is a noninvasive stimulus that offers higher spatiotemporal resolution
for regulating biological activities than the resolution achievable
by chemicals. Protein photoreceptors belonging
to several major classes have been engineered to control biological
activities in a light-dependent manner. These include UV-light receptors,
blue-light sensing LOV, cryptochrome and BLUF receptors, red- and
green-light sensing phytochromes, and rhodopsins that can sense visible
light in a broad range of the spectrum. Several regulatory
modalities have been successfully placed under light control, including
protein–protein interactions, protein degradation, recombination, gene
expression, and
synthesis of second messengers. Second messengers, particularly cyclic mono-
and dinucleotides
such as cAMP, cGMP, c-di-AMP, and c-di-GMP have remained underexplored
as optogenetic tools. These second messengers are attractive for several
reasons. (i) Cyclic mono- (cNMP) and di- (c-di-NMP) nucleotide second
messengers regulate diverse biochemical processes, including ion transport
across membranes, transcription, translation, protein activities,
and protein–protein interactions. Therefore, cNMP/c-di-NMP sensory
modules can be adapted to regulate various kinds of outputs. (ii)
No known organism possesses signaling pathways involving all cyclic
mono- and dinucleotide second messengers; therefore, orthogonal regulation
that does not interfere (or only minimally interferes) with the host
signaling pathways can be developed for various animal, plant, or
microbial organisms. (iii) The substrates for nucleotide cyclases
(ATP or GTP) are omnipresent and available in millimolar concentrations,
in all cell types. (iv) Synthesis of cNMP or c-di-NMP involves a single
enzymatic step that can be readily controlled by external signals
(e.g., by light). cNMP/c-di-NMP degradation also involves single dedicated
phosphodiesterases that produce benign, nontoxic products (AMP or
GMP). cNMP/c-di-NMP synthases with high photodynamic ranges
(i.e., light-to-dark
activity ratios) are particularly useful for controlling cNMP/c-di-NMP
levels with light. At present, natural blue light-activated adenylate
cyclases with high photodynamic ranges have been identified and characterized, and a blue light-activated guanylate cyclase has been engineered. The utility of these cyclases for regulating
cNMP-dependent signaling processes in animals has been proven. However, cNMPs are inappropriate for orthogonal regulation in mammals
where native cAMP- and cGMP-dependent signaling pathways are prevalent.
Another major obstacle in using these light-activated cNMP synthases
is poor penetration of blue light through tissues of red-blooded animals,
which limits their use to cell cultures, small transparent organisms
and in mammalian organs accessible to light. Most photons in
the UV/visible spectrum penetrate mammalian tissues
to the maximal depths of only one to several millimeters due high
absorption by hemoglobin and melanin. However, light in the so-called
near-infrared window (NIRW) of the spectrum, ∼680–880
nm, penetrates much deeper. NIRW light
absorption by mammalian tissues is several fold to several orders
of magnitude lower than absorption of light below ∼680 nm.
Even deep-red light (650–670 nm) is significantly inferior,
as demonstrated by measurements of light penetration depths through
human tissues. Optimal penetration makes NIRW
light a promising tool for remote photocontrol of biological activities
in live mammals. Among known protein
photoreceptors, only bacteriophytochromes sense
NIRW light. Not surprisingly, fluorescent bacteriophytochrome derivatives
engineered in recent years have readily outperformed fluorescent proteins
of other classes in whole animal imaging involving murine models. Another advantage of bacteriophytochromes for application in animals,
compared, for example, to the related classes of plant and cyanobacterial
phytochromes is that the bacteriophytochrome chromophore, biliverdin
IXα, is naturally made in animal tissues as the first intermediate
in the heme degradation pathway, which obviates the need to supply
the chromophore. Bacteriophytochromes
bind biliverdin covalently via intrinsic biliverdin ligase activity.
However, in cells with limited biliverdin levels, biliverdin can be
generated by a single enzyme, heme oxygenase, that can be supplied
along with a bacteriophytochrome gene. In this
study, we describe a NIRW-light activated c-di-GMP synthesis/degradation
module. It combines advantages of NIRW light for deep mammalian tissue
penetration with second messenger-mediated regulation that can be
adapted to control diverse output targets. Cyclic di-GMP is absent
from higher eukaryotes and therefore can be used for orthogonal regulation.
The synthetic module engineered here comprises (i) a bacteriophytochrome
c-di-GMP synthase (diguanylate cyclase, DGC) originating from the  BphG1 protein described by us earlier, and (ii) a constitutive c-di-GMP-specific phosphodiesterase
(PDE), YhjH from . These two enzymes keep intracellular c-di-GMP levels minimal in
the absence of light and allow c-di-GMP accumulation of >50-fold
following
exposure of  to NIRW light. To demonstrate
system performance, we engineered a c-di-GMP-responsive gene expression
output and observed high, ∼40-fold, change in gene expression
in response to NIRW light. Because numerous natural protein and RNA
modules involved in c-di-GMP sensing have been discovered, various output modules can be engineered to
regulate diverse biological activities by NIRW light. Engineering
a Potent Chimeric NIRW Light-activated DGC Bacteriophytochromes
possess a common photoreceptor module, PAS-GAF-PHY,
usually linked to a histidine kinase output. Earlier, we described an unorthodox bacteriophytochrome, BphG1,
from  that contains a C-terminal
GGDEF-EAL domain tandem as an output. The full-length BphG1 has constitutive c-di-GMP PDE activity and
no DGC activity. However, a truncated derivative of BphG1 lacking
the C-terminal EAL domain (PAS-GAF-PHY-GGDEF) possesses low-level
DGC activity. We hereby designate this derivative BphG (Figure A). As is typical of bacteriophytochromes, BphG
exists in a P form (712 nm, absorption maximum) in the
dark and is converted to the P form (756 nm, absorption
maximum) upon irradiation with red light (Figure B). The photoactivation ratio of DGC activity of BphG
(activity in the light versus activity in the dark) observed earlier
was ∼4-fold. Upon careful re-examination
of this parameter using freshly prepared BphG (Figure B), we determined that the ratio is actually higher, ∼11-fold
(Figure C). To our knowledge, this is the
highest photoactivation ratio described for any bacteriophytochrome
for which such a ratio has been quantified. This makes BphG particularly
attractive for optogenetic applications. To evaluate the potential
of BphG in regulating c-di-GMP levels
in a light-dependent manner, we overexpressed it in  BL21[DE3], a bacterial host with well-characterized c-di-GMP signaling
pathways. Since  does not synthesize biliverdin, we cloned the  heme oxygenase gene,  (RSP_4190), immediately
downstream of  as the second gene in the artificial  operon. To test for light-dependent c-di-GMP synthesis
by the  operon, we grew , in the dark or under red light, on agar medium containing Congo
red and monitored production of curly fimbriae, which bind this dye. The  operon produced
barely observable red pigmentation in BL21[DE3] in the light (Figure D) indicating poor accumulation of c-di-GMP, insufficient
for developing a versatile c-di-GMP-dependent regulatory system. We
extracted intracellular nucleotides from the biomass of BL21[DE3]
expressing the  operon grown in liquid culture
under constant irradiation. Cyclic di-GMP was separated and quantified
by LC-MS-MS. The maximal intracellular c-di-GMP concentration achieved
was ∼90 nM. This low level is consistent with the poor c-di-GMP
synthesis by BphG assessed by the Congo red colony staining. Since
the majority of c-di-GMP receptors have dissociation constants, K, for c-di-GMP in the submicromolar-to-low micromolar range, BphG is clearly not sufficiently potent for
activating c-di-GMP-dependent processes. Supporting Information (SI) Figure S1 To increase the DGC activity,
we attempted to replace the low activity
GGDEF domain of BphG with the GGDEF domain from a more active DGC,  sp. Slr1143, characterized by us earlier (Figure A). The site
for domain swapping was chosen based on protein domain alignments
().
The chimeric protein, BphS1, composed of the N-terminal photosensory
module of BphG (1–511 aa) and the C-terminal GGDEF domain of
Slr1143 (175–343 aa) showed more intense Congo red staining
in the curli fimbriae test. Upon irradiation, BphS1 showed ∼2.5-fold
higher DGC activity than that of BphG (Figure E). To enhance BphS1 potency further, we mutated the conserved RXXD
sequence motif located in the GGDEF domain of Slr1143 (Figure A). This motif is part of the c-di-GMP binding I-site
involved in the feedback inhibition of DGC activity. We introduced the R587A mutation in the RXXD motif to abolish
feedback inhibition. The constructed mutant protein, designated BphS
(), produced more intense pigmentation
on Congo red plates than BphS1 (Figure D).
Its DGC activity in the light was ∼2.2-fold higher compared
to BphS1 (Figure E). Therefore, removal of
feedback inhibition further increased the range of c-di-GMP concentrations
achievable by BphS. Overall, BphS had ∼5.5-fold higher specific
activity compared to BphG (in the dark or light), but importantly,
it retained the same photoactivation ratio as BphG (not shown). Biliverdin
produced by BphO is essential for BphS activity (). The photochemical properties of BphS were not
different from the properties of BphG. Engineering a potent
photoactivated DGC. (A) Domain architectures
of the proteins used for engineering BphS, a high-potency photoactivated
DGC. The RXXD motif of the I-site is indicated above the GGDEF domain.
(B) UV–vis absorption spectroscopy of BphG. The BphG protein
undergoes reversible photoconversion between the P (712
nm, absorption maximum) and P (756 nm, absorption maximum)
forms. (C) Kinetics of the DGC activity of BphG showing an ∼11-fold
higher specific activity in the light versus dark. (D) Congo red test
for c-di-GMP-dependent curli fimbriae production.  cells expressing a light-activated DGC (BphG, BphS1 or BphS) together
with the heme oxygenase BphO were incubated on plates supplemented
with Congo red dye (50 μg/mL) in the absence or presence of
light. pET23a(+) was used as a control. Red sun, irradiation with
red light. (E) Maximal specific activity of the original, BphG, and
engineered photoactivated DGCs, BphS1 and BphS, measured in the light. Improving the Photodynamic Range of a Light-activated Synthetic
c-di-GMP Module While the ∼11-fold ratio is high among
bacteriophytochromes, the higher DGC activity of BphS resulted in
an undesirable increase in c-di-GMP synthesis in the dark, compared
to BphG. To decrease the level of c-di-GMP accumulated in the dark
and thereby to increase the range of the c-di-GMP concentrations that
can be manipulated by light, we added a c-di-GMP PDE as a second component.
Ideally, this PDE would be inactivated by NIRW light; however, no
such enzyme has been found in nature or engineered. Therefore, we
added an enzyme with constitutive activity,  YhjH, which contains a single EAL domain responsible for PDE activity. The  gene was placed downstream
of  as part of the three-gene operon (Figure A). The purpose of YhjH is to maintain near-zero
levels of intracellular c-di-GMP by degrading c-di-GMP produced by
the dark DGC activity of BphS. However, the PDE activity of YhjH must
not interfere or interfere only minimally with c-di-GMP synthesis
in the light. To adjust YhjH expression to the desired levels, we
optimized the strength of a ribosome-binding site (RBS) driving  mRNA translation. To monitor relative strengths of
DGC and PDE activities, we needed a system responsive to changes in
c-di-GMP levels at the low end of c-di-GMP concentrations, unlike
the curli fimbriae system that responds to relatively higher intracellular
c-di-GMP.  flagellar motility in semisolid
agar presented a suitable system. The c-di-GMP receptor YcgR is one of the most sensitive c-di-GMP receptors described thus far. YcgR works as a backstop motility break that
binds to a flagellum rotor and, in the presence of c-di-GMP, decreases
its ability to reverse rotation direction. This, in turn, impairs
the ability of cells to change the direction of their movement and
gets them stuck in the blind alleys of semisolid agar. Sizes of motility zones in semisolid agar can therefore serve as
proxies for intracellular c-di-GMP levels. Since strain BL21[DE3] used in Congo red staining tests is nonmotile,
we constructed an alternative host derived from the highly motile  strain MG1655. To enable  operon expression in MG1655, we inserted
into its chromosome a recombinant λDE3 phage carrying an IPTG-inducible
T7 RNA polymerase gene. When cells expressing the originally constructed  operon were tested, they showed equally good
motility irrespective
of irradiation, which suggested that PDE activity of YhjH overpowered
the DGC activity of BphS not only in the dark (as desired) but also
in the light (Figure B). To decrease YhjH
expression, we designed a series of ribosome-binding sites (RBS) with
predicted lower translation initiation efficiencies and used them to replace the original RBS (RBS1) upstream
of  (Figure A). We tested
three RBS (RBS2–4) whose strengths span a 200-fold range below
the strength of RBS1 (Figure A). The RBS strength
was predicted by a RBS calculator. Constructs
with RBS with the predicted lower strengths generally corresponded
to the smaller motility zones in the light than the RBS1 construct
(Figure B and C); however, the calculated
RBS values did not always correlate with the expected phenotypes (e.g.,
reverse order in motility zone sizes in RBS3 and RBS2). None of the
tested constructs with lower RBS strengths showed motility inhibition
in the dark (Figure B and C), which indicated
that YhjH expression in the dark in all constructs was sufficient
to overcome the background activity of BphS. Synthetic operon for light-activated c-di-GMP
synthesis. (A) Structure
of the synthetic operon for light-activated c-di-GMP synthesis. The
genes encoding light-activated DGC (), heme oxygenase
(), and c-di-GMP PDE ()
are assembled in a single operon, .
A semicircle in front of each gene indicates a RBS; a T-sign at the
end of the operon indicates a transcription terminator. The expression
levels of  were altered by using RBS sequences
(orange arrow) of varying strengths shown in the box. (B) Adjustment
of the  RBS strength using semisolid agar motility
assays in  MG1655[DE3]. V, pMQ56 (empty vector);
1, RBS1; 2, RBS2; 3, RBS3; 4, RBS4. Increased intracellular c-di-GMP
levels decrease the size of a motility zone. (C) Diameters of the
swimming zones from panel B. (D) Intracellular c-di-GMP levels measured
in liquid-grown cultures of MG1655[DE3] expressing  with RBS3 upstream of . Kinetics of the NIRW Light-Induced
c-di-GMP Accumulation in To determine
the kinetics of intracellular
c-di-GMP accumulation in response to NIRW light, we used MG1655[DE3]
expressing the  operon with the RBS3
upstream of . The data in Figure D indicate that intracellular c-di-GMP rose from ∼4
nM in the dark to ∼84 nM after 3 h of irradiation (>20-fold
increase) and continued to rise reaching ∼210 nM after additional
6 h of irradiation (>50-fold increase). It is noteworthy
that
in this experiment we chose a relatively strong RBS (RBS3) for YhjH
to overpower not only the dark DGC activity of BphS but also native  DGCs that may have contributed an additional ∼0.1–1
μM c-di-GMP. In organisms lacking
native c-di-GMP signaling pathways, where the role of YhjH will be
restricted to degrading c-di-GMP produced only by the dark DGC activity
of BphS, it may be possible to select a BphS-YhjH module with lower
YhjH expression and therefore achieve higher than 50-fold photodynamic
range of c-di-GMP concentrations. NIRW Light-Activated, c-di-GMP-Mediated
Gene Expression Here, we assessed the performance of the
synthetic NIRW light-activated
module in photoactivating gene expression. We engineered two c-di-GMP-dependent
expression systems and linked them to the BphS-YhjH module. The first
system involved the CRP-like protein Clp from , where CRP is an  cAMP receptor/activator protein (Figure A). Clp recognizes the
same target sequence as CRP; its affinity to DNA is decreased upon
c-di-GMP binding (i.e., opposite to the
effect of cAMP on CRP). We placed the  reporter
gene downstream of the P promoter containing
two CRP-binding sites, while  gene expression was under the arabinose-inducible P promoter. The  operon expressing
YhjH under RBS4,  and  constructs
were expressed in the constructed BL21[DE3]  null
mutant to monitor reduction in LacZ expression in response to light
(). Light-induced c-di-GMP
synthesis resulted in the expected decrease in β-galactosidase
levels (Figure B). The observed fold-reduction,
measured in liquid culture, was moderate, that is, ∼3-fold
(Figure C). We modified the promoter strength,
number of Clp binding sites, and relative position of these sites
and yet did not succeed in significantly improving this parameter
(not shown), which suggests that system limitation may be Clp-specific.
We therefore linked a different transcription factor downstream of
the BphS-YhjH photocontrol module. MrkH is
a transcriptional
factor that binds c-di-GMP via a high-affinity c-di-GMP-binding PilZ
domain. Cyclic di-GMP binding enhances MrkH affinity
to DNA, that is, opposite to the effect of c-di-GMP on Clp (). We placed a  reporter under the control of the MrkH-dependent P promoter, where  is the MrkH-activated
gene target. was expressed
from the arabinose-inducible P promoter (Figure A). We adjusted the strength of the RBS upstream
of  (300 arbitrary units, according to the RBS
calculator) to produce blue colonies
on X-gal plates when MrkH is expressed at moderate levels (0.1% arabinose).
The  expression was then lowered (0.008% arabinose)
to allow for light-dependent c-di-GMP activation of MrkH activity,
and β-galactosidase levels were measured. The  operon expressing YhjH from RBS3 produced colorless colonies in
the dark and blue colonies in the light (Figure B). β-galactosidase levels in the liquid cultures in the dark
were very low for the RBS3 construct (but not for RBS2) (Figure C). The expression level of  was further optimized (0.03%, or 2 mM arabinose) to achieve a photoactivation
ratio of ∼40 (Figure D). The kinetics
of β-galactosidase levels (Figure E)
shows that an ∼10-fold activation of gene expression was reached
after ∼4 h, and the maximal ∼40-fold activation was
reached after ∼8.5 h of irradiation. Red or NIRW light has
no known targets in  except for BphS; therefore,
it was not surprising that this light did not inhibit  growth under constant irradiation (Figure F). In this study, we combined
two concepts whose utility in synthetic
biology applications has thus far been underexplored. , we engineered a module for highly controlled synthesis and degradation
of a bacterial second messenger, c-di-GMP. Because c-di-GMP is not
made by higher eukaryotes, it can be used for orthogonal regulation
of biological activities in these organisms. Second messengers, including
c-di-GMP, offer two important advantages over other regulatory modalities.
(i) They can amplify the magnitude of the change achieved by primary
signals. In the photocontrol module described here, an ∼11-fold
activation of the DGC activity by light (primary signal) is converted
to a >50-fold increase in intracellular c-di-GMP levels. Importantly,
because second messenger levels can be controlled at both synthesis
and degradation levels, establishing a near-zero background levels
is feasible. In our case, this was accomplished by integrating a c-di-GMP
PDE, YhjH, with the engineered DGC, BphS. (ii) Another advantage of
second messengers lies in the versatility of the downstream targets
that can respond to changes in concentrations of second messengers.
In the case of c-di-GMP, several protein types that bind this ligand
via diverse modes have been discovered. Some of them bind c-di-GMP via well-defined protein domains, such
as the PilZ domain of the  transcription
activator MrkH used in this study. Conformational changes occurring
in PilZ in response to c-di-GMP are structurally characterized and
can be used for protein engineering. Other proteins, that bind c-di-GMP
at the homodimeric or heterodimeric protein interfaces, can be used for engineering
homologous or heterologous c-di-GMP-dependent protein–protein
interactions. Further, c-di-GMP-specific riboswitches and ribozymes can be employed
to affect mRNA stability and/or transcription and translation efficiencies.
Therefore, complex, multilayer signaling cascades involving c-di-GMP
can be engineered (Figure ). Nucleotide second messengers are particularly attractive
for synthetic
biology applications. Briefly, they are synthesized in a single step
from ubiquitous substrates (GTP or ATP) and degraded into nontoxic
products (GMP or AMP). Since no organism possesses signaling pathways
involving all known cNMP/c-di-NMP second messengers orthogonal regulatory systems can be designed for various organisms.
Finally, several highly regulated adenylate and guanylate cyclases
have been discovered or engineered. BphS engineered in this
study is the first dinucleotide cyclase with a high photoactivation
ratio and an activity level suitable for orthogonal applications. The  concept explored in this study deals
with engineering of photoreceptors of the bacteriophytochrome class.
Bacteriophytochromes sense light in the farthest region of spectrum
compared to other known photoreceptor types. Their absorption falls
directly in the NIRW (∼680–880 nm), the optimal spectral
region for accessing deep mammalian tissues. Bacteriophytochrome absorption is separated from the absorption
of related plant- or cyanobacterial type phytochromes by a relatively
small (∼30–100 nm) red shift; however, this results
in a 2–10-fold gain in the depth of light penetration into
mammalian tissues, which may be critical in biomedical applications. An additional
advantage of bacteriophytochromes over other phytochromes that have
been engineered to control gene and protein activities is that their chromophore, biliverdin IXα, is naturally produced
in mammalian cells as a first intermediate in the heme degradation
pathway. Where biliverdin availability is limited, it can be supplied
by a single heme oxygenase gene. In the case of plant- and cyanobacterial
phytochromes, the chromophore biosynthetic pathway requires an extra
enzymatic step. While second messenger-mediated
NIRW light activated systems are
attractive because versatile downstream regulatory modules that can
be linked to them, they have inherent pitfalls. For example, they
respond to light relatively slowly because of the time required for
second messenger accumulation (Figure E).
Another potential concern in using c-di-GMP- (or c-di-AMP-) mediated
systems in mammals is that c-di-NMPs are recognized as pathogen-associated
molecular patterns that may stimulate the innate immune system. In
mammalian cells expressing the STING receptor, c-di-GMP activates
interferon β response via the DDX1-STING pathway. However, the K for c-di-GMP of DDX1
and STING lies in the 5–15 μM range, which is significantly higher
than the K of most bacterial c-di-GMP receptors; for example,
120 nM for MrkH or 1 μM for Clp. Therefore, the NIRW light-induced c-di-GMP systems
can operate below the level of interferon activation. In the models
intolerable to interferon induction, animals lacking the STING receptor
may be used, for example, Goldenticket mice. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Complete_Genomes/c-diGMP.html http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Complete_Genomes/c-diGMP.html Finally, while we envision the brightest prospects for the
use
of the engineered c-di-GMP-mediated photocontrol module in deep mammalian
tissues (from rodents to humans), it may of course be used in other
animals (flies and worms), as well as in plant or microbial organisms
that lack c-di-GMP signaling pathways. For example, major bacterial
pathogens (staphylococci, streptococci, enterococci, mycoplasmas,
etc.) as well as probiotic bacteria (lactobacilli, bacteroidetes,
etc.) do not make c-di-GMP (). The c-di-GMP photocontrol module can be introduced in these bacteria
to activate or inactivate genes and proteins in animal tissues , which may be invaluable for gaining insights into
host-microbial interactions. The described BphS-YhjH module can of
course also be applied as a tool to regulate c-di-GMP-dependent behavior
of bacteria that have c-di-GMP signaling pathways, as shown here using  motility and curli fimbriae formation. NIRW light-inactivated gene expression
module. (A) Structure of
a NIRW light-inactivated synthetic module. (B) Light-inactivated β-galactosidase
activity in the  T7 Express  mutant expressing a c-di-GMP-dependent Clp transcription factor.
Plates contained 0.1% arabinose, 0.015 mM IPTG, and 40 μg/mL
X-gal. (C) β-galactosidase activity in liquid cultures grown
in the dark or light to A, ∼1.0. NIRW light-activated gene expression module. (A) Structure of a
NIRW light-activated synthetic module. The DNA fragment encoding the
c-di-GMP synthetic photocontrol module is ∼3.5 kb; the  module is ∼0.8 kb. (B) Light-activated β-galactosidase
activity in the  T7 Express strain expressing
a c-di-GMP-dependent MrkH transcription activator. Plates contained
0.008% arabinose, 0.015 mM IPTG, and 40 ug/mL X-gal. (C) β-galactosidase
activities in liquid cultures grown in the dark or light to A, ∼1.5. The medium contained 0.008% arabinose, 0.025
mM IPTG. Higher YhjH expression in the RBS3 construct abolished the
undesired basal LacZ expression in the dark, whereas the RBS2 construct
produced undesired LacZ expression in the dark. (D) Optimization of
the photodynamic range of β-galactosidase levels by adjusting
MrkH expression from the arabinose-inducible P promoter.
(E) Time-course of β-galactosidase levels. The  T7 Express strain expressing the NIRW light-activated module with
RBS3 was grown in LB medium containing 2 mM arabinose and 0.025 mM
IPTG. (F) Growth curve of liquid cultures from panel E grown in the
dark or light. Regulation of diverse
biological activities via the NIRW light-activated
c-di-GMP module. NIRW light-controlled synthetic c-di-GMP module can
be linked to output modules via c-di-GMP receptor proteins and RNA
to regulate various biological activities. The structure of a VpsT
receptor (PDB ID, 3klo) is shown as an example. Bacterial
Strains and Growth Conditions Bacterial strains
and plasmids used for this study are listed in .  DH5α and BL21[DE3]
were used for cloning and protein overexpression, respectively, and
the  BL21 derivative, T7 Express (NEB Biolabs),
which contains a deletion in the  gene, was used
for light experiments. The T7 Express  mutant
was constructed by a one-step gene inactivation method, as described earlier. A motile  strain expressing an IPTG-inducible
T7 RNA polymerase was constructed as follows. A recombinant λDE3
phage carrying the T7 RNA polymerase gene under a P promoter was inserted into the chromosome of MG1655 using
the λDE3 lysogenization kit according to the instructions of
the manufacturer (Novagen). Unexpectedly, λDE3 insertion abrogated
the motility of all phage integrants. Therefore, a spontaneous suppressor
that regained swimming ability in semisolid agar was selected. All  strains were grown at 37 or 30 °C
in Luria–Bertani (LB) medium. For
plate assays, cells were streaked on LB agar supplemented with X-gal
(40 μg/mL), 0.008% arabinose, 0.025 mM IPTG, and appropriate
antibiotics. Plates were grown at 30 °C with or without irradiation
provided by light-emitting diode panels All-red (660 nm) LED Grow
Light panel 225 (30.5 × 30.5 cm square, LED Wholesalers, CA)
at an irradiance of 2 W/m. Antibiotics were used at the
following concentrations (μg/mL): ampicillin, 100; kanamycin,
25; gentamycin 15; tetracycline 5. Plasmid and Strain Construction The plasmids for protein
expression and purification were constructed using pET23a(+) (Invitrogen).
The engineered  gene was generated by linking
the PAS-GAF-PHY encoding fragment (1–511 aa) of  with the GGDEF encoding fragment (175–343 aa) of  via fusion PCR. The fragment was ligated in pET23a(+)
digested with XbaI and dIII to yield pETBphS1::His. The R587A mutation in the RXXD site of BphS1 was introduced
by site-directed mutagenesis using the QuickChange kit (Stratagene)
to create BphS. The  operon under the
T7 promoter was constructed using yeast recombineering based on shuttle
plasmid pMQ56. The  and  gene were amplified by PCR from the genomic
DNA of  and  MG1655, respectively, and assembled as a single operon in yeast
by homologous recombination, yielding pMQbSHY. The unique dIII site was introduced in the RBS (RBS1) of  by site-directed mutagenesis. The  gene was cloned into pJN105 carrying the pBBR1MCS origin of replication
and gentamycin-resistance marker for arabinose-inducible expression. The  gene was placed under
the control of the  promoter carrying two CRP
binding sites in yeast shuttle vector pMQ125 containing the p15a origin
of replication and gentamycin-resistance marker. The  gene was cloned into the modified
in-house vector pBAD/Myc-HisB (Invitrogen) that was made tetracycline
resistant by the insertion of a tetracycline resistance gene into
the ScaI site of the ampicillin resistance gene to generate plasmid
pBATmrkH. The LacZ reporter plasmids were constructed in pMQ125. The  gene was placed downstream of the 131-bp  promoter (positions −91...+39 relative to the  transcription initiation site along with the medium-strength
RBS (∼300 au according to the RBS Calculator). Protein Overexpression, Purification, and
Spectroscopy The His-tagged bacteriophytochrome
proteins (BphG, BphS1,
and BphS) were purified using Ni-NTA affinity chromatography as previously
described. Protein purification was performed
under safe green light. Briefly, 10-ml overnight cultures of  BL21[DE3] containing the pETBph::His vector together with the heme oxygenase encoding plasmid pT7-ho1-1
described previously were transferred
into 1 L of fresh LB and grown to A 0.7 at room temperature.
Protein expression was induced with 0.5 mM IPTG and cultures were
incubated with shaking at 250 rpm at 18 °C for an additional
20 h.  cells were harvested by centrifugation
at 4000 for 10 min and disrupted in the purification
buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 8.0), 300 mM NaCl) plus
0.2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and 10 mM imidazole using a French
pressure cell, and cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 10 000 for 30 min at 4 °C. Crude soluble cell extracts were
agitated with 3 mL (bed volume) of Ni-NTA resin equilibrated with
the buffer for 1 h at 4 °C. The resin was washed with 100 mL
of the buffer plus 20 mM imidazole and eluted with the buffer plus
250 mM imidazole. The proteins were used immediately or stored at
−80 °C in 20% glycerol. Protein concentrations were measured
using a Bradford protein assay kit (Bio-Rad) with bovine serum albumin
as the protein standard. Proteins were analyzed using SDS-PAGE. For spectral analysis, we used light originated from a halogen lamp
(EKE21 V150W, GE) with a flexible light guide to which optical filters
were attached. The 12.5-mm diameter interference band filters (Andover
Corporation) with center wavelengths of 694.3 nm and a 50% bandwidth
of 9.8 ± 0.5 nm were used (approximate fluence 3.5 μmol
m s). Flagellar motility was assayed in semisolid
agar (1% tryptone, 0.5% NaCl, 0.25% agar) containing 0.02 mM IPTG
as previously described. Motility zones
were measured after 6 h of growth in the dark or light. The DGC assays  were performed by measuring
the rate of GTP conversion to c-di-GMP
as described earlier. The protein was
irradiated with NIRW light at an irradiance of 0.2 mW/cm (which is saturating) or kept in green light. The reaction was initiated
by the addition of 200 μM GTP. Aliquots were withdrawn at different
time points and boiled for 5 min. The precipitated protein was removed
by centrifugation at 15 000 for 5 min. The
supernatant was filtered through a 0.22-μm pore size filter
(MicroSolv) and analyzed by reversed-phase HPLC. β-galactosidase assays were performed as follows.
Overnight cultures grown without a chemical inducer were diluted 1:50
in fresh LB medium containing appropriate antibiotics and 2 mM arabinose,
0.025 mM IPTG for MrkH, or 6 mM arabinose and 0.5 mM IPTG for Clp.
The transferred cultures were grown at 30 °C, and shaken at 250–275
rpm. The cultures were illuminated at an irradiance of 0.2 mW/cm or kept in the dark (wrapped in foil). β-galactosidase
activity was analyzed in the aliquots withdrawn at different time
points using -nitrophenyl-β-galactoside as
described previously. Absorbances were
recorded with a UV-1601 PC UV–visible spectrophotometer (Shimadzu).
Error bars represent mean ± SD of at least three independent
experiments. Intracellular c-di-GMP Measurements Intracellular nucleotides
were extracted with 40% methanol, 40% acetonitrile in 0.1 N formic
acid, following the protocol described earlier. Cells were grown at the same conditions used for β-galactosidase
assays. C-di-GMP concentrations were quantified by liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS) carried out at the Mass Spectrometry
Core at Michigan State University. Quantification of extracted c-di-GMP
was determined based on c-di-GMP standards. Intracellular c-di-GMP
concentrations were estimated based on the total number of cells.
One molecule per bacterial cell yields a concentration of ∼10
nM under the assumption that a typical  cell
has an internal volume of ∼2 × 10 L..