The deciphering of the human
genome and the new knowledge on genes and their functions has created
plenty of new target opportunities for the pharmaceutical industry. However, traditional approaches toward hit and
lead finding, such as high-throughput screening (HTS) and fragment-based
screening (FBS), still only cover a fraction of the potential “chemical
space”. Small molecule compound collections are often a reflection
of former drug targets, thus covering previously explored chemical space.
Also, the creation of chemical libraries is limited by feasible chemical
reactions. For this reason and although
HTS has been a valuable hit/lead source for historically tractable
target classes, its success rate lags behind for many novel or traditionally
undruggable targets, for instance inhibitors of protein–protein
interactions, Class B GPCRs or phosphatases. HTS and FBS are two common approaches used in the pharmaceutical
industry for the identification of hits which deliver almost antithetic
chemical starting points. In HTS, millions of compounds are initially
screened to assess biological activity against a target. There is
an increasing awareness, however, regarding the quality of HTS libraries,
and compound collections nowadays follow more closely the ideal of
screening lead-like compounds rather than drug-like or drug-unlike
compounds. Nevertheless, many compounds in these corporate collections
still lack structural diversity and possess a relatively high lipophilicity
and poor thermodynamic solubility. Compared to HTS, FBS samples
the smaller chemical space of fragment-sized
molecules more efficiently. This efficiency is borne out by a higher
probability of fragments matching a receptor due to their reduced
complexity. However, binding events are harder to detect owing to
the inferior affinities of low molecular weight fragments for the
target. Consequently, fragment hits require more medicinal chemistry
efforts to transform them into lead compounds with acceptable affinity. In addition, FBS in general requires targets to be isolatable, and
the availability of structural information is often critical to the
success of fragment-based drug discovery. In this paper, we describe a synthetic biology (SB)-based hit-finding
approach (Figure ) that is complementary to
existing strategies and extendable to novel or difficult therapeutic
targets. The approach combines the use of biosynthetic reactions for
compound generation with advantages from FBS (small, scaffold-sized
molecules), natural products (NPs) (diversity and structural complexity,
“prevalidated” by nature), and HTS (higher potency hits,
initial SAR, generation of chemical probes). The compounds resulting
from this process possess favorable structural and physicochemical
properties, are amenable to synthetic modifications, and exhibit a
high degree of novelty. Being produced by enzymes and selected on
the basis of an intracellular functional assay, SB hits explore biologically
relevant chemical space with “privileged”, NP-like fragments. Scheme
of the synthetic biology combinatorial genetics approach
in baker’s yeast. Synthetic Biology Platform, Screening, and
Compound Isolation The detailed methodology of the SB platform
used here has been
described previously. In short, the technology
combines horizontal gene transfer and expression with stringent screening
technologies in a system where the same yeast cell is used to first
generate the compounds and second to screen for activity of these
compounds against an internal or external assay. The basis for producing
novel compounds is genetic material sourced from (i) known biochemical
pathways producing drug-relevant chemical scaffolds, (ii) organisms
with unknown genetic diversity that can provide new enzymatic activities,
and (iii) organisms reported to have a medicinal effect or that can
tolerate different types of infection (e.g., bacterial or viral).
In the present study, a functional Brome Mosaic Virus (BMV) replication
assay was selected as the primary screen (see  section). The assay setup and compound isolation procedures are
described in the online  section. We
investigated yeast strains containing YACs (yeast artificial chromosomes)
expressing combinations of pathway and cDNA genes deriving from 8
pathways and 14 libraries containing cDNA (, Table S1 and S4). A total of 74 YAC-dependent
compounds were isolated from 35 yeast crude extracts (clones). Twenty-eight
compounds (38%) exhibited activity in a secondary BMV assay. All compounds
were isolated by preparative HPLC, and their structures were elucidated
by means of mass spectrometry and one- and two-dimensional homo- and
heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy. Figure  shows
selected examples of compounds (1–34) produced by this SB approach. Examples
of compounds produced by synthetic biology. Compounds
1–34 were isolated from yeast. Ribavirin was used as reference
in secondary activity assays. The entire list of 74 compounds is shown
in  Figure S2. Synthetic Biology Compound
Properties The 74 isolated
compounds were assessed for their physicochemical properties and their
quality as starting points for lead optimization. These data are summarized
in Table . The SB approach described here
produces mainly fragment- (110 < MW[Da]<250) to scaffold-sized
(250 < MW[Da]<350) molecules. Average
MW, clogP, and HBD values are in line with Congreve’s rule-of-three
(Ro3) criteria for fragments. HBA, ROT,
and PSA values are above recommended values. Depending on the calculation algorithm used, only 3–8% of
the isolated compounds have a high calculated logP (clogP > 5).
Less
than 10% of the compounds produced by SB give rise to one or more
violations in the rule-of-five (Ro5). Overall, the SB compounds possess fragment- to scaffold-like
molecular weights. Shape complexity describes the fraction of
sp hybridized carbon atoms compared to the sum of sp and sp hybridized carbons. Stereochemical complexity
relates the number of chiral carbons to the total number of carbons
in any given compound. Both values are useful descriptors to describe the
structural complexity of a molecule. Complexity, namely, a higher
degree of saturation in molecules, increases the likelihood of higher
solubility and lower melting points, physical properties that are
associated with successful drugs. In
addition, this property has been shown to be beneficial by increasing
the probability of appropriate complementary interactions between
ligand and target, resulting in greater selectivity and less off-target
effects. Molecules rich in sp-configured centers also have the capacity of covering larger portions
of chemical space. http://www.keyorganics.net/services/bionet-products/fragment-libraries/ http://www.keyorganics.net/services/bionet-products/fragment-libraries/ http://www.chembridge.com/internal/index.php http://www.chembridge.com/internal/index.php Shape and stereochemical
complexity of SB compounds were compared
to “drug-” and “fragment-like” compound
sets. Data sets were sourced as follows. A “drug-like”
data set of 870 marketed drugs was extracted from DRUGBANK using a
MW ≤ 500 Da criteria. Also, two sets of fragment-like compounds
were sourced: a diverse 13 190 fragment set from Key Organics
Ltd. (Full BIONET Fragments Library July 2013, ) and a diverse fragment library containing 7849 compounds from ChemBridge,
Inc. (Fragment Library Database—SDF Format Last Modified 8/1/2013, ). The SB compounds
shape and stereochemical complexity values rank above the diversity
oriented fragment set and are close to the drug-like molecule set
(Table ). Interestingly, the average shape
complexity of the core scaffold is higher than that of the whole compounds,
indicating a high degree of structural complexity connected to the
core scaffolds of the SB compounds (Table ). Stereochemical complexity, however, remains comparatively low. Optimizability is a key attribute
of successful hits in a discovery
program and is often used to rank prospective hits resulting from
a screen. Interestingly, many of the
compounds have at least two points of chemical variability to fit
with existing chemistry approaches. In cases where synthesis is difficult,
the compounds may be produced in larger quantities in yeast, using
metabolic engineering approaches, because this is how they originated. The described compounds can be assessed for suitability as hits
for drug discovery. A phenolic group is present in several of the
compounds. Although phenols can represent valuable starting points
for lead identification or lead optimization (LI/LO), their presence
in a final drug is usually undesired as it is often associated with
a clearance liability via glucoronidation. In these cases, common
strategies can be used to either replace this feature (for example
with acidic N–H groups) or to produce prodrug formulations.
In addition, some of the compounds contain anilinic groups which are
often flagged as a potential toxicophore. However, the most common
motif observed is -anthranilic acid (PABA), which
is known to have little toxicity and is of minimal concern. After
all, it should be considered that these are hit structures. During
LI/LO, possible problems could be addressed—in the case of
a genotoxic aniline, a solution could be to replace it with the corresponding
amino-pyridine, which has a lower tendency to be genotoxic. There is no doubt that compounds produced by this method have an
inherent tendency toward a more challenging synthesis compared to
compounds which have originated in a chemical library. However, for
this set of compounds, synthetic routes could quickly be envisaged
for many. Therefore, it is expected that during an LI/LO process,
the molecular properties and target affinity could be optimized rather
rapidly. Examples for clearly tractable hit structures are , , and , which have been resynthesized.
Conceptually, a hybrid approach may also be considered to optimize
SB compounds in which some of the enzymes which give rise to the hits
are used  (biocatalysis) and combined with
conventional synthetic chemistry. This would enable scalability and
rapid optimization demanded by the LO process. Physicochemical, Structural, and Shape-Based
Properties of Synthetic-Biology-Derived Compounds Compared to Fragment-
and Drug-Like Compounds shape complexity
core skeleton C/(C+C) stereochemical complexity (C/C) Synthetic biology values are average
values. Shape and stereochemical complexity are average values determined
using a diverse 13 190 fragment library (Key Organics Ltd.)
and a set of 870 marketed drugs of MW < 500 Da (extracted from
DRUGBANK) for fragment- and drug-like molecules, respectively. Otherwise,
values refer to thresholds of Ro3 and Ro5 or recommended in literature
for fragment- and drug-like molecules. Abbreviations: MW, molecular
weight; clogP, calculated logarithm of the octanol–water partition
coefficient; HBD, number of hydrogen bond donors; HBA, number of hydrogen
bond acceptors; ROT, number of rotatable bonds; PSA, polar surface
area; HAC, number of non-hydrogen atoms. Typical value, taken from ref (), In brackets: stereochemical
complexity
of deglycosylated synthetic biology compounds. Synthetic Biology Compound
Novelty Analysis SciFinder,
PubChem, ChemSpider, and ChEMBL were searched for the presence of
the SB originated structures. Figure a shows
the percentage of compounds new to each database. Overall, no match
was found for more than 75% of the compounds in either SciFinder,
PubChem, or ChemSpider. Similarity and substructure searches were
carried out in SciFinder. Figure b shows a
summary of the SciFinder structural similarity scores of the SB compounds
isolated in this work, with 100% similarity designating previously
reported structures and ≥99% structural similarity relating
to different or previously not assigned relative stereochemistry or
close analogues differing only in the length of aliphatic side chains
(e.g., methyl/ethyl). These similarity and substructure searches also
helped in defining core scaffolds of the isolated compounds, for which
side chains were removed. Scaffolds were defined as novel if both
the parent compound and the core skeleton exhibited SciFinder similarity
scores of less than 90% compared to any other entry. Interestingly,
scaffold novelty often derived from new combinations of known natural
product-derived substructures. Figure  shows
examples of novel scaffolds derived from SB compounds. Overall ≈20%
of the compounds represented novel scaffolds, although some redundancies
within the set were observed. Forty percent of these compounds exhibited
activity in the secondary BMV assay, therefore relating novelty to
biologically relevant chemical space. Novelty and similarity of synthetic biology
compounds. (a) Percentage
of synthetic biology compounds new to different databases. (b) Similarity
scores of synthetic biology compounds in SciFinder. (c) PubChem nearest
neighbor molecular quantum numbers city-block distance (CBDMQN) difference
of synthetic biology compounds. (d) GDB-17 CBDMQN difference of synthetic
biology compounds. Novel synthetic biology
scaffolds. Synthetic Biology Compound
Diversity Analysis Studies
were conducted to determine diversity within the SB compound set.
One common way to ascertain diversity is to fingerprint compounds
by a composition method (e.g., Daylight or MACCS keys) and then measure
the distance between different library members according to a Tanimoto
or other similarity metric. Compounds
above a similarity threshold can be assigned to the same “cluster”,
whereas those more dissimilar are not. To this end, compounds were
fingerprinted with MACCS keys, and a Tanimoto similarity value of
0.85 was used to define clusters. The average cluster size across
the limited 74 SB compound set is 1.27, and thus, the majority of
compounds exist in their own cluster and can be described as singletons.
The largest cluster size is 3, of which there are four such clusters
(, Table S2). These data were compared with distributions calculated for two “diverse”
libraries of commercially available fragments. In these compound collections
(ChemBridge and Key Organics), the average cluster sizes across the
compound sets are 1.36 and 1.30, respectively. This shows that the
SB set has fewer average compounds per cluster (i.e., is more diverse)
than the fragment collections examined. Of course, there is a significant
difference in size of the compound sets analyzed. However, the results
obtained for the ChemBridge and Key Organics sets nevertheless exemplify
typical distributions observed across libraries that were constructed
with diversity as a fundamental objective. As the size of the
SB libraries increases, the issue of compound
redundancy may have to be addressed. However, diversity of the SB
compounds is controlled by the nature of the functional screen used
for isolating the yeast transformants. Thus, use of a different screen
would be expected to give rise to new compounds. Furthermore, retention
times and high-resolution MS data can be used to dereplicate active
fractions. In addition, one of the important aspects of this approach
is that if a limitation on scaffold diversity was observed, further
sets of genes could be introduced into the yeast, expanding the chemical
repertoire, and thus, to some extent, diversity could also be controlled
in this manner. Chemical Space Classification by Molecular
Quantum Numbers Reymond and co-workers have described a classification
system that
places organic molecules in chemical space on the basis of 42 molecular
quantum numbers (MQN). The MQNs are defined as value
descriptors of structural elements by simply counting atoms of certain
types, bonds, polar groups, and topological features. Using the MQN
webserver (), we calculated
the similarity of the isolated SB compounds to nearest neighbors in
the PubChem (Figure c) and GDB-17 databases
(Figure d). GDB-17 stands for a chemical universe
database of organic molecules of up to 17 heavy atoms (C, N, O, S,
and Cl) virtually created following simple chemical stability and
feasibility rules. It contains 166 billion small molecules. Similarity in MQN-space is measured in city-block
distance (CBD) by summing up the absolute values of
the differences between the MQN-values of the SB compounds and the
nearest neighbor in the reference database. CBD for
SB molecules with less than 17 heavy atoms (HAC ≤ 17) and their
nearest neighbor in the GDB-17 database were calculated, giving rise
to distance (d) values between  = 2 and  = 11 (Figure d). A similar result
was obtained calculating CBD between all 74 SB structures
and their closest neighbor in the PubChem database, leading to distances
between  = 0 and  = 13 (Figure c). Although the magnitude of the  values does not indicate a high diversity to known or theoretically
predicted structures, SB compounds are
clearly novel within the vast chemical space explored in these databases. Chemical Space Analysis Using ChemGPS-NP Having established
that the SB compounds were generally diverse and novel, it was of
interest to know whether these compounds are more similar to natural
products (NP) or commercial screening compounds/synthetic small molecules. One convenient system to describe the NP-likeness of a set of compounds
is provided by the ChemGPS-NP approach. This method
converts relevant molecule descriptors (associated with concepts related
to NP-likeness, such as number of chiral centers, ratio of O vs N
atoms, etc.) into principal component space and provides a standardized
system to “map” sets of new compounds onto these coordinates.
It is useful to use such a system, because it has already been shown
to be relevant in separating natural from non-natural compounds. A web server generating the raw principal component analysis
(PCA)
scores for compounds was utilized to calculate values for three data
sets, a compound set comprising 20 000 randomly selected compounds
extracted from the Asinex Platinum screening library, a natural product set comprising 5150 compounds from Analyticon
(MEGx library) and the 74 synthetic biology
compounds identified in yeast. Figure  shows the resulting map of chemical
space between the libraries. According to this PCA mapping, there
is a clear chemical space separation between the screening library
and the natural product library. Furthermore, the SB compounds span
both chemical spaces. The majority (65 compounds) fall into the space
occupied by the screening compounds, but a significant number (9 compounds,
12%) sit outside this, in the coordinate space occupied by natural
products. Given the relatively small number of SB compounds being analyzed,
we wanted to evaluate the statistical likelihood of achieving this
result. An experiment was thus conducted by selecting 100 randomly
picked sets of compounds with the same molecular weight distribution
(each to the nearest whole MW value) to the synthetic biology set
from an internal database containing over 20 million commercially
available compounds. The internal database only contained low numbers
of natural product compounds (<0.4%). ChemGPS-NP scores were generated
for each of these sets, and the numbers of compounds falling within
the natural product volume were recorded. We assumed that these data
would be normally distributed. On average, 1.7 compounds (2.2%) fell
in the NP-only space (standard deviation 1.1). Because 9 (12%) of
the SB compounds exist in this space, we conclude it unlikely to have
occurred by chance, ρ = 8 × 10. PCA mapping of different libraries. Subset of Asinex screening
library (red), Analyticon NP library (blue), and the SB compounds
(yellow). The three axes represent the three first principal components
as generated by the ChemGPS-NP webserver. Activity of Synthetic Biology Compounds The yeast strain
used for this study was equipped with a Brome Mosaic Virus functional
assay, such that the yeast only survives in the presence of a small
molecule inhibitor of viral replication. Only when the yeast strain
was transformed with YACs encoding cDNA libraries and metabolic pathways
producing different small molecules were surviving colonies obtained.
BMV served as a surrogate for human infectious positive-sense single-stranded
(+ve ss) RNA viruses. A secondary BMV assay guided fractionation of
supernatant extract from surviving colonies led to fractions with
high antiviral activity, which were then further fractionated for
structural elucidation and activity determination of the compounds. Table  (and  Figure S3) shows activity data (IC) of selected SB compounds in the secondary BMV assay and against
two viruses of therapeutic interest, Dengue (DENV) and human hepatitis
C (HCV) virus. (Characterization data for the 6 compounds can be found
in the .) Compounds  and – were up-scaled
by metabolic engineering or synthetic chemistry, respectively, and
activity data were determined on the resynthesized products. Activity
data in the BMV assay (Table ) was recorded
for a set of compounds within or above the MW range of fragments.
pIC values vary between 4.3 (compound ) and 6.7 (compound ) (typical, literature-derived
value for fragment-like molecules pIC = 4.4) reflecting, in accordance with Hann’s
complexity model, the slightly larger size of some
of the molecules. Compound  shows above average activity
for its size. Interestingly, μM activity was also found for
two therapeutically relevant viruses, HCV and DENV, which, like brome
mosaic virus, also belong to Group IV +ve ss RNA viruses (Table ). Overall, these data show the potential of the
BMV model system to detect compounds that might serve as starting
points for the development of antiviral drugs against Group IV +ve
ss RNA viruses of therapeutic interest. IC Values of Synthetic
Biology Compounds in a Secondary Brome Mosaic Virus (BMV), Human Hepatitis
C Virus (HCV), and Dengue Virus (DENV) Assay tetra- and diterpenoids/virus-infected tobacco The pathway/cDNA
combination refers
to the YAC clone from which they were isolated. Racemic mixture used (resynthesized). Overall,
the activity, low
lipophilicity and MW, the low number of aromatic rings, the absence
of basic centers, a favorable stereochemical, and high shape complexity
make the isolated SB compounds high quality and optimizable start
points for drug discovery. On the basis of the molecules identified,
we assert that yeast-produced SB products allow the exploration of
new areas of biologically relevant chemical space. A significant number
of the isolated compounds are novel and diverse according to the tests
described in the  section. Importantly,
the novelty is biologically derived and not at the expense of drug-likeness. Given the attractive features of the SB approach, it is important
to also consider some of the practical aspects. Cycle times, consisting
of the creation of the libraries, primary and secondary screening,
dereplication, isolation, and structure elucidation of active metabolome
components, have averaged 6–9 months for screens of 50–60
libraries, resulting in the identification of the hits described in
this study. Overall, this is comparable to a typical complete time
frame for HTS- or FBS-based hit-finding approaches. For the
first time, novel compounds produced by SB are reported.
In view of their activity and physicochemical and structural properties,
these compounds represent good start points for medicinal chemistry
optimization and can be considered qualified hits or early leads for
drug discovery. Furthermore, the SB approach complements current hit-finding
practices and can be easily integrated in the drug discovery process. The haploid yeast strains used for constructing
the primary screening assay strains have a S288C genetic background
with the following genotypes MATa LYS2 ade8Δ his3Δ ura3Δ
leu2Δ trp1Δ arg4Δ and MATα lys2Δ ADE8
his3Δ ura3Δ leu2Δ trp1Δ arg4Δ. The haploid
yeast strain used for constructing the secondary screening assay has
a S288C genetic background with the following genotype MATa met15Δ
his3Δ ura3Δ leu2Δ pdr1Δ pdr3Δ erg6Δ Evolva has developed a
functional BMV replication assay in yeast on the basis of the publications
of Ahlquist and co-workers. The assay has been applied to
Evolva’s proprietary SB platform for creating small molecule
libraries in yeast (see , Table S4). The primary BMV screening
strain contains a BMV replication system consisting of expression
cassettes for BMV RNA1, BMV RNA2, BMV RNA3-URA3, and BMV RNA3-Renilla
that are integrated into the yeast genome under the control of inducible
GAL1 promoters, as described by Ahlquist and co-workers. Galactose-media-induced expression of the BMV cassettes leads to
expression of URA3 and Renilla reporter genes in a BMV replication-specific
manner. The URA3 gene encodes orotidine 5-phosphate decarboxylase
that can convert 5-fluoroorotic acid (5-FOA) to 5-fluorouracil, which
causes cell death. The Renilla gene encodes Renilla luciferase that
catalyzes a light-emitting reaction, which can be quantitatively detected
by a chemiluminescence reader. The primary BMV strain also has an
integrated Firefly expression cassette under the control of a constitutive
ADH1 promoter. This gene is expressed independently of BMV replication
and is used for normalizing the signal from the Renilla luciferase
reaction. Screening libraries were made by mating haploid primary
BMV strains
that had been transformed with YAC pools. The YAC pools were constructed
and introduced in the haploid primary BMV strains essentially as described
previously. Each YAC consists of multiple
expression cassettes under the control of inducible methionine dependent
promoters. Haploid MATα yeast libraries containing pathway
YACs (pathway
libraries, LEU2 marker) and haploid MATa yeast libraries containing
cDNA YACs (cDNA libraries, HIS3 marker) were prepared. Fifty different
combinations of pathway and cDNA libraries were mated to create diploid
screening libraries. In addition, diploid “pathway only”
screening libraries were created by mating the haploid MATα
pathway libraries with the haploid MATa yeast containing an empty
HIS3 plasmid. Furthermore, the haploid yeast strains with HIS3 and
LEU2 plasmids were mated to make a diploid screening strain control
without YACs. To start the screening process, an overnight culture
of the diploid
library was grown in glucose media without methionine. The next day,
2 × 50 million diploid cells were spread on two screening plates
(24 × 24 cm) containing solid synthetic complete (SC) media without
leucine, histidine, or methionine and containing 1% galactose, 1%
raffinose, 0.12% FOA, and 80 mg/L uracil. The galactose induces the
BMV replication, whereas the absence of methionine induces expression
of the YAC genes. The number of surviving clones varied with
the pathway and cDNA
combination and was typically in the range of 200–2000 surviving
clones per 50 million cells. Survivor clones (176) per diploid library
were picked from the FOA plates and transferred to two 96-well master
plates with SC media with 2% glucose, without histidine and leucine,
and with 2 mM methionine, to shut down BMV replication and expression
of the YAC genes. In total, 58 diploid libraries × 176 survivors
= 10208 clones were picked from the primary screening. Confirmation
of Primary Hit Clones A confirmatory process
was carried out to rank the survivor clones according to antiviral
potency of each clone. The master plate was used to inoculate a 96-well
plate with SC media with 2% glucose + 2 mM methionine (YAC expression
off) or without methionine (YAC expression on) and incubated overnight.
Next day, each plate was used to inoculate two 96 well plates containing
SC media with 2% galactose (BMV replication turned on) with either
2 mM methionine (+methionine, YAC expression off) or without methionine
(−methionine, YAC expression on) and incubated overnight. The
following day, these plates were used for the luciferase assay using
the Dual-Glo Luciferase Assay System (Promega). A Microlab Star pipetting
robot (Hamilton) was used for handling of plate cultures, lysis buffers,
and luciferase substrates. A 7 μL culture from each well was
transferred in duplicate to 384-well plates, in which cell lysis,
Firefly, and Renilla measurements were carried out. The Firefly and
Renilla signals were measured in a Pherastar FS plate reader (BMG
Labtech) by first adding 7 μL of lysis buffer containing Firefly
substrate. After a 1 h incubation, the Firefly signal was measured.
Next, 7 μL of StopGlo buffer containing Renilla substrate was
added to quench the Firefly signal and start the Renilla reaction.
After 45 min of incubation time, the Renilla signal was measured. The luciferase readings were used to calculate the YAC-dependent
inhibition of BMV viral replication for each clone (% inhibition =
(Renilla/Firefly (+methionine = YAC off) – Renilla/Firefly
(−methionine = YAC on))/(Renilla/Firefly (+methionine = YAC
off)) × 100). The most potent clones with inhibition ≥60%
were picked
and used for extraction and secondary assay testing. The number of
clones selected based on this cut off value varied from 0–35
clones/library depending on the screening library. Approximately 300
clones from 58 screening libraries were selected on the basis of this
confirmation. The
secondary BMV strain
was used for screening of metabolite fractions to identify the fractions/compounds
that are active against BMV. It contains the same integrated expression
cassettes as the primary BMV screening assay described above, except
for the BMV RNA3-URA3 cassette. In addition, the strain has been deleted
in the PDR1, PDR3, and ERG6 genes to enhance the uptake of exogenously
added compounds. The PDR1 and PDR3 genes regulate ABC transporters
that remove xenobiotic substances from the yeast cytoplasm. ERG6 deletion is known to give an increased
“permeability” of the yeast membrane to exogenously
added compounds. The Renilla and Firefly
activity is measured by the Dual-Glo kit (Promega) as described above A culture of secondary assay yeast strain was grown overnight in
SC containing 2% glucose. The next day, the culture was washed and
diluted to OD600 = 0.3 in SC media containing 2% galactose and distributed
in two 96-deep-well plates with 400 μL of cell culture in each
well. A 2 μL aliquot of each metabolite fraction resuspended
in 20 μL of DMSO was transferred to the 96-deep-well plates
with the Microlab Star pipetting robot (Hamilton). The plates were
incubated overnight at 30 °C, 300 rpm to let the fraction compounds
enter the yeast and interfere with the BMV viral replication system.
Negative control (no compound, used as baseline) and positive controls
(40 and 200 μM Ribavirin) were included. The following day,
the luciferase assay was carried out as described above for the confirmatory
process. The inhibition of BMV replication was calculated according
to the formula: (% inhibition = (Renilla/Firefly (baseline) –
Renilla/Firefly (fraction))/(Renilla/Firefly (baseline)) × 100).
Fractions that show activity by inhibiting the viral replication system
were identified (see  Table S5 and Figure S3 for additional data). The inhibition
data for the CEY fractions were grouped and aligned
in a pathway specific manner to identify pathway-specific clusters
of fractions, pathway + cDNA specific clusters of fractions, and clone-specific
fractions (singlets). A cluster arises when the same active fraction
is present in more than one CEY. The clustering analysis is used to
identify redundancy of molecules that arise when the same combinations
of YAC genes appear in more than one yeast clone. In total,
457 fractions gave a positive dose response that justified
further dereplication work against corresponding, nonactive fractions
of the control strain using MSXelerator in order to find YAC-dependent
fractions active against BMV. Finally, 28 compounds were isolated
(≈10% hit rate based on the number of “clone hits”). Purification of Compounds for MS and NMR Characterization Yeast culture batches (4 L) were grown and extracted using the
same conditions as those described for 0.5 L batch preparation. The
reconstituted supernatant was injected in a preparative HPLC column
(XBridge C18, 19 × 250 mm, 5 μm, Waters). Mobile phases
used were A (0.1% TFA in water) and B (0.1% TFA in acetonitrile).
The separation of the target compounds was achieved by a gradient
from 1% B to 100% B in 27 min. The collected fractions were dried
in a Genevac HT12 evaporation system, and a final quality control
(QC) was completed in the LC-MS using the LC conditions described
above. All NMR experiments were
performed in DMSO- at 25 °C using
a Bruker Avance III 600 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a 1.7 mm
cryogenic TCI probe. The structures were solved by means of
standard homo- and heteronuclear multipulse NMR experiments, namely, H,H–COSY, H,H-ROESY, H,C-HSQC, H,C-HMBC,
and H,N-HMBC experiments. Calculation
of Physicochemical Properties http://www.molinspiration.com/cgi-bin/properties http://www.molinspiration.com/cgi-bin/properties http://www.organic-chemistry.org/prog/peo/ http://www.organic-chemistry.org/prog/peo/ Physicochemical
properties were calculated using web-based molinspiration (), OSIRIS Property Explorer (), and ChemAxon chemicalize () software. Shape and stereochemical complexity were calculated
using a custom script written in support vector language within the
MOE environment (CCG, Inc., ). Cores were
defined by removing exocyclic groups with more than one rotatable
bond. The drug-like compounds used for these calculations contained
a set of 870 compounds which were extracted as a subset from the DrugBank
database, selected on the basis of the criteria that molecular weight
was less than 500. Diversity Analysis
Using MACCS Keys MACCS key fingerprints
were generated for the SB compounds using the MOE software package
(CCG, Inc.). Cluster composition was then also calculated using the
Fingerprint Cluster method in MOE with a 0.85 similarity threshold
and Tanimoto similarity metric. The same methodology was applied to
the other fragment databases which were compared in the study. Construction of a randomized 20 000
compound set extracted from the Asinex Platinum screening library
was undertaken using a script written in support vector language within
the MOE operating system. The relevant sets of compounds were uploaded
to the ChemGPS-NP webserver. The maximum size of a submitted database
was 8000 compounds; therefore, the screening library compounds were
submitted as several jobs. The resulting flat result files were imported
into MOE databases before 3D graphs were generated in the same environment..