RNA–RNA interactions
drive key processes in biology, such as RNA interference, retroviral genome dimerization, CRISPR-Cas activation and targeting, and post-transcriptional regulation of RNA by
long noncoding RNAs. RNA is also increasingly
utilized as a programmable element for the control of gene expression
and cellular function within the field of synthetic biology. Riboregulators, Toehold switches, Small Transcription Activating RNAs (STARs), and other ribodevices exploit the hybridization
of a acting RNA with a target mRNA to control
gene expression at either the transcriptional or translational level.
Nevertheless, the toolkit for monitoring RNA–RNA hybridization
events as they occur in real time is limited, relying primarily on
fluorescent reporter proteins. However, this approach is indirect,
as the downstream measurements are subject to additional variables
related to translation, time delays related to fluorophore maturation,
and additional resource burdens on the system. Monitoring RNA–RNA
hybridization directly through an RNA-based system is therefore highly
desirable. RNA-based systems have small genetic footprints and they
offer improved temporal sensitivity, as signal amplification and decay
are governed by transcription, degradation and assembly rates of the
RNA. Furthermore, genetic circuits with a directly reportable output
driven by RNA–RNA hybridization may provide an alternative
detection strategy for cell-based or cell-free diagnostics based entirely
on transcription. Intracellular
RNA visualization strategies roughly fall into two
categories: those that are genetically encoded and those that rely
on chemically labeled probes. Genetically
encoded strategies allow for nondestructive analysis in real time,
unlike chemical probes that require exogenous introduction and may
thereby perturb the system. Several encoded systems for RNA visualization
have been developed that utilize RNA-protein interactions, such as
those found in the bacteriophages MS2 and PP7. RNA hairpin motifs
in these phage genomes serve as binding sites for phage coat proteins.
When these motifs are inserted into an RNA of interest they can recruit
coat proteins that have been fused to fluorescent reporter proteins,
allowing for indirect visualization of the RNA. However, these systems require the insertion of up to 24 copies
(∼1200 nucleotides) of the binding motif and the use of export
and localization signals to overcome diffuse fluorescence arising
from unbound fusion proteins. While some of the limitations of protein-based
RNA visualization approaches can be mitigated by fluorescence complementation
assays—which utilize split-fluorescent proteins that only fluoresce
when brought into proximity through paired RNA binding motifs—these
approaches still require proteins. Genetically encoded RNA aptamers
that bind and activate the fluorescence
of small molecule dyes have seen increasing use in monitoring RNA
directly without involving reporter proteins. Aptamers are single-stranded,
functional nucleic acids that fold into three-dimensional structures
to bind defined molecular targets. Several
RNA aptamers have been selected against small molecule dyes for which
fluorescence is activated upon binding and sequestration within the
aptamer. While the malachite green aptamer (MGA) was the first to demonstrate such fluorescence
activation, the recent selection of the Spinach aptamer, which binds to a freely diffusible and nontoxic
dye (DFHBI), has resulted in a surge of publications reporting its
use in a wide range of contexts, such as serving as the output for
engineered genetic circuits, as a tool to monitor
RNA transcription, and as a fluorescent sensor for
metabolites. Several improvements to the original
Spinach aptamer have been developed through directed evolution strategies, including the Broccoli aptamer, which was selected  for improved physiological properties. The utility of these aptamers was further expanded by the introduction
of DFHBI-1T, a brighter aptamer-activatable fluorophore compatible
with the Spinach family of aptamers and optimized for conventional
green fluorescence excitation and emission spectra used for GFP detection. Nonetheless, while several direct visualization
strategies for RNA exist, including those that operate exclusively
as RNA, none is designed specifically for visualization of RNA–RNA
interactions. We reasoned that RNA assembly processes could
be monitored directly
through the use of a split-aptamer system analogous to the split fluorescent
proteins that have been used extensively to monitor cosynthesis, colocalization,
and assembly of proteins. Split fluorescent aptamers could provide
similar information for RNA, as they would only generate signal upon
cosynthesis, colocalization, and hybridization of the component nucleic
acids to form the functional aptamer. Indeed, split versions of MGA and Spinach aptamers have been developed
for use . However, these systems have not
been directly observed to function when transcribed . The triphenylmethane dye that binds to MGA is toxic, therefore
limiting its use in living systems, and the Spinach aptamers are limited
by weak signal . Multimerization can increase
signal strength, but can also result in interference between the different
aptamer modules. Several approaches to multimerizing or splitting
functional nucleic acids utilize three-way junction (3WJ) architectures, which are replete throughout biology. Because the Broccoli aptamer exhibits improved physiological properties,
such as lowered dependence on magnesium and higher folding efficiency
at 37 °C, we reasoned that it would
serve as an ideal platform for an improved split-aptamer system. We
further reasoned that multimerization of the aptamer would overcome
potential issues of low signal and that a self-assembling and thermodynamically
stable RNA motif, such as a 3WJ, would allow for robust fluorescence
complementation. Here, we present the binary “Split-Broccoli”
system
as a stand-alone RNA logic gate and as a device for monitoring RNA–RNA
hybridization  and . The design–build–test cycle iterates from  design to  implementation
and finally to  functionality. The structure-based
strategy begins with an unsplit dimeric aptamer within a stabilizing
RNA architecture and continues with its bisection into a two-component
system. The system assembles reliably  when
purified components are thermally renatured, and the addition of transcription
terminator structures improves the “OFF” level of the
system. At physiological temperature,  assembly
approximately follows second-order kinetics but appears to be limited
by kinetic traps that prevent fast refolding into the functional hybrid.
However, when individual RNAs of the system are cotranscribed , fluorescence signal strength roughly approximates
the unsplit variant over a 4-h time course. The Split-Broccoli system
also assembles and activates fluorescence when expressed , whether as a stand-alone AND gate or as a tool to monitor
an RNA–RNA hybridization event that drives translation of a
red fluorescent protein. We anticipate that the Split-Broccoli system
is an enabling addition to the toolkit for RNA biologists. Designs
for Stabilized Broccoli Aptamers and the Split-Broccoli
System http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf The published monomeric and dimeric forms of the Broccoli
aptamer ( and ) served as starting points for engineering three dimeric forms of
Broccoli aptamer. First, while the Spinach
series of aptamers are typically embedded within
a tRNA scaffold to stabilize
folding and  accumulation, there are divergent
reports as to whether Broccoli’s fluorescence activation requires
transcription within a tRNA context. We therefore compared the performance of  to  without additional
sequence and also to the Spinach2 aptamer embedded within a tRNA scaffold (). Fluorescence from  was equivalent to that of , but  alone, without additional stabilizing
base pairs, yielded approximately 25% of signal relative to  (). This represents
an 8-fold reduction from the expected doubling, consistent with its
predicted suboptimal folding (). Alternative designs for stabilizing Broccoli dimer without greatly
increasing transcript size were guided by RNA secondary structure
predictions using the web-based NUPACK software suite. Adding 3 terminal G:C base pairs to the terminal
stem—but not 1 or 2 G:C base pairs or 3 pairs that included
A:U pairs—provided adequate stabilization to favor the expected
structure, but stabilization by a mixed 4 base pair stem (GAGG:CCTC)
exceeded that of the other designs. When this 4 base pair stem was
appended to  to form the 100-nucleotide
“stabilized dimeric Broccoli” ()
(), fluorescence was more than
2-fold enhanced relative to  ().  was therefore
used as a reference point for further engineering of the aptamers. The second dimeric Broccoli aptamer design exploits the 3WJ motif
derived from the packaging RNA (pRNA) component of the DNA packaging
motor from bacteriophage Φ29. This stable element is a proven
architecture for multimerization of functional nucleic acids and self-assembly from oligonucleotides. We therefore inserted Broccoli monomers into arms 2 and 3 of the
3WJ to form  (a). Because these arms extend in opposite
directions from the 3WJ structural core in crystal structures of the
Φ29 3WJ pRNA, this design is expected
to keep the monomer units spatially distant and to minimize intersubunit
misfolding or potential quenching that can arise from chromophore–chromophore
interactions. While the work reported here was under way, Filonov  reported a similar design (“”) utilizing the same 3WJ element from Φ29 pRNA, but
with Broccoli monomers inserted into arms 1 and 2. Our  design incorporates a single
nucleotide substitution (C → U) and conversion of a U:A base
pair to an A:U pair, as Filonov  observed that
these changes improved transcriptional yield of full-length RNA by
interrupting a poly uridine tract that may serve as a cryptic transcription
terminator. However, we also note that
these substitutions include an adenosine whose phosphate is implicated
in coordinating one of the core metal ions of the 3WJ, potentially affecting thermostability of the
motif. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf The third dimeric Broccoli aptamer
design bisects  after first inverting the monomer
in Arm 2 to ensure that neither
strand alone would contain the full sequence required to form a functional
aptamer. In addition, 8 or 12 base pairs were appended on the two
distal stems to favor complete hybridization of the two strands and
formation of the desired secondary structure (b). The two autonomous RNA strands of the
Split-Broccoli system are designated  and . Neither strand contains the full sequence required
to form a functional Broccoli monomer, and neither is predicted to
fold into a secondary structure that resembles a functional monomer
(). Engineering the Split-Broccoli
system in this manner, wherein fluorescence activation (output) is
only expected in the presence of both  and  strands (inputs), creates an AND gate capable of
performing and reporting on logical operations entirely as RNA (c). Design and NUPACK predicted secondary structures of  and . (a) Monomers of Broccoli aptamer
(green) were inserted into Arms 2 and 3 of the three-way junction
(3WJ) RNA motif (black) to create the unimolecular, unsplit three-way
junction dimeric Broccoli (). (b) Design of
the Split-Broccoli system required inversion of the Broccoli monomer
present in Arm 2 to ensure that neither  (yellow)
nor  (blue) strand alone contained the full
sequence required to independently form a fully functional monomer
of Broccoli (, :′).
Predicted hybridization of the two strands was strengthened with the
addition of terminal stems. (c) The Split-Broccoli system illustrated
as an RNA AND gate (left) and its corresponding truth table (right).
Output from the system should be true (1) only when both inputs are
also true. Assembles  to Reconstitute Fluorescence
Activation To evaluate performance
of the Split-Broccoli system, we compared two approaches for assembling  from purified  and  strands. In the first approach, equimolar amounts
of  and  were mixed and
incubated with dye in buffer, then unfolded at 90 °C and renatured
by slow cooling to 37 °C prior to measuring fluorescence. The
thermally renatured  exhibited approximately
82% of the signal relative to the unsplit, unimolecular , while neither  nor  strand
alone generated robust fluorescence signal (a). Fluorescence signal for the renatured  was 22-fold greater than  strand alone, which gave less than 4% of signal compared to . Additionally, the  design exhibited
higher signal when compared to , suggesting that
the 3WJ framework reinforces the productive fold better than the minimal
stem that stabilizes  (a). In the second approach, the two strands
were first refolded separately and then mixed at 37 °C without
renaturation to mimic a more biologically relevant assembly process.
Fluorescence signal for the complex was again strongly above background,
and little or no fluorescence was observed for either  or  strand alone (b). These patterns were clearly visible when
these samples were excited with a standard UV-light source (c). For this simple
mixing approach, fluorescence from the assembled complex was approximately
60% of the signal from unsplit  under the same
conditions and was roughly 15-fold over  strand
alone, which again generated ∼4% signal over the  background sample (b). The data from these two approaches show effective
reconstitution of aptamer function from the binary Split-Broccoli
system , with switch-like behavior that serves
as a two-input AND gate and fluorescence signal strength that is slightly
reduced relative to the unsplit  and roughly
equivalent to . assembly of
the Split-Broccoli system
in the absence and presence of transcription terminator structures.
Assembly of equimolar amounts of purified Split-Broccoli RNA components
( + ) demonstrate robust
function comparable to fluorescence of the stabilized dimeric Broccoli
() and , (a) when thermally
renatured or (b) when simply incubated together at physiological temperature.
Background signal from either  or  alone remains minimal for both assembly methods. (c) Fluorescence
of  and the Split-System ( + , thermally renatured) is easily observed
when excited with longwave ultraviolet light, whereas signal from  alone is only slightly discernible. When transcribed
with transcription terminator structures (denoted by appending ” to the names of the individual RNAs)
and assembled  (d, e), the Split-Broccoli
system exhibits a decrease in relative fluorescence, but demonstrates
a larger fold-change in fluorescence activation over either  or  alone. (f) Nondenaturing
gel electrophoresis and dual staining with ethidium bromide and DFHBI-1T
of the Split-Broccoli system with transcription terminator structures
suggests that decreased fluorescence of the system is a result of
incomplete hybridization between  and , rather than nonfunctional assembly. (g) Functional
assembly of  and  approximately
follows second-order kinetics ( = [Top][Bottom] = [Top], for equimolar
mixture). Mean values are shown with error bars to indicate standard
deviations ( = 5 for panels a, b, d, e;  = 4 for panel g). Transcription Terminator Structures Enhance Activation Ratio http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf The RNA species described above were generated by runoff transcription
of linear dsDNA templates. In contrast, bacterial Rho-independent
transcription termination utilizes a G:C rich, stem-loop structure
followed by a U-rich tract that promotes dissociation of the polymerase
from the DNA template. To characterize
the performance of  in a more biological
sequence context, T7 transcription terminator structures were appended
to both unsplit and split aptamer transcripts, denoted by appending
“-” to the names of the individual
RNAs. Neither  nor  was predicted to contain a Broccoli-like secondary structure (), whereas hybridization of these
two strands was predicted to form the two Broccoli domains flanking
the 3WJ motif (). Fluorescence
from thermally renatured  and  strands was 486-fold above signal for either strand alone, representing
switch-like, digital behavior for the Split-Broccoli system. In comparison
with runoff transcripts, this improvement in activation ratio can
be ascribed to the reduction in signal from  alone to background  levels, in spite of
a decrease in signal from the assembled complex relative to the unsplit  (∼43%, d). Fluorescence activation remained high (186-fold)
when the complex was assembled by incubating  and  strands at physiological temperature,
even though signal strength for the complex dropped to approximately
19% of the unimolecular  (e). Fluorescence signal strength
for unsplit  and  were
roughly equivalent under both conditions (), thus justifying comparison of relative fluorescence values
of terminated transcripts to runoff transcripts. Assembly  Approximately Follows Second-Order
Kinetics http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf To address
the molecular basis for limitations to the  assembly of  and  strands at physiological temperature, assembly of  was evaluated using a native gel stained with ethidium bromide,
to locate all molecular species, and stained with DFHBI-1T to identify
functionally assembled complexes. When
incubated at 37 °C, each individual strand of the Split-Broccoli
system migrated as a single nonfunctional band, and a new functional
band appeared when the two strands were assembled together (f, ). However, a substantial amount of input material remains
unassembled under these conditions, consistent with the observed decrease
in relative fluorescence for the annealed complex upon adding transcription
terminator structures (e). Annealing efficiency and fluorescence intensity of the
system improved when the system was thermally renatured. Although
each strand remained independently nonfunctional when renatured, a
second, non-functional isoform is evident for thermally renatured  that is not evident when  was incubated alone at 37 °C, indicating that the terminator
hairpins may be cross-annealing to form a dimer of . Together, these results suggest that incomplete, rather than nonfunctional,
assembly is responsible for the decrease in signal when purified components
of the system are incubated at 37 °C. Robust assembly  may thus be limited by kinetic folding traps within
one or both strands that prevent fast refolding into the functional
hybrid. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf In principle, RNA-based genetic control elements can
provide rapid responses  or  because signal development does not require translation. To better
understand assembly kinetics, we measured the rate of functional assembly
of  at physiological temperature.  and  strands were separately
folded, mixed with dye, and mixed with each other at equimolar concentrations.
Development of fluorescence signal was monitored as a function of
time (), and the rates were plotted
against input RNA concentrations.  assembly
approximately followed second-order kinetics (g). The exponent (1.73) falls slightly below
the expected value of 2.00, potentially as a consequence of competition
from internal structure within the individual strands, as suggested
by the native gel mobility shift assay described above. Cotranscriptional
Assembly of  Improves Signal http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf Gel purification of RNA under non-native
conditions can introduce conformational traps. In contrast, cotranscriptional folding  is a sequential process in which the RNA folds from the 5′
end as synthesis occurs. Furthermore, folding is concurrent with,
and can be influenced by, other RNA species that are present. Therefore,
to better characterize  the  potential of the Split-Broccoli system, we evaluated cotranscriptional
assembly by incubating equimolar amounts of linear dsDNA templates
corresponding to , , , or both  and  together, and assaying for function in transcription reaction conditions
optimized for time resolution (). The unimolecular  exhibited
measurable fluorescence within a few minutes of incubation, and  required approximately ten more minutes as
the two strands accumulated to a sufficient concentration to associate
with each other at a detectable level. Although the rate of signal
development for the unimolecular  is substantially
faster than  for the first 45 min,
the rates are approximately equal for both the unsplit and split aptamers
afterward. Additionally, when compared to  in
transcription conditions optimized for RNA production,  function is slightly improved and goes to completion, suggesting
that the inclusion of a 3WJ scaffold does not delay aptamer folding
(). Cotranscription of the split-aptamer
system reconstituted nearly all of the function of  (∼88%) and demonstrated a remarkable 124-fold increase in
signal relative to  strand alone after a
4-h reaction. Cotranscription of the Split-Broccoli system with terminator
structures therefore allows for robust functional assembly without
the requirement for additional  manipulations,
such as thermal renaturation or coincubation of independently transcribed
RNA that may be kinetically trapped in alternative, nonfunctional
structures. Cotranscriptional assembly of  with
transcription terminator structures improves signal relative to independently
transcribed and assembled RNA. When cotranscribed with equimolar amounts
of template DNA in a one-pot  transcription
reaction designed to maximize time resolution,  (, green) exhibits approximately
88% of the signal generated by the unimolecular, unsplit variant (, black) after a 4-h reaction. By the final time
point at 240 min, Split-Broccoli demonstrates a 124-fold increase
over either  (yellow) or  (blue) alone. Mean values are shown ( = 4) with
error bars to indicate standard deviations. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf To determine whether the Split-Broccoli system would function , we constructed expression plasmids for evaluation
in . Transcripts originate from the
constitutive P70a promoter and were terminated
with Rho-independent transcription terminators. Single-insert plasmids
direct the transcription of either  (pUC19-P70a-3WJdB-T),  (pUC19-P70a-Top-T) or  (pUC19-P70a-Bottom-T),
while a dual-insert plasmid (pUC19-P70a-Top-T∼P70a-Bottom-T)
directs transcription of  and , with a 270-nucleotide spacer (∼) between transcription units
to reduce topological tension arising from simultaneous transcription
(a and ). As a control, we also
included a variant of the dual-insert plasmid that was missing the
second P70a promoter upstream of  (pUC19-P70a-Top-T∼Bottom-T)
to ensure that signal generated by the dual-promoted Split-Broccoli
system is not a product of a single runon transcript folding onto
itself. Transformed bacteria were grown
to mid log phase and their fluorescence
was measured by flow cytometry (b,c). For the cell population containing the  insert, mean fluorescence intensity was shifted
approximately 25-fold (b) relative to pUC19 transformants alone. Importantly, transcribing
both  and  together
generated a notable shift (approximately 6-fold above background)
in mean fluorescence intensity. Fluorescence signal from populations
containing only  or  inserts exhibited background levels of signal equivalent to the
unmodified pUC19 plasmid containing no insert, representing a true
OFF state, as did populations transformed with a plasmid that lacked
the second promoter for transcribing , indicating
that transcription of  strand was effectively
terminated (b,c). These results were further confirmed with fluorescence microscopy
(d). The Split-Broccoli
system therefore acts as a stand-alone, all-RNA AND gate , with a true OFF state in the absence of both strands
and an ON state in their presence. The  system functions when expressed . (a) DNA templates corresponding to  (black),  (yellow),  (blue) were individually cloned into the pUC19 plasmid. A single
plasmid expressing both  and  was created (pUC19-P70a-Top-T∼P70a-Bottom-T), as was a control
plasmid for runon transcription which lacked a promoter immediately
upstream of  (pUC19-P70a-Top-T∼Bottom-T).
(b) A representative flow cytometry histogram of 5 × 10 events per population illustrates a shift in fluorescence for the
plasmid containing the Split-Broccoli expression plasmid (green).
Bacterial populations transformed with plasmids containing either  or  alone, or lacking a promoter
upstream of , demonstrate background levels
of fluorescence equivalent to the unmodified pUC19 plasmid control.
(c) Relative mean fluorescence intensities for flow cytometric analyses
of transformed populations, normalized to the pUC19 plasmid (set to
0) and  (set to 1), are shown with error bars
to indicate standard deviations ( ≥ 4). (d)
Fluorescence microscopy imaging further validates the  functionality of the Split-Broccoli system, as green fluorescence
is only observed for  transformed with
either the unimolecular  encoding plasmid
or bimolecular  encoding plasmid. Is Functionally Modular and
Can Be Used to Monitor RNA–RNA Assembly http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf RNA molecules assemble with each other to drive many processes
in biology. To evaluate whether the Split-Broccoli system could report
on such assembly events, we chose to monitor activation of an RNA
Toehold switch. Toehold switches are two-component RNA systems for
gene regulation in which a -acting RNA (“”) relieves translational repression from
a -acting hairpin structure (“”) that lies just upstream of a gene of interest. In the absence of a  RNA,
the  structure effectively sequesters ribosomal
access to the 5′ UTR. Base pairing of  to  relaxes the 5′ UTR hairpin structure,
thereby exposing the ribosome binding site and start codon to allow
for efficient translation initiation. We fused  with a well-characterized  that regulates
an mCherry reporter protein to generate  and we fused  with the corresponding  RNA to generate  (a,b), and then determined
fluorescence for bacteria carrying these constitutively expressing
plasmids. Red fluorescence for bacteria encoding  in the OFF state ( only) showed
minimal red fluorescence, potentially due to incomplete suppression
of translation by the Toehold (c, ). Both  alone and  alone exhibited less than
2% of green fluorescence of the functional  populations. Finally, when the complete Split-Broccoli system was
fused with the complete Toehold switch system and expressed as two
discrete transcripts ( + -), both green and red fluorescence
were activated in the cell population and observed with flow cytometry
(c, ) and fluorescence microscopy (d). Split-Broccoli is therefore
modular and can be used to monitor RNA–RNA interactions . An advantage of RNA-based fluorescent reporters over proteins
such
as GFP and mCherry is improved temporal sensitivity, as translation
and fluorophore maturation would not be required for function. To
investigate how quickly  could be observed
relative to a translated gene of interest, we utilized an  cell-free transcription and translation system
(TX-TL) with the Split-Broccoli Toehold
Switch plasmid ( + -). The TX-TL system is prepared from a crude  cytoplasmic extract and contains the endogenous
transcription and translation machinery, allowing for rapid  characterization of synthetic gene circuits with -like conditions. Green fluorescence from  was detectable in TX-TL almost immediately
and increased rapidly before peaking around 90 min (e). In contrast, red fluorescence
from  took approximately 45 min to detect
and slowly increased over the remaining time course. While the fluorophore
maturation time can be improved through the use of alternative fluorescent
proteins, the nearly instantaneous response of the Split-Broccoli
system demonstrates the speed at which an RNA-based reporter can act. In this application of the Split-Broccoli system, the RNA–RNA
hybridization event self-reports through green fluorescence of the
assembled aptamer, while translational activation of the downstream  gene is subsequently self-reported through red fluorescence.
Most proteins do not self-report their synthesis and are not so easily
monitored in real time. The  and  design can be readily adapted to those proteins
by replacing  with another gene of interest
for which translation is less readily monitored. The appearance of
green fluorescence upon induction of  could then be taken as visual evidence that the gene of interest
was being translated. Although we fused  to an RNA Toehold switch, alternative systems for regulating gene
expression could also be used, such as those regulated by Small Transcription
Activating RNAs (STARs). The hybridization
of an antisense STAR to its cognate sense RNA results in the formation
of an antiterminator structure that allows transcription of an mRNA
to continue. The Split-Broccoli system could therefore be used to
monitor the STAR hybridization event upstream of a gene of interest. Split-Broccoli is modular and can be used to monitor RNA–RNA
hybridization events . (a) A Split-Broccoli
Toehold Switch plasmid was constructed to include two constitutively
expressed transcription units. The first transcription unit encodes  (yellow) and  (gray) sequences
within the 5′ UTR of the  mRNA (red).
Translation of the  mRNA is suppressed
due to sequestration of the ribosome binding site (orange) and start
codon within the toehold structure (boxed). The second transcription
unit encodes  (gray) and  (blue) sequences, which can base pair with . (b) Hybridization of  with  allows fluorescence activation of the Split-Broccoli
system and translation of . (c) Green fluorescence
(left columns) and red fluorescence (right columns) from flow cytometric
analysis of populations show background levels of fluorescence for
plasmids encoding a single transcription unit only ( or ). , which transcribes the Split-Broccoli system, exhibits only green
fluorescence, while the Split-Broccoli Toehold Switch plasmid ( + ) exhibits
both red and green fluorescence, indicating both hybridization of
Split-Broccoli and translation of . Grand
mean fluorescence intensity ( = 4) is shown with
error bars to indicate standard deviations. (d) Fluorescence microscopy
imaging of  harboring the Split-Broccoli
Toehold Switch plasmid confirms hybridization of the Top and Bottom
components of  (green fluorescence)
and activation of  translation (red fluorescence).
(e) An  cell-free system (TX-TL) was
used to monitor transcription and translation of the Split-Broccoli
Toehold Switch plasmid and demonstrates the increased temporal sensitivity
of  (green fluorescence, left axis)
over  (red fluorescence, right axis). Mean
values ( = 3) are shown with error bars to indicate
standard deviations. The 3WJ RNA architecture is a robust platform
for dimerization
of the Broccoli aptamer and allows for a straightforward bisection
of aptamers into two-stranded systems that can restore function when
hybridized. We have shown that the Split-Broccoli system functions
when assembled from purified RNA , in both
the presence and absence of transcription terminator structures and
when thermally renatured or assembled at physiological temperature.  performance appeared to be limited by an incomplete
assembly process that was only partially restored through thermal
renaturation, suggesting a high kinetic barrier for refolding of the
RNA components into the hybridized complex. This barrier was inconsequential
if the components of the system were cotranscribed, allowing for the
more native RNA structures to hybridize efficiently and productively.
These findings motivated us to explore the use of the system . Although Split-Broccoli signal  was observable, it was not as robust as the unimolecular  construct. We speculate that this reduction in signal
could have arisen from instability of one or both of the strands against
degradative cellular forces, such as RNases, rather than kinetic barriers
to refolding. The decrease in relative signal could potentially be
remediated by transcribing the split aptamer system with highly structured
5′ ends, as the 3′ end terminator structures likely
offer some protection against nuclease activity targeting unstructured,
linear RNA. Furthermore, when the Split-Broccoli system was fused
to an RNA Toehold switch upstream of a fluorescent protein,  fluorescence was observed tens of minutes
before the fluorescent protein, demonstrating the speed and utility
of an RNA-based split fluorescent aptamer in monitoring an RNA–RNA
hybridization event. To the best of our knowledge, Split-Broccoli
is the first split-aptamer
system directly shown to function when transcribed  and is the first example of an  logic gate
with RNA inputs and a directly observable output composed of RNA.
We posit that Split-Broccoli, or an analogously composed system, can
be extended to detect RNA–RNA hybridization events nondestructively
in real time as an alternative to chemically synthesized probes and
without the requirement of a protein reporter. For RNA-based computation
strategies that require a measurable reporter in living systems, Split-Broccoli
may offer an approach that can operate without introducing an additional
time delay or resource burden required by translating traditional
protein-based reporters. Additionally, as transcription of the individual
strands of the Split-Broccoli system can be regulated by independent
transcription factors, the Split-Broccoli system can be used as an
AND gate , further expanding the functional
capabilities of RNA as a programmable and self-reporting molecule
for RNA–RNA assembly. Broccoli Designs and NUPACK
Analysis http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf Sequences for
the Spinach2 aptamer, Broccoli aptamer and the core domain of the
Φ29 pRNA 3WJ motif were used as previously published.,  and  designs, with
and without transcription terminators, were analyzed for predicted
structures with the NUPACK web application at default settings for
RNA at 37 °C. For  hybridization, the two input strands were constrained to a maximum
complex size of 2 and at a concentration of 1 μM each. For details
of DNA sequences refer to . DNA Templates and RNA Transcription http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf Oligonucleotides
for generating DNA templates were ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies
and ligated to generate PCR amplification templates. In short, oligonucleotides
corresponding to the left and right halves of each sequence, and a
reverse complement sequence bridging both halves, were designed. The
oligonucleotides corresponding to the right half of each sequence
were phosphorylated for ligation using T4 polynucleotide kinase (New
England Biolabs). All three oligonucleotides per complete sequence
were then incubated in equimolar amounts and annealed through a heat–cool
step prior to ligation with T4 DNA ligase (New England Biolabs). Ligated
oligonucleotides were PCR amplified with Pfu DNA polymerase, a forward
primer to add the 5′ XbaI restriction site and T7 promoter,
and a reverse primer to append the T7 terminator and 3′ XmaI
restriction site. Amplification products were cloned into the pUC19
plasmid and inserts were confirmed through sequencing. Plasmids encoding
the T7 RNA polymerase promoted templates were deposited to Addgene
(IDs 87307–87310). For details of DNA sequences refer to . Transcription templates
were generated by PCR amplification of sequence-verified plasmids.
The pET28c-Spinach2 plasmid (a gift from Samie Jaffrey) was used for
PCR amplification and transcription of .
Runoff transcription reactions were performed using T7 RNA polymerase,  transcription buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 15
mM MgCl, 5 mM DTT, and 2 mM spermidine), and 2 mM of each
ATP, CTP, GTP and UTP. Reactions were incubated at 37 °C for
a minimum of 4 h and halted with the addition of 2× RNA loading
buffer (95% formamide and 5 mM EDTA, with trace amounts of Xylene
Cyanol FF and Bromophenol Blue). RNAs were purified through denaturing
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (0.75 mm 6% TBE-PAGE, 8 M urea)
and bands corresponding to the expected product size were gel extracted
and eluted while tumbling overnight in 300 mM Sodium Acetate pH 5.4.
Eluates were ethanol precipitated, resuspended in buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl
pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA), and stored at −20 °C until further
use. RNA concentrations were determined on a NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer
(Thermo Scientific). Assembly and Fluorescence
Assays assembly reactions were
prepared on ice
with 25 picomoles of each RNA and 250 picomoles of DFHBI-1T dye (Lucerna
Technologies) in buffer (40 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl) at a final volume of 50 μL. For thermal renaturation,
samples were transferred into a preheated aluminum insert within a
dry heat block set to 90 °C. Following addition of samples, the
aluminum insert was immediately removed from the block heater and
placed on the lab bench to cool to 37 °C before measurement.
Assembly at 37 °C was performed by placing samples in a dry heat
block at 37 °C for 15 min before measurement. Samples were then
transferred into a clear, flat-bottom 96-well plate and measured for
fluorescence (λ = 472 nm, λ =
507 nm) on an EnSpire Mulitmode plate reader (PerkinElmer) at room
temperature. Measurements from  samples, which
contained buffer and dye, were averaged to establish background signal.
Background signal was subtracted from all measurements and individual
readings were normalized for fluorescence relative to . Normalized values were used to calculate mean and standard deviation. Dual Staining Native Gel Shift Assay Ten picomoles
of each purified RNA (, , ) were incubated at 37 °C for 15 min
before being loaded onto a 0.75 mm 6% native TBE polyacrylamide gel
in a final volume of 25 μL with 20% glycerol. Approximately
1 h after electrophoresis at 20 W in 4 °C, the gel was stained
according to an in-gel imaging protocol. In brief, the gel was stained with 5 μM of DFHBI-1T at RT
for 15 min and then imaged using a Typhoon FLA 9000 (GE Healthcare)
with Alexa Fluor 488 settings (473 nm laser excitation, Y520 emission
filter). A destaining step was then performed on the gel with 2 washes
in ultrapure Milli-Q water (EMD Millipore) for 5 min each, followed
by a 5 min incubation in ethidium bromide at 0.5 μg/mL. The
gel was then reimaged on a Typhoon FLA 9000 (GE Healthcare) using
the ethidum bromide setting (532 nm laser excitation, O580 emission
filter). Densitometry analysis was performed in Fiji. Following a slight linear contrast adjustment, the intensity
value of each band was estimated. The hybridization yield for the
annealed complex was calculated according to the following formula:
[(annealed complex)/(free  + free  + annealed complex)]. Split-Broccoli Assembly Kinetics Purified samples of  and  RNA at various concentrations
(0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3, 0.35, 0.4, 0.45, 0.5, and 0.6
μM) were independently prepared on ice, in buffer (40 mM HEPES
pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl) containing DFHBI-1T at
4 μM. Samples were aliquoted into a clear, flat-bottom 96-well
plate and preincubated at 37 °C for 15 min. Assembly was initiated
by using a multichannel pipet to transfer 50 μL of  samples into 50 μL of  samples at
equimolar concentrations. Fluorescence measurements (λ = 485/25 nm, λ = 535/25 nm) were taken on an
Infinite F200 Pro plate reader (Tecan) every 10 s for 3600 s. The
linear region between 500 and 1000 s was used to fit a line and determine
the slope (, change in fluorescence as a function
of time). Slope values from replicate experiments were averaged and
then plotted against their concentration to obtain a value for the
rate of assembly. Cotranscription Fluorescence Assay http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf Cotranscription
assays were performed with PCR amplification products purified through
agarose gel electrophoresis (GeneJET Gel Extraction Kit, Thermo Scientific)
to isolate bands corresponding to the desired DNA template size. Templates
were quantified on a NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific).
To ensure equivalent transcriptional burden on the RNA polymerase
across samples, each sample contained a total of 10 picomoles of T7-promoted
template DNA. For ,  alone and  alone, 5 picomoles of each DNA
template was added to 5 picomoles of DNA template for an unrelated
RNA aptamer (80N 433min2) with no observed fluorescence activation
of DFHBI-1T. Split-Broccoli sample was composed of 5 picomoles of
each  and  DNA templates,
while background sample contained 10 picomoles of the 80N 433min2
control aptamer template. Samples were incubated with 2.5 nanomoles
of each nucleotide triphosphate (ATP, CTP, GTP, UTP), 1 unit of inorganic
pyrophosphatase (New England Biolabs), 1 nanomole of DFHBI-1T, and
40 U of T7 RNA polymerase with its supplied buffer (New England Biolabs)
in a total volume of 50 μL. Samples were prepared and kept on
ice until transfer to a flat-bottom 384-well plate and measurement
on a Synergy HT plate reader (BioTek) prewarmed to 37 °C. Plate
reader was configured to take readings at 1 min intervals over a period
of 4 h (λ = 485/20 nm, λ = 528/20
nm). For Supporting Information , samples volumes were reduced to 20 μL and T7 polymerase was
used at 100 U, while all other amounts remained the same. Background
measurement values at each time point were subtracted from sample
values before calculating mean and standard deviation. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf Expression plasmids
for  assays were constructed to contain constitutive  P70a promoters and either a T7 transcription terminator or a derivative of the
T500 transcription terminator from bacteriophage Φ82. Plasmids for the single insert corresponding
to , , and  were cloned using standard restriction digest cloning to insert
the sequence between the XbaI and XmaI sites in the pUC19 plasmid
and were terminated with the T7 terminator. Dual expression plasmids
contained the T7 terminator immediately downstream of  and the T500 terminator derivative immediately downstream of . DNA assembly (NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly, New England
Biolabs) was used to insert the two inserts, along with a 270-nucleotide
spacer sequence, between the NdeI and HindIII sites of the pUC19 plasmid.
All plasmid inserts were confirmed through sequencing. Plasmids for  transcription by native  RNA polymerase were deposited to Addgene (IDs 87311–87315).
For details of DNA sequences refer to . The protocol for  assessment in  was adapted from the
Spinach and Broccoli publications. In short,
100 ng of each plasmid was transformed into  BL21(DE3) competent cells using a standard heat shock transformation
protocol. Cells were plated on 2xYT-agar plates containing 100 μg/mL
of ampicillin and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Single colonies
from each plate were cultured overnight (∼16 h) at 37 °C
with 250 rpm shaking in 3 mL of 2xYT broth containing 100 μg/mL
of ampicillin. Following overnight culture, 100 μL of samples
were added to 2.9 mL of fresh liquid media until reaching OD = 0.4, at which point 500 μL of sample was pelleted at 2000
RCF and resuspended in 1 mL Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline
(DPBS) with calcium and magnesium (Thermo Fisher). 200 μL aliquots
were then incubated with 200 μM DFHBI-1T at 37 °C for 45
min prior to assessment on an Accuri C6 flow cytometer (BD Biosciences)
configured with a 488 nm excitation laser and 533/30 nm filter. For
each population, 5 × 10 events were analyzed and
processed using FlowJo software. Samples for fluorescence microscopy
were prepared as described
above. Following the centrifugation of freshly diluted overnight culture,
samples were resuspended in 200 μL of DPBS and plated on poly--lysine-coated 8-chamber glass chamber slides (Lab-Tek). After
a 45 min incubation at 37 °C, cells were washed twice in DPBS
and incubated with 200 μM DFHBI-1T in DPBS for an additional
45 min. Fluorescence images were obtained at 100× oil objective
magnification using QCapture Suite Plus software and Rolera-XR camera
(QImaging) mounted on an Olympus 1 × 70 inverted fluorescent
microscope. Green fluorescence (λ = 470/40 nm,
λ = 525/50, 33 ms exposure) and bright field images
were captured and exported into Fiji for
linear adjustment of the brightness and contrast. Split-Broccoli
Toehold Switch Assays Toehold (TS2_KS01)
and Trigger (TS2_AT01) RNA sequences were used as published. Inserts for  and  were synthesized as gBlocks
gene fragments from Integrated DNA Technologies and cloned into pUC19
between the XbaI and XmaI restriction sites. For the dual-insert plasmid
containing  and  (“Split-Broccoli Toehold Switch”), the pUC19-Trigger-Bottom
plasmid was linearized with NdeI and the insert for  was inserted using Gibson assembly. Each transcription unit contained
a constitutive  P70a promoter and a T7 transcription terminator.  analysis was performed as described above for  fluorescence, with additional detection for red
fluorescence using a 670 nm low-pass filter. For each population,
5 × 10 events were analyzed and processed using FlowJo
software. Fluorescence microscopy was performed as described for , with the
addition of a red fluorescence filter set (λ =
562/40 nm, λ = 624/40, 100 ms exposure). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00059/suppl_file/sb7b00059_si_001.pdf TX-TL transcription and translation reactions (a gift of Julius B.
Lucks) were prepared and performed as described. In short,  cytoplasmic extract,
reaction buffer with metabolites and 20 μM DFHBI-1T were added
to either 8 nM plasmid or HO (blank) on ice, in a total
volume of 10 μL. Samples were immediately transferred to a flat-bottom
384-well plate and measured on a Synergy H1 plate reader (BioTek)
configured with filter sets for green fluorescence (λ = 472, λ = 507) and red fluorescence (λ = 587, λ = 615 nm). Readings were taken
at 3 min intervals over the course of 12 h. Average blank values at
each time point were subtracted from sample values before calculating
mean and standard deviation. Plasmids and their sequences were deposited
to Addgene (IDs 87314, 87316–87318). For details of DNA sequences
refer to ..