Microbial natural products represent
a valuable chemical reservoir of life-saving medicines and biological
probes that have greatly impacted the quality of human health and
our fundamental knowledge of the life sciences. Due to high rediscovery rates, traditional activity-guided
screening is no longer an effective approach for the discovery of
new natural product chemical scaffolds. The immense biosynthetic potential of microbes as revealed by modern
genome sequencing efforts, however, confirms the continuing importance
of utilizing bacteria as a source of new molecules and scaffolds. Indeed, sequencing projects are not only uncovering the extended
capacity of well recognized secondary metabolite producers, such as
terrestrial actinobacteria but also revealing
new bacterial families with substantial encoded biosynthetic capacity. For example, marine actinobacteria have now been
recognized as an abundant source of novel bioactive compounds yielding
promising anticancer agents such as salinosporamide A (from the genus ), antibiotics such
as taromycin (from the genus ), and other drug leads. These observations suggest investigation of the encoded biosynthetic
potential of diverse marine bacteria, including proteobacteria, could
be very fruitful and ultimately yield unique clinically applicable
natural products. is a genus
of marine γ-proteobacteria
found in seawater, marine sediments and epiphytically associated
with marine invertebrates. Pseudoalteromonads play a role in biofilm
formation and influence settlement, germination and metamorphosis
of various marine invertebrate and algal species. In recent years, the genus has
been identified, through bioactivity chemical profiling, as a promising
source of chemically diverse molecules, including antifouling, antibacterial,
antifungal, and cytotoxic agents. The most thoroughly
studied  metabolite is thiomarinol
A, a very promising antibiotic with broad spectrum activity. Sequencing
of the responsible gene cluster has revealed a large hybrid pathway
containing fatty acid, polyketide, and nonribosomal peptide synthesis
genes. In light of the genome sequencing
results observed for other microbes,
it is very likely that the number of pathways encoded within  genomes will dwarf the number of molecules
identified to date. To probe the chemical capacity of this promising
genus, we undertook an analysis of 47 publically available  genome sequences using the antiSMASH web-based
bioinformatics tool for predicting secondary metabolite pathways. We found that this genus encodes biosynthetic
genes for many different classes of molecules, including peptides
of both ribosomal and nonribosomal origin, indole derivatives, siderophores,
polyketides, homoserine lactones, and hybrid molecules (see  Table S1). Representatives
of many of these chemical classes have been characterized, as have diketopiperazines and polybrominated pyrroles and phenols that arise from biosynthetic pathways challenging to predict
using current algorithms. The most prolific  strains contain upward of 20 biosynthetic gene clusters; however,
few strains have more than a couple of characterized metabolites,
indicating that the chemical bounty of the genus largely remains to
be uncovered. To fully realize the considerable biosynthetic potential
of these microorganisms, genetic and synthetic biology tools for manipulation
and reactivation of their genetically encoded biosynthetic pathways
in a host organism must be developed. Traditional approaches
for the capture and manipulation of natural
product biosynthetic gene clusters utilize large, randomized genomic
libraries and therefore require extensive screening to identify positive
clones. Biosynthetic pathways can reach 100 kb in size; however, because
cosmid and fosmid library inserts are restricted to around 40 kb,
large pathways cannot be captured in their entirety as a single clone
and further manipulations are frequently necessary to assemble a complete
gene cluster from multiple cosmids. Transformation-associated
recombination (TAR) is an alternative, PCR-independent method that
utilizes homologous recombination in yeast () for the direct capture of specific genomic DNA
fragments in a selective manner. A specific
TAR capture/expression vector can be assembled with sequence information
for the target region of genomic DNA, facilitating the  interrogation of function for captured genes. In a previous
publication, we reported a TAR-based approach in which a silent 67-kb
biosynthetic pathway was captured from the genomic DNA of a marine
actinomycete and genetically activated, thus facilitating heterologous
expression and the discovery of the novel antibiotic taromycin A. TAR represents a paradigm shift in the study
of microbial natural products, enabling straightforward and specific
capture of target biosynthetic pathways, without the size limitations
or inconveniences associated with generating and screening genomic
libraries. Herein, we expand our current TAR capability to include
the facile
capture of pseudoalteromonad genomic loci utilizing the versatile
host organism (,) to enable genetic manipulation and direct heterologous expression
of pathways in a simple and expedited manner.  was chosen because it has a similar GC content, is fast growing,
has extensive tools available for its genetic manipulation, and has
a limited secondary metabolite profile, generating a “clean”
background for gene expression. We chose to capture and express
the putative biosynthetic pathway
for a group of lipopeptides exemplified by bromoalterochromide A () (Figure ). Produced by multiple species
of  bacteria, including  JCM 20779, the “alterochromides”
possess unusual chemical structural features, such as a brominated
lipid moiety, in addition to their antibacterial and cytotoxic properties.
Structures of the different peptides within the alterochromide family
vary by the length of the lipid moiety (C-15 or C-17), identity of
the amino acid at position 5 (isoleucine, leucine, or valine), and
by degree of halogenation on the phenolic residue (zero, one or two
bromine atoms). The 14 open reading frames (ORFs) of the 34-kb alterochromide
() gene locus are all aligned in a single direction,
and  and  form overlapping
regions encompassing 6 kb and 25 kb, respectively. The gene cluster
encodes nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS), fatty acid synthase
(FAS), flavin-dependent halogenase, and
transporter proteins. The TAR-based capture
of the alterochromide gene cluster directly
from  gDNA is summarized in Scheme . Briefly, 1-kb regions located outside the boundary
of the gene cluster were amplified, assembled, and cloned into the
TAR vector pCAP01 to generate the alterochromide
specific capture vector pACR01.  VL6–48 spheroplasts were transformed with linearized pACR01
and enzyme-digested  JCM 20779 gDNA.
Positive clones containing the captured  gene
cluster were identified and confirmed to give pACR02. With the full biosynthetic pathway for the alterochromide molecules
captured, direct expression from the TAR vector was attempted in  using the native promoters associated with the  locus. The 34-kb  locus is, to the
best of our knowledge, larger than any other derived or NRPS-containing pathway that has been successfully expressed
as a single construct in . As the last gene in the 14-ORF  biosynthetic gene cluster encodes a halogenase (), complete transcription of the pathway should result in heterologous
production of the halogenated molecule bromoalterochromide A (), in addition to the des-halo . Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea Thiolation
domains within an NRPS must be functionalized with a
phosphopantetheinyl carrier arm; however,
no phosphopantetheinyl transferase (PPTase) gene, responsible for
this modification, was identified in the neighborhood of the  gene cluster. To ensure effective production of the
alterochromide molecules in the  heterologous
host, we utilized a functionally established PPTase from the related
strain  2ta16. The gene-encoded PPTase was cloned into pACYCDuet-1 to generate
pACR10, and coexpression with pACR02 was undertaken in  BL21 (DE3) using media supplemented with KBr. Upon analysis of organic culture-extracts by liquid chromatography
coupled mass spectrometry (LCMS) (Figure a)
and metabolic comparison by MS networking against natural alterochromides from  ( Figures S1 and
S2), we confirmed production of bromoalterochromide A () as the major heterologously expressed alterochromide. Analysis
of the MS data further identified alterochromides  and . Trace amounts of alterochromide  were detected
when pACR02 was expressed in the absence of pACR10 and the auxiliary
PPTase. These results confirmed the successful reconstitution of the
full alterochromide biosynthetic pathway in  using the native  promoter sequences. While we are able to heterologously produce several alterochromide
molecules using pACR02, the level of production compared to the  native producer was greatly reduced by
over 60-fold (Figure a). In an attempt to
boost production in  we chose to incorporate
a T7 promoter directly in front of the 14-ORF  pathway. Several other (,) and NRPS biosynthetic pathways have been heterologously expressed
in  previously under the control of a single
non-native inducible promoter (T7, P, or P), with larger pathways spread across multiple expression vectors. Although  promoters are poorly
recognized due to a lack of current information, inspection of the  gene cluster suggested it may potentially be transcribed
as a single operon since all genes are oriented in the same direction
and with considerable overlap. This organization suggested a promoter
exchange in front of the pathway could have a powerful effect on the
production levels of the alterochromide molecules as seen in the case
of violacein and 3-formyl tyrosine metabolites. We applied a λ-red recombination strategy to transfer the
full  gene cluster from pACR02 into the first
cloning site of the commercial vector pETDuet-1 and introduced the  2ta16 PPTase gene into the second cloning
site to generate pACR07 in which both cloning sites are under direct
control of an upstream T7 promoter (Figure ). Expression was undertaken in  BL21 (DE3)
using growth media supplemented with KBr. To our delight, a large
number of alterochromide molecules were detected and in significantly
higher amounts than in our previous  expression,
correlating to a 20-fold improvement in production of bromoalterochromide
A () (Figure a). With the successful capture
and heterologous expression of the  pathway in , we were provided
the opportunity to interrogate the biosynthesis of alterochromide’s
unusual lipid side chain (Scheme ). Based
on the  gene cluster, we propose that the unsaturated
fatty acid chain originates from a tyrosine-derived coumaric acid
residue by the action of the AltA tyrosine ammonia lyase (TAL). Moreover, the bromine atom in  is likely attached to the coumarate-derived residue by the flavin-dependent
halogenase AltN in conjunction with a non pathway-specific flavin reductase, yet the exact timing of the bromination reaction was not evident
from the DNA sequence. The  locus also contains
genes encoding a nearly complete fatty acid biosynthetic pathway,
missing only an enoyl reductase enzyme (FabI), which perfectly correlates
with alterochromide’s unsaturated lipid chain. To explore the biosynthetic pathway to the alterochromide
lipid,
we employed a λ-red recombination approach analogous to that
used for the transfer of the full cluster from pACR02 to ultimately create pACR07. Two new pETDuet-1 based expression vectors were generated in which
either the TAL-encoding  gene (pACR08) or the brominase-encoding  gene (pACR09) were removed upon transfer. Following heterologous
expression in  BL21 (DE3), organic extracts
from the mutants were similarly analyzed using LCMS and molecular
networking (Figure b and  Figures S2 and S3). As expected,
the  deficient mutant lost the
ability to produce alterochromide molecules, which was consistent
with the proposed biosynthetic scheme in which the AltA enzymatic
product coumaric acid primes the synthesis of the lipid side chain
and ultimately the entire molecule. We were able to restore alterochromide
production in the  mutant through chemical complementation
with supplemental coumaric acid. By contrast, deletion of the halogenase gene  abolished production of just the halogenated molecules,
while the nonhalogenated alterochromides , , , and  were produced. We observed
a similar result with the expression of pACR07 in the absence of supplemental
bromide, in which we measured the des-halo alterochromide molecules , , ,, and , along with trace amounts of bromoalterochromide B () that may arise from very low levels of bromide in some
of the media ingredients. Although chloride was abundant in the medium,
we did not observe any chlorinated alterochromide products, suggesting
that the AltN halogenase is specific for bromide.  efforts to elucidate the biosynthetic mechanisms responsible for
producing the alterochromides are ongoing and further  experiments are underway to investigate several enzymatic reactions
within the biosynthesis of these unusual lipopeptides, including the
exact timing of the halogenation reaction. In conclusion, the
development of a TAR-based genetic platform
for the interrogation of the encoded biosynthetic potential of the
γ-proteobacterium  has-enabled
the heterologous expression and functional investigation of the gene
cluster responsible for production of the alterochromide lipopeptides.
This technology builds upon recent advances in the applications of
TAR and features a simple and easy to use refactoring/expression approach
based in the common host organism . By demonstrating
that  is suitable for direct expression of  genes, this work leads the way for the
facile exploration of the chemistry and biochemistry of this promising
marine genus. To this end, efforts are actively underway to develop
a high throughput TAR capture method to clone and express pathways
in a broad range of host organisms. Supporting
Information Figure S4 (a) Biosynthetic gene cluster for the alterochomide family
of natural
products in  JCM 20779. (b) Structures of alterochromide A-like molecules
(–) and the alterochromide B-like molecules (–)
isolated from  differ in the
length of the lipid chain and display variable halogenation patterns
highlighted in red. Note six further analogues are simultaneously
produced in which the -alloisoleucine residue shown in blue
is replaced by -leucine. These molecules are denoted as
alterochromide A′ (), bromoalterochromide A′ (), etc.,
and dibromoalterochromide B′ (). Finally, the -alloisoleucine
residue shown in blue is also replaced by valine in molecules named
following the established nomenclature alterochromide A″ (),
bromoalterochromide A″ (), alterochromide B″ (),
and bromoalterochromide B″ (). See  for a complete display of all structures
1–16. Abbreviations: FAS, fatty acid synthase; NRPS, nonribosomal peptide synthetase. General
Strategy for the Capture and Expression of Biosynthetic Genomic
Loci from  Exemplified by the Alterochromide
Pathway Step one utilizes a TAR cloning
approach of homologous recombination in yeast between enzymatically
digested genomic DNA and a pathway specific capture vector. Step two
introduces the pathway of interest held within the capture vector
into . The expression of the pathway can be
attempted directly, perhaps with the assistance of auxiliary genes
maintained in a complementary plasmid or integrated into the chromosome
of . Step three involves additional genetic
manipulation of the pathway in  before expression
is attempted. Mass spectral molecular networking can be used for comparison
of metabolites from the expression systems versus the wild-type producer
and is extremely useful for identifying new compounds in addition
to confirming production of known molecules. (a) LCMS
UV trace showing comparative production levels of alterochromide
molecules in the native producer  JCM
20779 and two  heterologous expression constructs
(pACR07 and pACR02/pACR10) alongside empty vectors. Bromoalterochromide
A ()/bromoalterochromide A′ () are detected in all three,
albeit at levels 3-fold and 60-fold less than the native producer
for the expression in  with pACR07 and pACR02/pACR10
respectively. (b) LCMS UV trace showing alterochromide metabolite
profiles for gene inactivation mutants of alterochromide pathway (Δ or Δ) and feeding experiments
(Δ, Δ, pACR07/KBr, or pACR07/without KBr), relative production
levels not to scale. Note: peaks labeled with an asterisk are other
alterochromide compounds. Vector map of pACR07,  is arrayed behind
a T7 promoter in the first cloning site of pETDuet-1, and the PPTase
from  is contained in the second
cloning site. Proposed
Biosynthetic Steps for the Production of the Alterochromide
Lipopeptides by the  Gene Cluster in  JCM 20779 Compounds 1 and 2 are used
as an example; however, all molecules in the family are proposed to
arise from the same pathway. This can occur through differential halogenation
by AltN, passage of the growing lipid through an additional round
of fatty acid biosynthesis to give “B” molecules (–)
and incorporation of leucine or valine by the 5th NRPS module to give
the A′ and B′ (–) and A″ and B″
(–) molecules respectively. Abbreviations: C, condensation
domain; A, adenylation domain; T, thiolation domain; E, epimerization
domain; TE, thioesterase domain; ACP, acyl carrier protein. Construction
of pACR01 and TAR Capture of Alterochromide Cluster
to Generate pACR02 For capture of the genomic region encompassing
the alterochromide gene cluster pACR01 was constructed using pCAP01. Two regions of approximately 1 kb each, flanking
the cluster, were amplified by PCR using the following primer sets. The resultant
PCR products were assembled by a second PCR reaction
using primers TARBFP and TARBRP. The PCR product was digested with
I and I and then cloned into pCAP01 to yield pACR01. The resultant
alterochromide specific capture vector (pACR01) was linearized with HI and then used in TAR transformation with enzymatically
(I/I) digested  JCM 20779 gDNA,
following a detailed procedure described previously, to generate pACR02 containing the full cluster. 5′-TGC ATC AAC TAC GAT ATC GAC
GCG CTT-3′ 5′-TCT CTC AGT TTT GGA CAA AGC
GCA CAG-3′ 5′-CCA AAA CTG AGA GAA TGT CGC CAA TGC-3′ 5′-CGA GTC
AGC TAT GGG CAG GGC TTA ATG-3′ Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea Vector was assembled from pETDuet-1
and the PCR amplified PPTase from  2ta16 using primers FP2ta16ppt and RP2ta16ppt. After
restriction digestion with I/I, the
PPTase was cloned into MCS2 of the linearized pETDuet-1. 5′-CAG  ACT CAG CAC CTT TCA ATA CC-3′ () 5′-CAG GGT ACC TTA ACG GCT-3′ () Construction
of pACR04, pACR05, and pACR06 Expression
and gene inactivation vectors for the alterochomide pathway were constructed
from pACR03. For each expression construct, two regions (each approximately
1 kb in size) flanking the alterochromide cluster were amplified from  JCM 20779 gDNA by PCR using the following primer
sets. The first
region for each construct was designed such that the
first gene in the cluster was aligned with the T7 promoter region
and MCS1 start codon of pACR03. The resultant PCR products were assembled
by a second PCR reaction using Primers 1 and 4 from each set. PCR
products were digested with I and dIII (or HI) and then cloned into the pACR03 MCS1 to yield pACR04,
pACR05, and pACR06. 5′-ATA TAT TAC CAG TAC AAC ACA GAA AAG GAA GCA ATTC-3′
() 5′-GAC TAA CGC GTG ATG CCC ACA TCT CAG
CAT CAAT-3′() 5′-GGG CAT CAC GCG TTA GTC GCA
CGC AAT TACC-3′() 5′-CGC ACG CCA CGC CAT TTC AGG GTT GTTAT-3′() 5′-ATA TAT TGT AGC TTA
GAA TCA ATA ACA CAA TTT ATT AAA CAA GAC
ATC ATT GTA-3′() 5′-CGA CTA ACG CTG TCA GCA AAG GTG ACG GCTT-3′() 5′-TTG CTG ACA  GCG TTA GTC GCA CGC AAT TACC-3′() 5′-CGC
ACG CTC ACG CCA TTT CAG GGT TGT TATGG-3′() 5′-ATA TAT TAC CAG TAC AAC ACA
GAA AAG GAA GCA ATTC-3′() 5′-GCA TTT AGC  GTG ATG CCC ACA TCT CAG CAT CAAT-3′() 5′-TGG GCA TCA
CGC TAA ATG CAC ACT CAG GCG ATG-3′() 5′-CGC ACG CGG AGC TCC
CTT TAA TGC CTC ACTC-3′() Lambda Red Transfer of Gene Cluster to Generate
pACR07, pACR08,
and pACR09 (Whole Cluster and Δ and Δ) The resultant alterochromide pathway-specific
capture vectors (pACR04, pACR05, and pACR06) were linearized with
I and then transformed into  BW25113 containing
pACR02 and pIJ790 to complete λ-red recombination to transfer
the gene cluster directly into MCS1. Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea Assembled from pACYCDuet-1 and
the PCR amplified PPTase from  2ta16 using primers FP2ta16ppt and RP2ta16ppt2. After restriction
digestion with I/I, the PPTase was cloned into MCS2 of the linearized
pACYCDuet-1. 5′-CAG  ACT CAG CAC CTT TCA ATACC-3′ () 5′-CAG  GGT ACC TTA ACG GCT-3′ () Analysis of Alterochromide
Production by  JCM 20779 To
analyze the production of alterochromide molecules,  JCM 20779 was cultivated with shaking at 28
°C for 2 days in Difco 2216 marine broth (50 mL) supplemented
with KBr (1 g/L). The entire culture was then extracted with ethyl
acetate (3 × 100 mL), the organic layers were combined and dried
over anhydrous MgSO. Solvent was removed  and the residue redissolved in methanol and analyzed by LC-MS/MS
as follows. A sample was injected onto a reversed phase C column (Phenomenex luna, 5 μm, 4.6 × 100 mm), operating
on an Agilent 1260 HPLC (with UV monitoring at 390 nm) in tandem to
an Agilent 6530 Accurate Mass Q-TOF mass spectrometer (positive mode)
with a 0.1% formic acid (A)/0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B) solvent
system. The HPLC method was (flow rate of 0.7 mL/min): 10% B for 2
min, linear gradient to 100% B over 8 min, hold 100% B for 2 min,
and linear gradient back to 10% B over 1 min. All the mass spectrometry
data and MS/MS of identified spectra for this work has been uploaded
into GNPS (MassIVE ID# MSV000078784). Note: As much as possible,
compounds were protected from light throughout all growth, extraction,
and purification steps. Heterologous Expression of Alterochromides
in All heterologous expression was
carried out using  BL21(DE3) grown in Luria
Broth (LB) with appropriate
antibiotics (and with or without KBr 1 g/L) added. Bacteria were grown
and extracted under identical conditions (except growth medium) to
those used for  JCM 20779..