RNA devices designed to regulate gene expression
in response to
various chemical stimuli are a promising class of genetic devices
for interfacing synthetic circuits with practical chemical information. A widely adopted strategy to engineer RNA gene regulatory devices
exploits a self-cleaving ribozyme fused to an RNA aptamer (i.e., aptazyme)
that serves as a chemical sensor. With a suitable connection between
the ribozyme and the aptamer, the ribozyme activity can be allosterically
regulated by the aptamer ligand. These aptazymes can be integrated
into various genetic and biological contexts to facilitate chemical
gene regulation in , yeast, and mammalian cells. However, the majority of the aptazymes that
have been used to control
gene expression in living cells have focused on a single class of
self-cleaving ribozyme, namely, the hammerhead ribozyme. While the
hammerhead ribozymes have been successfully exploited in many RNA
devices, the regulatory dynamic ranges of these devices are often
rather modest with up to 5- to 6-fold maximum change in gene expression
in response to the ligand. Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) ribozymes
are an alternative class
of self-cleaving ribozymes. HDV ribozymes
possess some distinct characteristics that may complement the widely
used hammerhead ribozymes in engineering RNA devices for synthetic
biology applications. For example, the HDV ribozyme structure has
been found to be exceptionally stable, with in vitro activity reported
in the presence of 5 M urea or 50% formamide or at 80 °C. Although analogues of the HDV ribozyme have been recently discovered
in diverse organisms, the mammalian origin
of the ribozyme provides confidence that the HDV ribozyme derivatives
would be functional in mammalian cells. Despite its long history
of investigation, HDV ribozymes have not
been extensively exploited for engineering applications except for -acting HDV ribozymes for targeted gene knockdown. To our knowledge, only two allosteric HDV ribozymes
characterized in vitro have been described in the literature. Kertsburg
and Soukup described a theophylline-activated HDV ribozyme, and Beaudoin and Perreault incorporated a G-quadruplex
structure that regulates HDV ribozyme activity in response to potassium
ion. Most recently, the Perreault
group demonstrated the first chemically
regulated HDV ribozymes embedded in the 5′ untranslated region
(UTR) of mRNA in mammalian cell culture. The chemical inputs used in this system, however, are 13- or 14-mer
synthetic chemically modified oligonucleotides designed to hybridize
with the complementary sequences strategically placed to modulate
the ribozyme activity. Moreover, the dynamic ranges of gene expression
(ON/OFF ratios) were modest, topping at about 2-fold. We investigated
the possibility of using HDV ribozymes as a platform
for RNA devices for applications in mammalian cells. In this article,
we report our engineering efforts of the first small molecule responsive
HDV ribozymes that function in living cells. Our RNA devices exhibit
excellent gene expression control in response to the two small molecules
theophylline and guanine with ON/OFF ratios up to 29.5. Additionally,
the modularity of the HDV aptazymes was highlighted by the integration
of two aptazymes to construct a NOR logic gate device. Library and
Plasmid Construction All plasmids were
prepared by standard recombinant DNA techniques. Plasmids encoding
the -acting (3′ UTR) HDV aptazymes were
derived from pEGFP-N1 (Clontech). Appropriate aptazyme sequences were
cloned in the 3′ UTR of the EGFP transcript. All plasmids were
purified using Zyppy Plasmid Miniprep kit (Zymo Research). Nucleotide
sequences of the plasmids are provided in . HEK293
cells were maintained
in a 5% CO humidified incubator at 37 °C in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Mediatech) supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco) and 1× antibiotic-antimycotic
(Gibco). One day before transfection, HEK293 cells were trypsinized
and diluted appropriately with fresh complete medium, and 2.4 ×
10 cells/well (∼100 μL) were seeded onto
96-well plates. Fifty nanograms of an EGFP/SEAP-aptazyme plasmid or
an appropriate control plasmid and 10 ng of pCMV-mCherry plasmid (constitutively
expresses mCherry) were cotransfected using 1 μL of PolyFect
reagent (QIAGEN) per well according to the manufacturer’s instruction.
After 3.5 h of incubation, the medium was removed and replaced with
100 μL of fresh complete medium containing appropriate concentrations
of theophylline or guanine. Guanine (Acros) was first dissolved in
100× concentrations in 0.2 M NaOH and was diluted 100-fold with
the complete medium immediately before use. The cells were incubated
for additional 18 h before EGFP or SEAP assay. Cellular
fluorescence was measured and normalized
according to our previous report. Briefly,
the cell culture medium was replaced with phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) (150 μL per well) and incubated at 37 °C until measurement.
Fluorescence intensities were measured for EGFP (484 nm excitation/510
emission/5 nm bandwidth) and mCherry (587 nm excitation/610 nm emission/10
nm bandwidth) using Safire2 microplate reader (Tecan). The raw fluorescence
values were first subtracted with that of the untransfected cells
(background). For each well, EGFP fluorescence was normalized by mCherry
([EGFP fluorescence]/[mCherry fluorescence]) to account for variations
in transfection efficiency. The values were further normalized by
the cells transfected with pEGFP-wtHDVRz(inactive)/pCMV-mCherry (=
1.0). The reported values are mean ± SD from four replicate samples. Approximately 100 μL of the medium
from each well containing the secreted SEAP was sampled and centrifuged
in a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube. Supernatant (80 μL) from each
well was transferred to a fresh tube and stored at −20 °C
until SEAP assay. After removing the remaining medium, PBS (150 μL)
was added to each well, and the cells were incubated at 37 °C
until mCherry fluorescence was measured as described above. SEAP assay
of the medium was performed using Great EscAPe SEAP Fluorescence Detection
Kit (Clontech) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
The samples were diluted 16-fold before measurement after confirming
that the SEAP activities fall within the linear range of the assay.
Fluorescence of the SEAP-cleaved substrate was measured (360 nm excitation/449
nm emission/20 nm bandwidth) using a Safire2 microplate reader. The
values were normalized by mCherry fluorescence after subtracting the
background values obtained using untransfected cells..