An explosion of DNA sequencing, synthesis, and manipulation technologies
has driven the development of synthetic genetic programs of increasing
complexity in living cells. Underlying this work is the hope
that engineered biological systems will be used to solve important
problems in energy and health over the coming years. Initially inspired
by electronic circuits, researchers began by designing small transcriptional
switches and oscillators. These early successes fostered a growing population of
physicists, computer scientists, and engineers that aimed to apply
an engineering-based methodology to the design of biological systems.
In the past decade, substantial success has been achieved using this
genetic circuits approach termed . Multigene logic
gates capable of integrating environmental signals
have been constructed in bacteria, yeast, and mammalian cells. Electronics-inspired networks have included counters, pulse generators, filters, and communication modules. Sophisticated circuits can now be controlled by light, yielding
genetic programs readily tunable both () and  in live animals. Dynamic genetic clocks have been constructed
that function at the single-cell, colony, and multicolony level in growing bacterial populations, and even in mammalian cells. In a recent study, redox signaling mediated
by HO vapor permitted the synchronization
of millions of oscillating bacteria across an LCD-like sensor array. Early efforts toward clinical applications
have utilized bacteria and bacteriophages (viruses that infect bacteria)
to perform therapeutic functions . Commensal
bacteria have been engineered to fight diabetes, HIV, and cholera by producing and delivering therapeutic agents
directly in the human microbiome. Because certain bacteria grow preferentially
in hypoxic environments, a number of studies have engineered cancer-fighting
bacteria to selectively attack tumors. Toward still
another application, a pair of studies has engineered phages to produce
foreign enzymes, making them far more potent than their unmodified
counterparts at dispersing bacterial biofilms. In most of these cases, the genetic programs involved were
responsible
for overexpressing target genes, similar to traditional genetic engineering
where genes are added, removed, or modified one at a time in a stepwise
fashion. To truly achieve its clinical potential, synthetic biology
must continue to do what has made it successful: engineer progressively
more complex, multi-input networks in which the triggering, amplitude,
and duration of therapeutic activity is controllable. This will require
using hosts that are easy to genetically modify and compatible with
the clinical requirements regarding safety, immunogenicity, and drug
resistance. While bacteriophage and adenovirus have their advantages,
viruses have smaller genomes and therefore have a narrower range of
genetic modifications, frequently induce host resistance, and are
highly cell-type specific. As one potential
bridge between organisms such as  and clinically relevant
microbes,  is a bacterial anticancer platform that is closely related
to , has been extensively studied  for therapeutic applications, and has been shown to be safe in human clinical trials. The development of attenuated strains has utilized auxotrophy and
phoPQ deletions to suppress virulence cell invasion and virulence. Lipid A mutations have been generated to reduce
immunogenicity, stimulating a much weaker immune response than wild-type
strains. Despite this reduced potency,
systemically injected  cells retain
their ability to target and selectively replicate within tumors, displaying
a thousand-fold growth preference relative to other organs. Their motility allows them to follow chemical gradients and penetrate
deep into the tumor vasculature, much further
than passively diffusing small molecules. And many of these strains also display innate oncolytic activity,
regressing tumors simply by growing in them. Perhaps
the most important property of  for
synthetic biology is the ease of genetic modification. It is
a model organism whose genome is sequenced, has knockout collections, and the genetic tools are almost identical
to .  is capable
of stably expressing recombinant DNA from plasmid-based circuits . This approach has already been used to produce
a number of therapeutic compounds directly within tumors, but most
often  “always on” expression of
well-established genes. This work has laid the foundation for more sophisticated functionality,
such as programmed delivery profiles that take advantage of plasmid
instability. Such a focus will merge
the dynamic sensing, production, and delivery capabilities of genetic
circuits with the native tumor seeking and penetration of . In order to test the degree to
which existing synthetic circuits
function in , we transformed the attenuated
strain ELH430 (SL1344 ΔphoPQ, gift of Elizabeth Hohmann, MGH) with several genetic oscillator constructs.
First, we tested a single-plasmid variant of a published single-cell
gene oscillator. Using our microfluidic
platform, we observed robust oscillations for all  cells over many generations (Figure A,B). While the qualitative period-inducer relationship
was similar to , the curve was shifted toward
faster periods as compared to  strain JS006
(MG1655 ΔaraC,lacI) (Figure C). In contrast,
we initially expected  to oscillate
slower since longer division times generally result in period lengthening. When we measured the dependence of oscillatory
period on temperature in , we found
the trend qualitatively similar to , where
lower temperatures (and therefore longer doubling times) resulted
in longer oscillatory periods (Figure D).
We therefore hypothesized that the faster oscillations in  are not due to growth rate differences, but
rather a strain-dependent factor such as mean promoter level, transcription
rate, or enzymatic degradation rate. To explore this quantitatively, we used automated
single-cell tracking
using a previously developed algorithm to compare a large number of single-cell time courses from  and  (). Oscillators are an ideal
circuit to quantify strain-specific parameters such as transcription
and degradation rates since they allow for hundreds of measurements
in a single experiment. For each oscillatory period, the trough-to-peak
and peak-to-trough slopes were measured. Since the ClpXP degradation
machinery is likely saturated, the peak-to-trough
slope yields an estimate for the zeroth-order enzymatic degradation
rate in degrade-and-fire oscillators. Interestingly, we found that the apparent enzymatic degradation
rate in  was roughly 1.5-fold that
of  (Figure A). In
our computational model of the oscillator, this increase reproduced
the experimentally observed period-inducer relationship (Figure B). Next, we transformed  with a quorum-sensing
oscillator that had been previously characterized in , and observed coherent, colony-level
oscillations for more than 48 h (Figure A,B).
Here, we found that the period-flow rate dependence was markedly different
in  than in the original study, where
oscillatory period was much longer and changed very little across
a wide range of flow rates (Figure C). Interestingly,
while increased degradation rate resulted in faster oscillations for
single cells (Figure B), our computational
model correctly predicts the opposite trend for the quorum-sensing
oscillator when degradation is increased (Figure C). Finally, we tested the original genetic toggle
switch, plasmid
pIKE107. In this circuit, a transient
pulse of IPTG inducer turns the switch ON and reporter expression
is maintained at a high level. A second pulse of ATC inducer turns
the switch OFF, dropping reporter expression indefinitely. In periodically
diluted batch culture experiments similar to the original study, we
used flow cytometry to observe robust switching and bistability when
inducing with either 2 mM IPTG or 500 ng/μL dox in cultures
growing at 37 °C (Figure A–C).
Interestingly, the fluorescence level at which  settled after we removed IPTG was lower than the same circuit in  (Figure A). We suspected
that the differences in apparent degradation and expression rates
(Figure A) might explain this change, since
the steady-state repressor balance would be adjusted. To test
this hypothesis, we used the original computational model
of the toggle switch and quantified the
steady-state expression level over time for strain parameters measured
in  and . We
found that the  parameters reproduced
the experimentally observed curves, where expression rises to a higher
level when switched ON then decays to a lower steady-state when IPTG
is removed (Figure D). While these parameters
are particularly important for dynamic circuits, they can also impact
the performance of stable switches since repressors are continuously
being produced and degraded. A central issue in the design of
genetic circuits is the degree
to which native and engineered networks should be integrated. Synthetic
biology began by fully isolating itself from the strain background,
using it solely to supply energy, enzymatic machinery, and a cellular
volume in which to function. In contrast, industrial applications
in medicine and energy have commonly utilized a variety of microbes
for their native networks. As our biological knowledge of native networks and our ability to
engineer new circuits has improved, it has become increasingly possible
to blend these two strategies. is an ideal strain for clinical
synthetic biology since it is closely related to , well studied , has safety precedence for
clinical trials in humans, and displays a thousand-fold growth preference
for tumor environments. Moving to other microbes for clinical and industrial
purposes will require the determination of the critical strain parameters
that define the space of bacteria capable of hosting genetic circuits.
Next steps will involve measurement of these parameters and testing
circuits in strains of interest that are further removed in the phylogenetic
tree. One such roadmap would begin with
more distantly related gamma proteobacteria like  before moving outside
the phylum to alpha proteobacteria such as . Additionally, individual
components and modules can also receive a “portability”
score that estimate the degree to which they translate to other hosts.
For example, while lacI- and tetR-based circuits are nearly universal,
more generally the function of other components are likely to be more
sensitive to strain-specific parameters. This work will enable synthetic
biology to move beyond  into a diverse range
of microbes for clinical and industrial applications. A fast, robust, and tunable genetic oscillator
in . (A) Timelapse fluorescence microscopy
depicting asynchronous oscillations
in a growing colony of . (B) A single-cell
trajectory extracted from image data. (C) Period vs inducer concentration
for  compared to original data taken
in . The trends are qualitatively similar,
yet  is shifted toward shorter periods.
Points are experimental measurements fit to a line generated by computational
modeling. (D) Period vs temperature for  compared to original data taken in  with
similar trends. Computational modeling of  genetic
circuits. (A) Comparison of enzymatic degradation rate between  and  generated from
automated single-cell tracking. Degradation rate is approximately
1.5× higher in . (B) A higher
degradation rate results in the shorter periods observed experimentally
for the single-cell oscillator. (C) In contrast, increased degradation
rate results in longer periods for the quorum-sensing oscillator that
are comparatively unchanged with flow rate. (D) Increased degradation
and expression rates produce the experimentally observed behavior
for the  toggle switch. A synchronized quorum of genetic clocks in . (A) Timelapse fluorescence microscopy depicting
coherent oscillations
at the colony-level for a growing colony of . (B) A colony trajectory extracted from image data that illustrates
the regularity of oscillations over time. (C) Period vs flow rate
for  compared to original data taken
in .  displays
much higher periods that appear to be independent of flow rate. A genetic toggle switch in . (A)
A time course of fluorescence output that illustrates switching by
both IPTG and ATC quantified by flow cytometry in periodically diluted
batch culture experiments. (B) Raw flow cytometer data illustrating
switching by 2 mM IPTG and (C) 500 ng/μL of ATC..