Actinobacteria
of the genus  are among the most prolific
and well-studied
producers of diverse secondary metabolites. Over
the past several decades,  strains have
been found to produce a number of important bioactive natural products,
such as the anticancer compound daunorubicin from , the herbicide phosphinothricin
from () and , and the antibacterial daptomycin from . While
these decades of study might suggest that the supply of  natural products is nearing exhaustion, in fact, genome sequencing
efforts have revealed that the well is far from dry, even in the most
comprehensively studied strains. Access to this “silent” majority of uncharacterized
natural product gene clusters would benefit greatly from the development
of new genetic manipulation tools that leverage genomic information
to aid natural product discovery, characterization, engineering, and
production. In the context of a  strain
of interest, for example, facile genome manipulation would aid both
discovery and validation of new natural products from uncharacterized
gene clusters, as well as ensuing biochemical and mechanistic studies.
In heterologous production strains, such techniques would further
enable genomic remodeling to direct metabolic flux toward a pathway
of interest and eliminate competing pathways, as well as pathway engineering
for product diversification. Nevertheless, the current  genetic toolkit, though well-developed and widely employed, often
mandates a significant investment of time and effort. Typically,
for gene disruption in , single crossover
integration of a suicide plasmid can be employed,
resulting in disruption of the gene of interest with a selectable
marker. However, the limited number of
selectable markers limits the reusability of this approach. Further,
disruption via single-crossover can revert in the absence of selective
pressure, resulting in undesired restoration of the wild type allele.
Inclusion of flanking recombinase target sites and expression of the
corresponding recombinase can enable recycling of markers and improve
mutation stability, but this mandates additional steps and leaves
a scar sequence at the target site. Alternatively, clean genomic
deletions can be made via double-crossover
integration. However, this multistep process
is often labor and time intensive. First, integration of the disruption
vector at the target locus (the first single-crossover event) is identified
with a selectable marker. Next, loss of the disruption vector and
its selectable marker (the second single-crossover event) is identified
via nonselective culture. Finally, colonies exhibiting loss of the
selectable marker (upon replica plating) must be further screened
to separate those that have lost the vector via the desired second
crossover event from those that have reverted the first crossover
event to restore the original genotype. Counterselectable markers
such as  and  can facilitate
identification of the second crossover event but are limited to use
only in particular mutant hosts. To facilitate
identification of double-crossover integrants in one step, a double-strand
break (DSB) can be introduced at the genomic locus of interest, as
has been demonstrated using a homing endonuclease. However, this method is dependent upon prior integration
of the homing endonuclease recognition site at the target locus, as
homing endonucleases are minimally amenable to specificity alteration. Recently, DSB-mediated genome editing
has been achieved via the
type II Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
(CRISPR)/CRISPR associated proteins (Cas) system of . Functioning similarly
to a bacterial immune system, CRISPR/Cas requires three components
to realize targeted cleavage of foreign DNA: Cas9, the nuclease and
scaffold for the recognition elements; CRISPR RNA (crRNA), short RNAs
conferring target site specificity, encoded as spacers in a CRISPR
array; and trans-activating crRNA (tracrRNA), a short RNA that facilitates
crRNA processing and recruitment to Cas9. The Cas9/crRNA/tracrRNA complex can target any DNA sequence, known
as a protospacer, provided that the requisite protospacer-adjacent
motif (PAM) is present at the 3′ end (NGG in the case of , where N represents any nucleotide). To repurpose this system for genome engineering,
spacer sequences
matching genomic loci of interest can be directly programmed into
a heterologously expressed CRISPR array. To further simplify the system,
fusion of the crRNA and tracrRNA into a single synthetic guide RNA
(sgRNA) transcript has been demonstrated, obviating the need for processing
of the transcribed CRISPR array (pre-crRNA) into individual crRNA
components. The  CRISPR/Cas system has been successfully reconstituted in a variety
of hosts across all domains of life, including (but not limited to) ,, and human cell lines. Compared with other tools for site-specific
genome engineering, such as zinc-finger nucleases and transcription
activator-like effector (TALE) nucleases, the engineered CRISPR/Cas
system offers unprecedented modularity. Targeting any site of interest
requires only the insertion of a short spacer into a CRISPR array/sgRNA
construct, which can be achieved rapidly and with high throughput
using modern DNA assembly techniques. A suitable target site needs
only to have an adjacent NGG sequence, which are notably abundant
in GC-rich  genomes. To harness
the CRISPR/Cas system for genome editing in  species, the pCRISPomyces expression system
was designed (Figure ). Two versions of the
pCRISPomyces plasmid were constructed: pCRISPomyces-1, which includes
both tracrRNA and CRISPR array expression cassettes along with , and pCRISPomyces-2, which includes a sgRNA expression
cassette and . In both cases, previously characterized
strong promoters were selected to drive
expression of the CRISPR/Cas elements, along with widely used terminators
from phages fd, λ, and T7. Analysis of the  gene revealed the presence of several rare
codons. Among them were many  codons, translation-level
regulators of secondary metabolism in  species. As a result, a refactored  gene codon-optimized for  expression was designed. To facilitate seamless, one-step Golden Gate assembly of
custom-designed
spacers into the CRISPR array of pCRISPomyces-1, a  cassette flanked by unique I restriction sites
was incorporated between two direct repeat sequences in the empty
CRISPR array. A I-flanked  cassette was included in the sgRNA cassette of pCRISPomyces-2 for
the same purpose. In both plasmids, a unique I
restriction site allows linearization of the backbone for insertion
of additional elements, such as editing template sequences for recombination-driven
repair, via Gibson assembly or traditional ligation. Inclusion of  allows selection in both  and  hosts, the colE1 origin enables
replication in , and the RP4 origin of transfer  enables conjugative transfer of pCRISPomyces plasmids
from  to  hosts. Finally, the temperature-sensitive  region from pSG5 allows rapid clearance
of the pCRISPomyces plasmid following the desired genome editing. To assess the functionality of the pCRISPomyces system, initial
experiments were carried out in the well-studied strain  66. Two genomic protospacer
sequences were selected: one in , from the undecylprodigiosin
gene cluster, and one in , from the actinorhodin gene cluster. In both cases, a 20 bp sequence with the requisite NGG PAM sequence
was chosen, with preference given to sites on the noncoding strand
and those with multiple purine bases at the 3′ end. To minimize off-target effects, sites were chosen
in which the last 12 bp of the protospacer plus the PAM (15 bp in
total) were unique, as confirmed by BLAST
analysis against the published genome sequence. To enable defined
editing via homologous recombination, a 2 kb editing template was
supplied on the pCRISPomyces plasmid. The editing template consisted
of two 1 kb arms homologous to the corresponding sequences upstream
and downstream of the protospacer, designed to introduce a short deletion
(20–34 bp) to partially or fully eliminate the protospacer
sequence and create a frame shift. The pCRISPomyces plasmids
were transferred to  via conjugation.
Exconjugants displaying apramycin resistance were
confirmed by restreaking on selective ISP2 plates. To screen for the
desired editing event, genotyping of multiple exconjugants was carried
out by first isolating the genomic DNA and then PCR amplifying the
target locus. To ensure that the PCR product was amplified from the
chromosome rather than the pCRISPomyces plasmid, primers were designed
to anneal slightly upstream and downstream of the editing template
sequence. Each PCR product was sequenced with internal primers to
determine if the intended deletion had been introduced. Of note, conjugation
efficiency was found to be reduced by 5- to 10-fold for any plasmid
bearing the  gene, suggesting an inherent toxicity
associated with overexpression of the heterologous endonuclease. Using the pCRISPomyces-1 system with separate tracrRNA and CRISPR
array elements, only modest editing efficiency was observed (Table ). For the  target, three out
of 14 exconjugants possessed the desired deletion, while the remaining
11 strains were unedited at the  locus. As a
negative control, a pCRISPomyces-1 derivative plasmid bearing all
CRISPR elements (tracrRNA,  spacer, and  editing template) except for the  gene was constructed and conjugated into . In this case, 12 exconjugants were screened, and each possessed
the unedited genotype. For the  target,
a similar efficiency was observed as the  target,
with two out of eight exconjugants displaying the edited genotype. Supporting Information Figure S1 To demonstrate clearance of the pCRISPomyces-1 plasmid, one of
the identified  strains carrying the desired  deletion was cultured nonselectively at high temperature
(37–39 °C). After growth to stationary phase, a fraction
of the culture was plated to isolate individual colonies. Multiple
colonies were obtained that had regained apramycin sensitivity and
did not produce the red undecylprodigiosin pigment (), indicating successful clearance
of the temperature-sensitive plasmid. This sequence allows the apramycin
selection marker to be reused in this strain for future applications,
such as further genome editing or introduction of heterologous genes. Supporting Information
Figure S2 Since the three-component CRISPR/Cas9 system of the pCRISPomyces-1
plasmid did not exhibit high editing efficiency, it was speculated
that employing the simpler two-component system could yield improvement.
To test this hypothesis, the same protospacers in the  and  target genes were evaluated with
the sgRNA-expressing pCRISPomyces-2 plasmid. Editing efficiency was
again evaluated by genotyping multiple isolated exconjugants. With
the pCRISPomyces-2 -targeting construct, significantly
higher editing efficiency was observed, as six out of six randomly
selected exconjugants were revealed to possess the edited phenotype
(Table ; ). Similar results were observed for the  target, where eight out of eight randomly selected exconjugants
were found to be correctly edited. Taken together, these results show
that sgRNA targeting affords higher efficiency than tracr/crRNA targeting.
A possible explanation could be that pre-crRNA processing by native
RNase enzymes is inefficient when applying CRISPR/Cas in , in contrast to results in other hosts where native RNase enzymes
appear sufficient. One of the key
advantages of the CRISPR/Cas system compared with
other targeted nucleases is the relative ease with which multiple
sequences can be simultaneously targeted using the same Cas9 endonuclease.
Given the observed superiority of sgRNA over the tracrRNA/CRISPR array
configuration for single-target genome editing, additional constructs
were designed with two sgRNA cassettes to evaluate the potential for
multiplex targeting. In these constructs, tandem sgRNA cassettes were
driven by two copies of the same strong promoter. Insertion of both
cassettes into the same pCRISPomyces-2 backbone was carried out in
one step by Golden Gate assembly with a synthetic DNA fragment containing
the first sgRNA sequence, a terminator, a promoter, and the second
sgRNA sequence, all flanked by I sites. The first dual-targeting construct was designed to introduce simultaneous
short deletions in both the  and  loci, utilizing the same protospacer sequences and 2 kb editing
templates previously evaluated. Following conjugation and isolation
of genomic DNA from multiple exconjugants, both loci of interest were
sequenced. In four out of four strains evaluated, the desired deletion
was observed at both loci, demonstrating the potential for multiplex
genome editing. The ability to cut two loci in the genome simultaneously
opens up the possibility for excision of larger chromosomal segments
by introducing a DSB at both ends and bridging the gap with a plasmid-borne
editing template (Figure a). To test this
method, a second dual-targeting construct was designed to delete the
entire 31 kb  cluster. Protospacer sequences were
selected within the genes at the start and end of the cluster ( and , respectively), and a 2 kb
editing template was constructed from the 1 kb sequences immediately
flanking the cluster. In total, four exconjugants were picked and
evaluated by PCR from genomic DNA with primers that anneal outside
of the 1 kb homology arms. In all four cases, the 2.1 kb band indicative
of cluster deletion was observed, while no band was observed when
wild type genomic DNA was used as template (Figure b). Similarly, PCR amplification with a primer annealing within
the deleted region only produced a 1.1 kb band from the wild type
genomic DNA, but not from the strains in which the  cluster had been deleted. Phenotypic screening confirmed the loss
of red pigmentation in all four edited strains (Figure c). Supporting Information Figure S3 Outside of , it would be desirable
to utilize the pCRISPomyces plasmids in other  strains to realize targeted editing of genes of interest, such as
natural product gene clusters, in the native producers. To evaluate
the possibility for broader applicability, two additional  species were selected:  DSM 40736 and  J1074. In , two genes within the phosphinothricin
tripeptide (PTT) gene cluster, and , were chosen as individual
targets. For both genes, the corresponding single-targeting pCRISPomyces-2
plasmid was constructed with an appropriate spacer and 2 kb editing
template to introduce a short frame-shift deletion early in the coding
sequence. Following an analogous conjugation and genotyping protocol
as described for , seven out of seven
exconjugants isolated with the -targeting plasmid
were confirmed to possess the intended deletion. For , a total of six exconjugants were screened, and four were found
to exhibit the desired mutant genotype (Table ; ). The
other two exconjugants possessed the unedited wild type sequence. In , the PKS-NRPS hybrid gene  from a cryptic polycylic tetramic acid macrolactam
gene cluster was chosen to evaluate single
locus targeting, again to introduce a short frame-shift deletion using
a 2 kb editing template. Six out of six exconjugants evaluated by
PCR amplification from genomic DNA and sequencing were confirmed to
harbor the intended 67 bp deletion (Table ), confirming Cas9 functionality in this strain. As a second trial,
a dual-targeting plasmid was constructed to delete a full 13 kb lanthipeptide
cluster encoded by genes  to . After conjugation with the dual-targeting plasmid containing a
2 kb editing template, three  exconjugants
were isolated and evaluated by PCR. All three were found to yield
the correct PCR product indicative of full-cluster deletion (amplified
with primers 1 and 3 in Figure a), and the
identity of the PCR product was confirmed by sequencing. However,
one of the three also yielded the PCR product with a primer annealing
within the deleted region (primers 2 and 3 in Figure a), indicating a mix of edited and wild type cells in this
population. Nevertheless, the observed efficient genome editing of  and  without
strain-specific modification of the pCRISPomyces backbone suggests
broader applicability of this system in various  species. In summary, we have demonstrated that the type II
CRISPR/Cas system
of  can be reconstituted successfully
in multiple  species to realize targeted,
multiplex genome editing. To implement this system, we have developed
pCRISPomyces plasmids amenable to insertion of custom spacers and
editing templates via modern DNA assembly techniques. These tools
reduce the time and labor needed to perform precise chromosomal manipulations
compared to previous techniques. As a result, application of the pCRISPomyces
system should facilitate a wide variety of future studies in  species, such as analysis of biochemical pathways,
activation of silent natural product gene clusters, pathway/metabolic
engineering, and host design. pCRISPomyces plasmids for targeted genome editing
in  species. Notable features include
a codon-optimized  from , a I-flanked lacZ cassette for
Golden Gate assembly of spacer sequences,
an I site for addition of editing templates, and
a temperature-sensitive pSG5 origin. (a) Strategy for deletion of the 31kb  cluster.
Two sgRNA transcripts guide Cas9 to introduce DSBs at both ends of
the cluster, while a codelivered editing template bridges the gap
via homologous recombination. (b) PCR evaluation of  cluster deletion from four exconjugants (DF1–DF4) with wild
type control (wt). (c) Phenotypic evaluation of strains DF1–DF4
with wild type control. Summary of Genome Editing Results
in  Species Number
of correctly edited exconjugants/total
number of exconjugants screened. strain NEB5-alpha (New England Biolabs,
Ipswich, MA) was used for
plasmid cloning and maintenance. Yeast  plasmid
assembly was performed in  HZ848. 66 was obtained
from the Agricultural Resource Service Culture Collection (Peoria,
IL),  J1074 was a gift from Prof. Wenjun
Zhang (University of California, Berkeley), and  DSM40736 and the  conjugation strain WM6026 were gifts from Prof. William Metcalf (University
of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign).  strains
were grown in LB medium supplemented with apramycin (50 μg/mL)
and, for strain WM6026, diaminopimelic acid (19 μg/mL).  strains were grown on modified MYG medium (10
g/L malt extract broth, 4 g/L yeast extract, 4 g/L glucose) with 50
μg/mL apramycin as needed for plasmid selection. Medium R2 (without
sucrose) was used for conjugation. All
media components and supplements were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO) with the exception of yeast extract (BD Biosciences,
San Jose, CA) and LB broth (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). PCR
primers were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville,
IA), and PCR reactions were performed in FailSafe PCR PreMix G (Epicentre
Biotechnologies, Madison, WI) with Q5 DNA polymerase (New England
Biolabs, Ipswich, MA). All PCR products were purified using the DNA
Clean & Concentrator or Zymoclean Gel DNA Recovery Kit (Zymo Research,
Irvine, CA). Plasmids were recovered using the QIAprep Spin Miniprep
Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Restriction enzymes and T4 ligase were
purchased from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA). Plasmid pCRISPomyces-1 was constructed
via yeast homologous recombination from
the following fragments: promoter rpsLp(XC), synthesized as a gBlock (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville,
IA) to remove I recognition sites; codon-optimized , along with the wild-type fd terminator, synthesized
by GenScript (Piscataway, NJ); promoter rpsLp(CF), PCR amplified from
a previous construct; tracrRNA, oop terminator,
promoter gapdhp(EL), a  expression cassette flanked by I recognition
sites and direct repeat sequences, and a T7 terminator, synthesized
as a gBlock (IDT); yeast helper fragment containing  and CEN6/ARS4 flanked by I recognition sites,
PCR amplified from pRS416 (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA); and an / helper fragment containing
origin colE1, selection marker (3)IV, pSG5  origin, and origin of transfer , PCR amplified in two pieces from plasmid pJVD52.1 to remove a I recognition site in pSG5 . The resulting intermediate plasmid was then digested
with I to liberate the yeast helper fragment,
and the backbone was religated to yield pCRISPomyces-1. Plasmid pCRISPomyces-2
was constructed via isothermal assembly of the RI/I-digested pCRISPomyces-1 backbone with two
synthetic gBlocks (IDT) comprising a guide RNA expression cassette
(with a I-flanked  cassette
in place of the spacer sequence). All targeting constructs were assembled
by a combination of Golden Gate assembly (for insertion of spacers) and traditional digestion/ligation or
isothermal assembly (for insertion of
editing templates). Single spacer inserts were generated by annealing
two 24 nt oligonucleotides (offset by 4 nt to generate sticky ends),
while double spacer inserts were synthesized as gBlocks (IDT). The
1 kb left and right arms of each editing template were amplified from
purified genomic DNA, spliced by overlap-extension PCR, and ligated into the I site
of the desired plasmid. Correct plasmid assembly was confirmed by
diagnostic digestion and sequencing (GeneWiz, South Plainfield, NJ).
Plasmid maps were generated with Vector NTI (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA). NEB5-α
was transformed by heat shock following the manufacturer’s
suggested protocol. Yeast transformation was performed as described
elsewhere. WM6026
was transformed by electroporation. Conjugation of plasmids into  spores was performed using the modified protocol
described elsewhere. Following conjugation, individual
exconjugants were randomly picked
and restreaked on MYG agar plates supplemented with 50 μg/mL
apramycin and grown at 30 °C for 2–3 days. Single colonies
were then picked to liquid MYG medium for genomic DNA isolation using
the Wizard Genomic DNA Purification Kit (Promega, Madison, WI). The
locus of interest was PCR amplified and sequenced using primers annealing
∼300 bp upstream and downstream of the deletion site (GeneWiz,
South Plainfield, NJ). Clearance of the plasmid was accomplished with
high-temperature cultivation (37–39 °C) for 2–3
days, followed by replica plating on selective and nonselective plates
to confirm restoration of apramycin sensitivity. For phenotypic screening
of undecylprodigiosin-producing strains, saturated liquid cultures
were streaked on nonselective R2 plates without sucrose and grown
at 30 °C for 2–3 days..