Transcriptional
logic gating
is the genetic equivalent of Boolean logic gating that is typically
found in electronic circuits. In essence,
transcriptional logic gating is the simultaneous regulation of a promoter
by two or more transcription factors. If the transcription factors
are themselves controlled by inputs such as inducible promoters or
ligand binding, the result is a logic gate that regulates the expression
of a target gene based upon the presence or absence of the inputs.
Thus, logic gates can be used by synthetic biologists to engineer
complex genetic programs that elicit desired phenotypic responses
within host cells. To date, intense efforts have been made to generate more effective
and modular transcriptional logic gates for use in synthetic biology.
These efforts have generally fallen within two categories: (1) the
creation of hybrid promoters that respond to different classes of
known transcription factors, and (2) the genomic mining of existing
parts from various organisms for use within a particular host. Hybrid
promoters have long been widely used. For instance, the Lac/Ara hybrid
promoter created by Lutz and Bujard has
been used in a number of synthetic gene circuits, such as the dual-feedback
synthetic gene oscillator. In addition,
hybrid promoters have been engineered to create different types of
logic gates and layered to generate complex circuits. To expand the genetic toolbox even further, researchers have also
begun to mine the genomes of prokaryotes for new components. For instance, Stanton et al. recently mined
prokaryotic genomes for analogues of the tetracycline repressor. Another method for generating transcriptional
logic gates is to repurpose existing transcription factors via protein
engineering. For instance, Shis and Bennett recently used split versions
of T7 RNA polymerase to create a library of transcriptional logic
gates that strongly drive downstream expression. Here, we take a protein engineering approach to utilize
and expand upon a collection of engineered LacI/GalR family chimeric
transcription factors to create novel transcriptional
logic gates, as outlined in Figure . The lactose repressor, LacI, regulates the  operon, which is responsible for the uptake and metabolism of lactose. LacI binds the  promoter
at the operator site, O, to prevent transcription of downstream
genes by RNA polymerase. In the presence of the ligand allolactose,
or of its nonhydrolizable analogue isopropyl β--1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG), LacI loses its high affinity for the operator, which allows
transcription to proceed. LacI is part of a larger LacI/GalR
family of transcriptional repressors
that regulate sugar metabolism in . Most members of the family respond to their
own ligand inducers in much the same way LacI responds to IPTG. Meinhardt
et al. recently created a library of chimeric repressors by replacing
the ligand binding domain (LBD) of LacI with the LBDs of homologous
LacI/GalR family members. This created a set of LacI-like transcriptional
repressors that respond to the natural inducer of the LBD while regulating
transcription of the  promoter. Here, we demonstrate that chimeric LacI/GalR family transcription
factors can be used to create modular logic gates in  that display tightly regulated ON and OFF states. We use ligand-binding
domains from five different members of the LacI/GalR family, each
with a different sugar ligand inducer. We show that these five chimeras
can be used to create traditional two-input AND gates and that they
can also be used  to enable three- and four-input
AND gating. Importantly, the multi-input AND gates we generate are
much simpler than existing technologies that have similar functionality. This is because ligand control works directly
at the level of each transcription factor, eliminating the need for
ligand inducible promoters to control each input. To further increase
the modularity of the transcription factors, we also engineered a
previously described DNA binding mutation into the DNA binding domain
(DBD) of each chimera. These orthogonal
DBDs allow the chimeras to regulate promoters that are orthogonal
to the  promoter and hence enable multiple types
of AND gates to be used simultaneously with minimal cross-talk. Schematic of
transcriptional logic gates using LacI/GalR repressors.
(a) Each chimera consists of a LBD and a DBD. The set of five LBDs
each responds to a different sugar. The two DBDs
regulate two orthogonal promoters. (b)
Combinatorial AND transcriptional logic is facilitated by the simultaneous
coexpression of multiple chimeric transcriptional repressors. Since
each chimera regulates the same promoter, the ligand for each chimera
must be present for downstream transcription to occur. (c) Coexpression
of multiple chimeric repressors with a mix of the two DBDs creates
functionally orthogonal transcriptional AND gates that regulate the
expression of two different genes. We first constructed a set of chimeric repressors from the LacI/GalR
family transcriptional repressors previously described by Meinhardt
et al., specifically the chimeras LLhR_Q60A, LLhS_Q54A_E230K,
LLhF_Q60S, and LLhT_V52A, hereafter referred to as RbsR-L, GalS-L,
FruR-L, and TreR-L, respectively. The chimeras each contain the DNA
binding domain of LacI and the ligand binding domain of repressors
that respond to ribose (RbsR-L), fucose (GalS-L), a fructose metabolite
(FruR-L), and a trehalose metabolite (TreR-L). When a dimeric version
of wild-type (wt) LacI (here called LacI-L for consistency) is included, these proteins form a set of five repressors
that derepress in the presence of five different sugars (Figure ). In addition, we modified the DBD of these transcriptional
regulators to include the point mutations Y17T, Q18A, and R22N (the
“TAN” mutation), previously described by Daber et al. to create the functionally orthogonal transcriptional
repressors, RbsR-T, GalS-T, FruR-T, TreR-T, and LacI-T ( Table S1). We tested
the ability of each chimeric repressor to regulate the
expression of a gene encoding green fluorescent protein () driven by either the Lac promoter, P, or the orthogonal
TAN promoter, P ( Figure S1). The expression of  was repressed
by each chimera and induced in the presence of the appropriate sugar
for both sets of DBDs. We also confirmed the orthogonality of the
two DBDs by testing for regulated GFP fluorescence from either P or P in the presence of the opposite repressor,
LacI-T or LacI-L, respectively ( Figure S2). As expected, when the chimera with the wrong DBD was
used, fluorescence was the same in the absence or presence of IPTG,
indicating no repression occurred. While the use of individual
LacI/GalR chimeras allows flexibility
in ligand choice, coexpressing multiple chimeric repressors enables
combinatorial transcriptional AND logic. For instance, coexpressing
two chimeras with the same DBD should create a transcriptional AND
gate for which the inputs are sugars specified by each chimera’s
LBD. Since both chimeras repress the same promoter, expression of
the target gene should occur if and only if both sugars are present.
To test this hypothesis, we measured the regulation of  driven by the P promoter in the presence of LacI-L
and each of the four other chimeras (Figure ). For three combinations, GFP fluorescence was observed if and only
if inducing amounts of both IPTG and the relevant sugar were present
in the media (Figure b). However, the combination
of LacI-L and GalS-L showed no induction, even in the presence of
IPTG and fucose. Subsequent investigation revealed that IPTG inhibits
the ability of fucose to induce expression of a GalS-L regulated system
( Figures S3 and
S4), similar to what happens for GalR in the presence of IPTG. We also tested every pairwise combination of sugars with each chimera
and found that the IPTG inhibition of GalS-L was the only instance
of competitive inhibition in this set of chimeras ( Figure S3). We then expanded this study to
include all pairwise combinations
of the chimeras with either the wt  or TAN DBD.
We expressed pairwise combinations of each chimera and tested for
the induction of GFP fluorescence from P in the presence
or absence of 10 mM of each appropriate inducer (Figure a). Except for the pairings of GalS-L and FruR-L in addition
to GalS-L and LacI-L, all pairwise combinations of transcription factors
facilitated AND transcriptional logic: GFP fluorescence was observed
if and only if inducing amounts of inducers for both repressors were
present. We next tested for AND transcriptional logic at the promoter
P when pairs of chimeras with the TAN DBD were coexpressed
(Figure b). Similar to the wt DBD, many of
the combinations facilitated AND transcriptional logic at P, and maximal GFP fluorescence was observed only in the presence
of both inducers. However, in most instances the overall induction
level from P was much lower than that of P and generally consistent with induction levels of each chimera when
used alone ( Figure
S1). Since expressing pairs of repressors creates AND transcriptional
logic, we hypothesized that coexpression of three or more repressors
would create a multi-input transcriptional AND gate. In that case,
induction of gene expression would be observed if and only if inducing
ligands for all transcription factor were present (Figure ). Therefore, we first created a three-input gate
(IPTG, ribose, and fructose) by controlling the promoter P with the LacI-L, FruR-L, and RbsR-L repressors. We assayed for GFP
fluorescence with all combinations of 10 mM of IPTG, fructose, and
ribose. As predicted, induced GFP fluorescence was observed if and
only if all three ligands were present, while background was observed
otherwise (Figure a). We next constructed
a four input AND gate with the inputs of IPTG, fructose, ribose, and
threhalose by coexpressing the repressors, LacI-L, FruR-L, RbsR-L,
and TreR-L. Again, induced GFP fluorescence was seen only in the presence
of the four inducers IPTG, fructose, ribose, and trehalose (Figure b). Finally, we hypothesized that the coexpression of chimeric
repressors
with a mixture of the wt  and TAN DBDs would allow
simultaneous logic gating at different gene outputs. Therefore, we
coexpressed repressors possessing either the wt  or TAN DBD and assayed for gene expression from promoters regulated
by either the wt  or the TAN DBD. We first tested
a wt  transcriptional AND gate working in conjunction
with P regulated by a single repressor with the TAN
DBD. We coexpressed the chimeras FruR-L and RbsR-L and LacI-T and
tested for inducible fluorescence from the wt  DBD regulated promoter P (driving ) and from TAN DBD regulated promoter P (driving ) (Figure a). As expected, we
observed induced mCherry fluorescence only in the presence of fructose
and ribose, while GFP fluorescence was seen only in the presence of
IPTG (Figure b). We extended this system to contain two functionally orthogonal
transcriptional AND gates, one at the promoter P (driving ) and the other at P (driving ) by coexpressing the chimeras FruR-L, RbsR-L, LacI-T,
and TreR-T (Figure c). We tested for GFP and
mCherry fluorescence in response to all combinations of 10 mM IPTG,
fructose, ribose, and trehalose. We observed induced mCherry fluorescence
only when ribose and fructose were present and induced GFP fluorescence
only when IPTG and trehalose were present (Figure d). This demonstrated that the two transcriptional logic gating
systems could be used simultaneously with minimal cross-talk. Pairs of engineered LacI/GalR
repressors with the same DBD create
AND transcriptional logic. (a) Each LacI/GalR chimeric repressor was
coexpressed with LacI-L and the induction of  driven
by P was monitored. (b) GFP fluorescence in response
to all combinations of the presence or absence of 10 mM IPTG and 10
mM of the respective LBD’s inducer. Data points and error bars
reflect the average and standard deviation of three experimental replicates. Pairwise combinations of repressors lead to AND transcriptional
logic. (a) All repressors contained the wt  DBD
in this experiment. Pairwise combinations of transcription repressors
were coexpressed, and the induction of GFP fluorescence from P was monitored in the presence and absence of 10 mM of each
transcription factor’s inducer. (b) All repressors contained
the TAN DBD in this experiment. Pairwise combinations of transcriptional
repressors were coexpressed and the induction of GFP fluorescence
from P was monitored in the presence or absence of 10
mM of each inducer for each transcription factor. “Fold GFP/OD”
is the observed fluorescence/OD for a given inducer condition normalized
to no inducer. Each data point represents the average of three experimental
replicates. Error bars can be found in  Figures S5 and S6. Multi-input transcriptional AND gating. Three (a) and
four (b)
chimeras were coexpressed to create multi-input AND gates. Each chimera
contained a different LBD and the wt  DBD.  was driven by P. (a) For three-input transcriptional
AND logic, we coexpressed the repressors LacI-L, FruR-L, and RbsR-L
and assayed for GFP fluorescence in the presence and absence of all
combinations of 10 mM IPTG, fructose, and ribose. (b) For four-input
transcriptional AND logic, we coexpressed the repressors LacI-L, TreR-L,
RbsR-L, and FruR-L and assayed for inducible GFP fluorescence in the
presence or absence of 10 mM IPTG, fructose, ribose, and trehalose.
Both plots show the mean GFP/OD and error bars reflect the standard
deviation of three experimental replicates. Coexpression of repressors
with either the wt  DBD or the TAN DBD for transcriptional
logic at two orthogonal promoters.
(a) The chimeric repressors FruR-L and RbsR-L regulating P, in addition to LacI-T regulating P, were coexpressed
with a dual reporter plasmid containing P driving  expression and P driving  expression. (b) Induction of GFP and mCherry fluorescence in the
presence of absence of 10 mM IPTG, fructose, and/or ribose. (c) Coexpression
of the repressors FruR-L and RbsR-L, both regulating P, and TreR-T and LacI-T, regulating P, behaved as two
orthogonal transcriptional AND gates for the dual reporter plasmid.
(d) GFP and mCherry fluorescence was assayed in the presence or absence
of 10 mM fructose, ribose, trehalose, and/or IPTG. Conditions for
which fluorescence was expected are highlighted with red boxes in
b and d. Data points and error bars reflect the average and standard
deviation of three experimental replicates. Here, we have shown that the construction of modular, multi-input
transcriptional logic gates is possible through the use of ligand-inducible
transcription factor chimeras. These chimeras make use of two main
properties. First, by using transcription factors from the same structural
family, namely the LacI/GalR family, one can swap ligand binding domains
from one transcription factor to another. This type of domain swapping has been used in other contexts, as
well. For instance, Temme et al. were able to engineer orthogonal
versions of T7 RNA Polymerase by replacing the specificity loop with
a loop from a distant homologue. The second main property used in this study was the plasticity
of the DNA-binding domains. Through mutation, the DNA binding domain
of LacI can be altered to recognize an alternate promoter. Similar studies have been used to alter the promoter specificity
of T7 RNA polymerase. This type of
mutation is particularly powerful, as it allows for the coexpression
of similar regulatory proteins that target orthogonal pathways. In
addition, because the overall function of the transcription factors
remains unchanged, they can be easily implemented within large scale
circuits with minimal retuning of regulatory strengths. This study can be further expanded in several ways. First,
the
LacI/GalR family comprises many more proteins that could be used.
Swint-Kruse and co-workers showed that at least nine different ligand
binding domains of these family members could be fused to the LacI
DNA binding domain to create functional repressors. However, not all of these chimeras show
strong inducibility, and some have significant cross-talk between
sugar ligands. This cross-talk could
be used as an additional layer of logic. For instance, the GalS-L
chimera used in this study is competitively inhibited by IPTG. This
means that any logic gate in which GalS-L is used will also contain
NOT (IPTG) logic (i.e., will not be active in the presence of IPTG).
Further engineering might also eliminate undesirable cross-talk. For
example, a point mutation within the linker domain of FruR-L improves
the responsiveness of the chimera to ligand. Second, other families of transcription factors might be used in
a similar way. For example, the growing body of knowledge on the AraC/XylS
family of transcriptional activators suggests that a similar library
of ligand-inducible transcription factors may be possible. Of course, logic gating in protein regulation is not limited
to
the transcriptional level. Recent studies have used other modalities
of translation and transcriptional regulation such as amber stop codon
suppression and DNA recombination to
engineer conditional gene regulation. Nor is logic
gating exclusively limited to prokaryotes, as recent advances in eukaryotic
gene regulation demonstrate. Taken together, these new tools
provide powerful components with which to program gene regulation
at transcriptional and post-transcriptional
levels. Rationale for
Choosing Chimera Mutants The particular
chimeras were selected from a set of more than 1000 variants for two
main reasons: (1) they have large regulatory ranges as a function
of ligand concentration, and (2) their
minimal and maximal repression levels are well-matched among the set.
In some cases, we found that fine-tuning the strength of the promoters
driving each gene gave better results. In particular, some chimeras
worked better when their genes were driven by the P promoter,
while others worked better with P. Note that chimeras with the FruR and TreR LBD are
induced by fructose-1-phosphate and trehalose-6-phosphate, respectively.
However, we used -fructose and -trehalose, which
are each phosphorylated upon cellular import. Assay for Fluorescent Protein
Production Single colonies
were inoculated in to 2 mL selective 0.04% glycerol modified MOPS
minimal media and grown overnight (M2101, Teknova). 0.8% glycerol modified MOPS minimal media was then inoculated
with the overnight culture at 1% v/v. Inducer was added and each culture
was then aliquoted in triplicate into a 96 well U-bottom plate (BD
Falcon 35117). Each plate was incubated at 37 °C and shaken at
800 rpm in a microplate shaker (VWR, 12620-926) for 3 h. Plates were
then assayed for growth (OD, 600), GFP fluorescence (ex, 488 nm; em,
510 nm), and/or mCherry fluorescence (ex, 587 nm; em, 610 nm) (Tecan
M1000, Tecan). All fluorescence values were normalized to growth (OD,
600). Each data point and error bar represents the average and standard
deviation of three experimental replicates, respectively. Modified
MOPS minimal media was used exclusively in this study to ensure consistent
induction of gene expression by each sugar sensitive LacI/GalR chimeric
repressor. Inconsistencies in the preparation of LB media between
research groups lead to inconsistent induction of gene expression
in our experiments. All experiments were performed in the cell
strain JS006, which
is the  strain MG1655 that has  and  knocked out. In experiments testing the induction of gene expression in the presence
of more than one chimera, excess amounts (10 mM) of inducer was used.
This was to detect cross-talk between LBDs. No deleterious effects
on cell growth were observed due to the high levels of inducer. When possible, expression of each transcriptional repressor was
controlled using the strong constitutive promoter P. For LacI-L, LacI-T, TreR-L, and TreR-T, we used
P. This increased the range of induction for LacR-R and
LacI-T ( Figure S1).
For TreR-L and TreR-T, this allowed detectable induction that was
absent when P was used. Plasmids maps and genotypes
used in this study are provided in  (Figure S7 and Table S2). AND Transcriptional Logic
with LacI/GalR Chimeras To
confirm the ability of each transcriptional repressor to regulate
gene expression with the wt  DBD, we cotransformed
the plasmids pZS1[FruR-L], pZS1[RbsR-L], pZS1[GalS-L], pZS1[TreR-L],
and pZS1[LacI-L] with pZA2[P:GFP] into JS006 cells.
To test the abilities of repressor with the TAN DBD to regulate gene
expression, we cotransformed the plasmids pZS1[FruR-T], pZS1[RbsR-T],
pZS1[GalS-T], pZS1[TreR-T], and pZS1[LacI-T] with the GFP expression
plasmid pZA2[P:GFP] into JS006 cells. Induction of GFP
fluorescence from the GFP reporter plasmids was then assayed as a
function of each chimera LBD’s inducer. To test the functional
orthogonality of the wt  and TAN DBDs, we cotransformed
the plasmid pZS1[Iq:LacI-L] with pZA2[P:GFP] and pZS1[Iq:LacI-T]
with pZA2[P:GFP] into JS006 cells. In these expression
systems, the repressor was driven by the “strong” promoter
P. GFP fluorescence was
assayed with or without 10 mM IPTG. To coexpress the chimeras
FruR-L, RbsR-L, TreR-L, and GalS-L with
LacI-L, the expression plasmids pZS1[RbsR-L, LacI-L], pZS1[FruR-L,
LacI-L], pZS1[GalS-L, LacI-L], and pZS1[TreR-L, LacI-L] were each
cotransformed with the GFP expression plasmid pZA2[P:GFP] into the strain JS006. GFP fluorescence was assayed in the
presence or absence of 10 mM IPTG and or the inducer of the chimera’s
LBD. To test the regulation of GFP fluorescence when GalS-L
was in the
presence of IPTG, the plasmids pZS1[GalS-L] was cotransformed with
pZA2[P:GFP] into JS006 cells. Induced GFP fluorescence
was then assayed in the presence of different fucose concentrations
as a function of increasing IPTG concentration. To test all
pairwise combinations of the chimeras with the lac
DBD, the plasmids pZS1[FruR-L, RbsR-L], pZS1[FruR-L, TreR-L], pZS1[GalS-L,
RbsR-L], pZS1[GalS-L, FruR-L], pZS1[GalS-L, TreR-L], and pZS1[RbsR-L,
TreR-L] were cotransformed with pZA2[P:GFP] into the
strain JS006. GFP fluorescence was assayed in the presence or absence
of 10 mM of the inducer for each transcriptional regulator. Similarly, to test AND transcriptional logic at the promoter P:GFP, the plasmids pZS1[RbsR-T, LacI-T], pZS1[FruR-T, LacI-T],
pZS1[GalS-T, LacI-T], pZS1[TreR-T, LacI-T], pZS1[FruR-T, RbsR-T],
pZS1[FruR-T, TreR-T], pZS1[GalS-T, RbsR-T], pZS1[GalS-T, FruR-T],
pZS1[GalS-T, TreR-T], and pZS1[RbsR-T, TreR-T] were each cotransformed
into JS006 cells with the reporter plasmid P:GFP. GFP
fluorescence was measured in the presence and absence of all combinations
of 10 mM of each inducer for each transcription factor. Multi-Input
AND Transcriptional Logic with LacI/GalR Chimeras To test
the multi-input AND transcriptional logic gates, we coexpressed
three or four chimeras to facilitate three and four input AND transcriptional
logic, respectively. For a three input AND gate at the promoter P, the plasmids pZS1[LacI-L] and pzS3[I:FruR-L,I:RbsR-L]
were cotransformed with the reporter plasmid pZA2[P:GFP]
into JS006 cells. To create a four-input transcriptional AND gate,
the plasmids pZS1[TreR-L,LacI-L] and pZM3[I:FruR-L,RbsR-L] were transformed
with pZA2[P:GFP] into the strain JS006. For both the
three and four input transcriptional AND gates, induction of GFP fluorescence
was assayed in the presence and absence of all combinations of 10
mM inducer of reach chimera. Multi-ORF and AND Transcriptional Logic with
LacI/GalR Chimeras To test the simultaneous regulation of
orthogonal ORFs with both
the wt  and TAN DBDs, we expressed chimeras with
either DBD with the dual reporter plasmid containing wt  DBD regulatable promoter P and the TAN DBD regulatable
promoter P driving expression of mCherry and GFP, respectively.
To test a transcriptional AND gate working in conjunction with a single
regulator with the TAN DBD, we cotransformed the plasmids pZS1[LacI-T]
and pZM3[FruR-L,RbsR-L] with the reporter plasmid pZA2[P:mCherry,P:GFP]. Induction of GFP and mCherry fluorescence
was assayed in the presence or absence of all combinations of 10 mM
of each inducer for each transcriptional regulator. Similarly, to
test the preparation of two orthogonal transcriptional AND gates,
we cotransformed the plasmids pZS1[TreR-T, LacI-T] and pZM3[I:FruR-L,I:RbsR-L]
with the dual reporter plasmid pZA2[P:mCherry,P:GFP] and then assayed the induction of GFP and mCherry
fluorescence was assayed in the presence or absence of all combinations
of 10 mM of each inducer for each chimeric repressor..