One
of the main goals of synthetic biology is to use well-characterized
functional modules for engineering biological systems with novel functionalities.
These functional modules are usually protein-coding or regulatory
DNA parts, which are cloned from various organisms or synthesized,
and assembled together into genetic circuits. Since the development
of the first engineered gene networks, a toggle switch and an oscillator, in the beginning
of the century, the field has accelerated with the fabrication of
even more sophisticated gene circuits such as clocks, counters, logic
processors, pattern detectors, and intracellular communication modules. Today, synthetic biology is still an emerging field and is
rapidly
expanding. This raises the question of what the unique contributions
of synthetic biology are that could not be addressed otherwise. What
distinguishes a synthetic biology approach from simply a biological
approach is that it seeks to solve problems through the construction
of new models rather than through analysis and observation alone.
This approach allows a new perspective, where biology, chemistry,
and engineering are combined to revisit old biological questions.
Being able to construct and emulate a biological system helps in better
understanding of relevant biological phenomena as well as allows the
development of a more precise, predictable means of biological manipulation
in agriculture, bioenergy production, and therapeutics. One
of the scopes of synthetic biology is to contribute solutions
to biomedical challenges. These challenges include, among others,
growing antibiotic resistance in bacteria, accelerated emergence of new infectious diseases, and evolving cancer drug resistance. To address these challenges, synthetic biology envisions the development
of custom-designed, easily regulated, and safe devices that would
complement human immune defenses and address metabolic abnormalities. This review focuses on recent advances in synthetic biology that
are holding promise for the future development of human therapeutics.
First, we will discuss some synthetic biology approaches that were
recently used in disease mechanism investigation and disease modeling.
Next, we will briefly cover current examples of the field’s
contributions in drug discovery and production (Figure ). Finally, we will review recent progress of synthetic biology
strategies in vaccine development, treatment of infections diseases,
cancer, and metabolic disorders. Outlined scheme of the typical pipeline
of drug development consisting
of drug discovery, production, animal and clinical trials, and therapeutic
administration. Natural resources are often used for novel therapeutic
discovery. Once identified, the therapeutic compounds are optimized
for bioproduction via refactoring of metabolic pathways, usually in
a heterologous host. Next, animal and consequently clinical trials
are performed for the assessment of therapeutic efficacy and safety.
Finally, novel therapeutics are administered in the clinic to treat
human diseases. Disease
Mechanism Investigation Synthetic
biology has been helpful in providing mechanistic insights into certain
human disorders. In particular, it provided a framework for generating
disease models and discovering new drug targets. For example, the
contribution of genetic defects that result in abnormal B cell development
in agammaglobulinemia, a primary immunodeficiency, was investigated
by reconstituting functional parts of key natural complexes in an
orthogonal environment. This approach
is often implemented to provide an isolated, well-characterized environment.
Patients were screened for genes that were expressed in the early
stages of B cell differentiation. Once a defect in the immunoglobulin-β
(Igβ) encoding gene was identified, the mutant Igβ and
other constituents of the human B cell antigen receptor (BCR) were
reconstituted on the surface of cultured  cells. Mutant Igβ abolished the assembly of the BCR on the
cell surface, and failure to assemble the BCR complex, in turn, caused
a complete block of B cell development. The described process was
proposed as a likely mechanism of agammaglobulinemia in some patients. In another example, synthetic presentation
of an entire human peptidome on the surface of T7 phage allowed to
discover new self-antigens (autoantigens) that could lead to autoimmune
diseases. Enrichment of autoantigens
was carried out using antibodies from patients with neurological syndromes.
The enriched antigens were subjected to high-throughput sequencing,
which revealed new antigens that could be used in accurate diagnostic
tests and designing new therapeutics. Genome
Editing Tools for Cancer Study Disease modeling is another
explored avenue that is made possible
by utilization of synthetic biology. For example, genome editing tools
such as zinc finger nucleases (ZFN), transcription activator-like
nucleases (TALEN), and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats (CRISPR) in combination with the Cas9 nuclease (CRISPR/Cas9
system), are being increasingly used in gene therapy and disease modeling
(reviewed in refs (−)). These genome
editing tools usually function by introducing a sequence-specific
double strand break, which is consequently repaired by either error-prone
nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) or homologous recombination (HR)
pathways. While the former allows for knocking out the gene of interest,
the latter pathway allows gene segment replacement or site-specific
gene knock-in. Because of their exceptional precision and relative
simplicity in designing, TALENs and CRISPR/Cas9 tools have been important
in modeling and drug target discovery, especially for a complex group
of diseases such as cancer. Certain diseases have been linked
to chromosomal rearrangements and provide a great challenge for disease
modeling. While knocking-in or coexpression of rearranged genes is
possible, these models are often unconvincing in pinpointing the exact
contribution of the rearrangements. As an example of an alternative
approach, TALENs were used to introduce androgen receptor () gene rearrangement to model a castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) phenotype in a human cell line. Two pairs of TALENs were cotransfected to introduce a deletion and
an inversion of exons 5–7 of the  gene.
The resulting splice variant of the  gene was discovered
to drive its independence from androgen in the genome engineered cell
line, which is proposed to be the mechanism of CRPC. ZFN and TALEN
technologies have also been implemented in modeling cancer-relevant
chromosomal translocations, such as those found in Ewing sarcoma and
anaplastic large cell lymphoma. Nuclease-assisted genome engineering can also be a powerful tool
for generation of genome-scale knockout screening, as was shown using
the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Using lentiviral vectors,
libraries of tens of thousands of unique guide RNA sequences, which
guide CRISPR/Cas9 specificity, were delivered into human cells. Such
screening allowed identification of genes essential for cell viability
in cancer and pluripotent stem cells, as well as genes whose loss
conferred resistance to chemotherapeutic agent vemurafenib. In another work, screening was performed for
the identification of members of the DNA mismatch repair pathway and
for genes whose loss conferred resistance to a chemotherapeutic agent
etoposide. With
the rise of multiresistant
pathogens, novel antimicrobial compounds are increasingly needed.
Since the discovery line of novel drugs has diminished in the recent
years, novel approaches, such as those proposed by synthetic biology,
are in demand. For example, a synthetic mammalian gene circuit was
utilized for the discovery of novel antituberculosis compounds. Ethionamide is an antibiotic often used for
treatment of tuberculosis; however, ethionamide-based therapies are
sometimes unsuccessful due to the development of resistance by . The resistance develops when  protein EthR represses the transcription
of , which converts ethionamide into a toxic
metabolite. A rationally designed chemical library was screened for
a compound that would inhibit EthR binding to  promoter. The interaction between the latter was assayed in human
cells through a reporter gene expression. The screening revealed 2-phenylethyl-butyrate as a potent inhibitor
of EthR, which dramatically increased the sensitivity of  to ethionamide. This work was a demonstration of a generic screening platform for
the discovery of novel antituberculosis drugs. Synthetic biology
also paved a new road for discovering novel anticancer agents. Cytotoxic
anticancer drugs are believed to discriminate between cancerous and
normal tissues by preferentially killing actively dividing cells through
targeting DNA replication, which makes cytotoxic drugs more generic
compared to “targeted” anticancer drugs. For the discovery
of novel cytotoxic drugs, a high throughput-compatible mammalian cell
based assay was devised. CHO-K1 cell
line was engineered for tetracycline-responsive overexpression of
human cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27, which
is a negative regulator of G1-S transition. The engineered cells proliferate
normally in the presence of tetracycline. However, upon withdrawal
from the antibiotic, they diverge into a heterogeneous population
of growth-arrested and proliferation-competent cells due to a spontaneous
loss of p27 in roughly half of the cells. These proliferating cells were assumed to imitate
the neoplastic cell characteristics. The assay was validated by scoring
the viability of arrested and proliferating cells upon exposure to
clinically licensed cytotoxic drugs. It is expected that the assay
will be useful for high throughput screening of novel anticancer drugs. Natural products
have been valuable in therapeutic areas such as infectious diseases
and oncology. These drugs, however, are
produced in small amounts in native hosts, and therefore, extraction
of these drugs from native hosts is usually uneconomical or can have
a negative impact on the environment. A powerful solution is drug
production in metabolically engineered microorganisms or plant cells,
which can be made capable of large-scale production (reviewed in refs (−)). A prominent recent example is pathway optimization
for overproduction of taxadiene, a precursor to an anticancer drug
taxol. In this study,  was used as
an expression host, where the overall pathway was partitioned into
two modules. Unlike in previous studies,
where these two modules were engineered separately, here, the modules’
expression was varied simultaneously by using various promoters and
gene copy numbers. This approach allowed identification of an optimally
balanced pathway using a small combinatorial space. The titer of taxadiene
was improved 15,000-fold, yielding approximately 1 g/L of taxadiene
in fed-batch bioreactor fermentations. Another impactful example was
conducted in  for the production
of artemisinic acid, a precursor to antimalarial drug. For the first
time, artemisinic acid was produced by the expression of a complete
biosynthetic pathway, which included a newly discovered plant dehydrogenase
and a second cytochrome. This development
resulted in 10-fold increase in artemisinic acid titers, yielding
up to 25 g/L. Besides microorganisms, plants have also been
used for the production of therapeutically valuable plant metabolites.
In this approach, natural products are usually produced in plant cell
cultures that are induced from either established callus cultures
or multipotent cambial meristematic cells. However, in the past two decades, production of natural products
in plant hairy roots has received a lot of attention. Hairy roots are a result of genetic transformation of plant
cells due to an infection with . Hairy roots are another attractive system for drug production since
in contrast to cell cultures they are phenotypically and genetically
stable and can be exploited for a long time. For example, three genes
involved in the biosynthesis pathway for tanshinone, a cardiovascular
disease agent, were introduced in  hairy root cultures, resulting in significantly improved production
of tanshinone (4.74-fold) and increased antioxidant activity. In vaccination, the introduced vaccine stimulates the adaptive
immunity response to a specific pathogen. Conventional vaccinations
are usually delivered by injection; however, the procedure is not
without risks or discomfort. One example
of addressing this issue is engineering of oral plant tissue-based
vaccinations, which considerably reduce the risk of contamination
with mammalian pathogens and do not require costly purification and
downstream processing. Moreover, rigid plant cell walls protect antigen
degradation in the acidic environment of the stomach. For example, unicellular green alga  chloroplasts were used for vaccine formulation
against  infection. Chloroplasts were engineered for stable expression
of the D2 fibronectin-binding domain of  fused with a mucosal adjuvant cholera toxin B subunit, which improves
antigen-specific immune responses. Mice treated with transgenic algae
had significantly reduced pathogen load in the spleen and the intestine,
and 80% of the pretreated mice survived lethal doses of , which makes  an attractive
platform for oral vaccine development. can also be manipulated to
express
foreign antigens that would stimulate an immunologic response. Recombinant yeast vaccines engineered to express
viral or tumor antigens have been demonstrated to activate dendritic
cells (DCs) and confer protective cell-mediated immunity against tumor
cells. One example is  vector engineered
to express a transgene encoding human carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA),
which is associated with tumor growth. Human DCs were activated by
CEA and subsequently activated cytotoxic T-cells specific for CEA+
human tumor cells. Reengineering
of viruses for vaccine design is another interesting
strategy in vaccine development. Thus, poliovirus was synthetically
attenuated by recoding the poliovirus capsid protein with underrepresented
codons and synthesizing the recoded DNA . Recoding of poliovirus decreased rates of protein
translation and resulted in attenuation of the virus in mice. The
attenuated virus generated effective immune response in mice, indicating
that virus attenuation via codon deoptimization could provide an alternative
method of vaccine generation. Treatment of Infectious Diseases Treatment of Bacterial Infections by Designer
Bacteriophages With the bacterial antibiotic resistance becoming
an increasing concern, synthetic biology is turning back to an almost
100-year-old idea of using bacteriophages to fight bacterial pathogens. One source of bacterial resistance to antibiotics
and host defenses is the development of biofilms, which are surface-associated
communities in a hydrated matrix of extracellular polymers. An example
of constructing a bacteriophage with an increased bactericidal ability
was engineering of T7, an specific phage,
to express dispersin B (DspB) enzyme for biofilm degradation. Intracellular expression and release of DspB
to the environment upon cell lysis allowed biofilm dispersal and a
two orders-of-magnitude improvement in decreasing biofilm cell counts
compared to a nonenzymatic phage. In a following study, M13
phage was engineered to enhance the efficacy of antibiotics in a phage–drug
combination therapy. The phage was modified
to overexpress LexA3, a repressor of SOS response in . It was reasoned that LexA3, which has also been previously shown
to inhibit emergence of antibiotic resistance, would enhance bacterial
killing by bactericidal antibiotics via disabling of the SOS response.
The study showed that the engineered phage improved the bactericidal
effect of a quinolone drug by several orders-of-magnitude  and significantly increased survival of infected
mice . In a different investigation,
M13 phage was engineered to inhibit
infection of , a common cause
of sexually transmitted diseases. The
phage was engineered for enhanced internalization into bacteria-containing
parasitophorous vacuoles, also known as inclusions, in the mammalian
host cells. The phage capsid proteins were fused with two functional
peptides: integrin binding peptide RGD, known to induce integrin mediated
endocytosis, and a segment of the polymorphic membrane protein (PmpD),
an autotransporter protein from  (Figure a). The study showed increased uptake of the phage
into the lumen of the inclusions and significant amelioration of bacterial
infection in HeLa and primary endocervical cells. Biosynthetic devices
for the treatment of infectious diseases.
(a) Engineering bacteriophages against pathogenic bacteria. M13 phage
was engineered for enhanced mammalian host cell internalization by
fusing two functional peptides, RGD and PmpD, to the coat proteins
of the phage. (b) Engineering commensal
bacteria against pathogenic bacteria.  strain
Nissle 1917 expressing autoinducer 2 (AI-2) was engineered to express
cholera autoinducer 1 (CAI-1), both of which are molecules synergistically
coordinating quorum sensing in . Through
a signal transduction cascade, CAI-1 and AI-2 inhibit the expression
of virulence genes in . (c) Type I-E CRISPR/Cas endonuclease system was engineered
for cytotoxicity against target bacteria via site-specific introduction
of a double strand break in the genome. CRISPR RNA was designed for
homology to a target gene in a region that is unique to the strain,
allowing strain-specific removal of . Treatment of Bacterial Infections by Commensal
Bacteria Diminishing virulence of pathogenic bacteria by
prophylactic consumption of engineered commensal bacteria is another
promising approach in synthetic biology. One study exploited the quorum
sensing mechanism of  in regulating
its infection cycle. High concentrations
of cholera autoinducer 1 (CAI-1) and autoinducer 2 (AI-2) are known
to inhibit virulence gene expression in . To interrupt the virulence of , an  strain Nissle 1997, which expresses AI-2 natively,
was engineered to express CAI-1 (Figure b).
When cocultured with the engineered  strain,
cholera toxin and toxin-coregulated pilus expression was inhibited
in . Furthermore,
pretreatment of an infant mouse model with engineered commensal bacteria
significantly disrupted  colonization. Thus, engineering commensal bacteria is a promising
strategy in the treatment of bacterial infections. Sequence-Specific Endonucleases for Disruption
of Bacterial and Viral Infections Another novel approach
of developing antibacterial and antiviral agents is exploitation of
sequence-specific endonucleases, such as ZFNs, TALENs, or the CRISPR/Cas
system. While the NHEJ pathway in most eukaryotes can quickly repair
extensive site-specific double strand DNA breaks, poor efficiency
or absence of this pathway in many prokaryotes can render the aforesaid
endonucleases lethal. Thus, cytotoxicity of the CRISPR/Cas system
was exploited for programmable removal of bacterial strains (Figure c). It was shown
that the CRISPR/Cas system targeting endogenous genes at species-specific
sites can be employed for the development of species and even strain
specific bactericidal agents. This was shown in an experiment with
a mixed population of  strains K-12 and BL21,
with the extent of removal of >99.999% of the targeted bacterial
strain. Genome editing tools can also be used to establish viral
resistance
in humans or develop potent virus disrupting agents. For example,
HIV-1 resistance in human CD4 T cells was established
using a ZFN targeting human endogenous HIV coreceptor . When targeting directly viral genomes,
TALENs and CRISPR/Cas9 were shown to be successful in disrupting hepatitis
B virus and latent HIV-1 provirus, respectively. Chemotherapy
and radiotherapy are used extensively in the clinic but often target
noncancerous tissues and have limited toxicity to cancer cells. More
sophisticated technologies capable of discriminating between cancerous
and healthy tissues are therefore needed. One of the developing fields
that can potentially provide a solution is oncolytic virotherapy,
which focuses on engineering viruses capable of infecting and killing
cancers. Some viruses are naturally oncotropic, and many also have
tissue tropism, which has been a starting point
for engineering tumor-specific oncolytic viruses. Greater viral
specificity for tumor cells has been the preferred direction of recent
studies. The specificity for tumors can be engineered at the stage
of virus entry via receptor targeting, which requires the modification
of receptor binding proteins. This usually is achieved via fusion
of single chain antibodies to the attachment proteins displayed on
the viral surface (reviewed in ref ()). However, tumor cells can develop resistance
by inhibition or mutation of the target antigen. To counteract this process, an oncolytic virus was engineered
for bispecific targeting of tumor antigens. This was made possible
by using designed ankyrin repeat proteins (DARPins), engineered antibody
mimetic proteins that are smaller in size and less prone to aggregation
compared with larger single-chain antibodies (Figure a). DARPins specific for two different tumor markers were
fused with the measles virus attachment protein. As a result, a virus
with conserved oncolytic potency and attenuated potency in nontarget
tissue was generated. The multiplex targeting
approach might be helpful in counteracting resistance development
in carcinoma cells. When it comes to therapeutic efficacy,
cytotoxicity of oncolytic
viruses can be enhanced through a so-called “arming”
strategy, where the virus is engineered to express a protein that
sensitizes both infected tumor cells and surrounding uninfected tumor
cells. Recent clinical studies demonstrated the increased efficacy
of oncolytic viruses when replicative viral oncolysis was combined
with stimulation of inflammation and adaptive immunity against tumor
antigens. The first report in humans was an oncolytic adenovirus armed
with granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GMCSF). GMCSF-armed virus was reported to mediate antitumor
immunologic response by recruiting natural killer cells and inducting
of tumor-specific cytotoxic T cells. Biosynthetic devices
for cancer therapy. (a) Oncolytic virotherapy.
To counteract the development of resistance in cancer cells, the measles
virus was engineered for multiplex targeting of cancer antigens. To
this end, DARPins EC4 and G3 targeting two different tumor markers,
EpCAM and HER2, were fused to the virus attachment protein. (b) Designer anticancer bacteria.  was engineered to specifically infect CD20 tumor cells via surface-expression of anti-CD20 antibody.
The cytotoxicity was achieved through expression of herpes simplex
virus thymidine kinase (TK) prodrug-converting enzyme. (c) Structure of chimeric antigen receptors
(CARs) for adoptive T cell therapy. First, second, and third generations
of CARs differ by the number of intracellular signaling domains. scFv,
single fragment length antibody. TM, transmembrane domain. CD28, 4-1BB,
and CD3ζ, intracellular signaling domains. Engineering
bacteria to invade and kill cancer cells is another promising strategy
for cancer treatment. ,  and other genera have been shown to have tumor-tropism and the ability
to kill cancer cells, which was exploited for engineering of even
more potent anticancer bacterial strains. In a recent study, tumor specificity, which is an important attribute
of anticancer bacterial therapy, was addressed. To inhibit nonspecific
invasiveness of , single-domain antibody
against human tumor-associated antigen CD20 was expressed on the bacterial
cell surface (Figure b). The engineered  was found to
preferentially invade and destroy CD20 lymphoma xenografts
in mice while significantly minimizing nonspecific cell invasion. Adoptive
T cell therapy has been shown to be effective in initiating lasting
antitumor responses. In some cases, though,
the effectiveness of the technique is limited since the function of
redirected T cells relies on the presentation of tumor antigens by
the major histocompatibility complexes (MHC), which are often inhibited
in cancerous cells. Engineering of T cells to express chimeric antigen
receptors (CARs) allows MHC-independent T cell activation and proliferation
(reviewed in refs (−)). CARs are
modular fusion proteins consisting of an extracellular antigen recognition
element, usually single chain variable fragment (scFv) antibody, a
transmembrane domain, and an intracellular signaling domain, usually
from T cell coreceptor CD3ζ or Fc receptor γ. To date,
the most encouraging clinical observations were achieved with CARs
specific for CD19 antigen, which is expressed in B cell malignancies
such as B cell leukemia/lymphoma, but not by normal essential tissues. To increase signaling strength and persistence, CARs of second
and third generations have been developed with two or three different
costimulatory signaling domains fused in a single polypeptide chain (Figure c). Engineered T cells with second
generation CARs, containing costimulatory domains from both CD3ζ
and CD28, have been shown to demonstrate improved expansion and persistence
compared to those of the first generation CARs. Moreover, the third generation CARs, also containing a
third costimulatory domain from the costimulatory molecule 4-1BB,
was shown to increase cytotoxicity of engineered T cells compared
to the second generation CARs. These advancements improved effectiveness of the CAR technology,
but the challenge of specificity remains to be addressed. In most
of the studies up to date, engineered T cells recognize a single antigen, which can also be presented by noncancerous tissues, raising the
concern of off-tumor cytotoxicity. In a recent approach, a CAR-based
AND logic gate was used to create T cells capable of recognizing two
antigens, but neither of the antigens alone. Thus, it was shown that cotransduced T cells administered in mice
destroy prostate tumors expressing both tumor antigens PSMA and PSCA,
but not tumors expressing either antigen alone. Engineering dual-specific CAR-T cells to recognize both
mesothelin and a-folate antigens resulted in potent activity against
a mouse xenograft model of ovarian cancer. These studies showed the efficacy of engineering dual-specific CAR-T
cells for minimizing parallel reactivity against normal tissues bearing
a single antigen. Treatment of Metabolic Disorders Disorders of human
metabolism encompass a diverse group of complex diseases that usually
result from genetic enzyme deficiency or epigenetic alterations. For many metabolic disorders, treatment is currently
unavailable, while others are controlled by dietary restriction or
supplementation. With the aim of tackling these disorders, the first
synthetic biology proof-of-principle studies have been conducted by
engineering bacterial circuits capable of restoring normal metabolism.
Thus, for treatment of diabetes, bacteria were engineered to stimulate
intestinal epithelial cells to secrete insulin in response to glucose. strain Nissle 1917
was engineered to express and secrete glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1)
as well as pancreatic and duodenal homeobox gene 1 (PDX-1), proteins
that are known to stimulate intestinal epithelial cells to synthesize
insulin. Cultured epithelial cells grown in cell-free media pretreated
with engineered bacteria were stimulated to secrete insulin up to
1 ng/mL. However, implementation of the
strategy in commensal bacteria cocultured with epithelial cells  or  implementation is yet
to be shown. Mammalian Pharmaceutically
Controlled Open-Loop
Circuits To be more therapeutically relevant, the synthetic
biology field is currently developing further by expanding its mammalian
gene circuit repertoire. In particular, for
the treatment of metabolic disorders, it is imperative to develop
interactive gene networks that would stimulate the expression of therapeutics
in a controlled, regulated manner. This can be achieved either by
open-loop circuits, where an input signal triggers the output in a
linear fashion, or a closed-loop circuit, where the output feeds back
on the input signal, the latter giving a more stable output control. In a recent study, an open-loop circuit for
the treatment of the metabolic syndrome was developed. Metabolic syndrome is a co-occurrence of functionally
linked health problems, such as hypertension, hyperglycemia, obesity,
and dyslipidemia, which are usually treated independently. In this
study, a synthetic circuit was devised where a pharmaceutical targeting
one of the health conditions, antihypertensive drug guanabenz, is
also an input for the signal transduction to express GLP-1 fused to
leptin. Both of the latter are therapeutic peptide hormones, GLP-1
stimulating the secretion of insulin and leptin regulating energy
intake and expenditure (Figure a). Administration
of this circuit in mice with the metabolic syndrome phenotype resulted
in simultaneous attenuation of hypertension, hyperglycemia, obesity,
and dyslipidemia. Thus, this study demonstrated the feasibility of
treating a complex metabolic health condition by obtaining a triple
output upon the administration of a single input, a pharmacological
drug. Synthetic circuits for treatment of metabolic diseases. (a) Ligand-controlled
open-loop circuits. For the simultaneous treatment of interdependent
pathologies comprising the metabolic syndrome, antihypertensive drug
guanabenz was used to activate a synthetic signal cascade to stimulate
the secretion of metabolically active peptides GLP-1 and leptin, fused
to a single polypeptide chain. (b) Closed-loop
circuits. For the treatment of diet-induced obesity, appetite-suppressive
peptide hormone pramlintide was placed under the control of a chimeric
transcription regulator TtgR-PPARα. Depending on the presence
or absence of fatty acids, human PPARα recruits either endogenous
transcription co-activators or endogenous transcription co-repressors,
respectively. Thus, a synthetic circuit that constantly senses and
regulates the blood fatty acid levels was created. (c) Optogenetic open-loop circuits. Electromagnetic waves
with radio frequencies were used to activate the production of bioengineered
insulin. To this end, antibody-coated iron oxide nanoparticles, which
heat up upon exposure to radio waves, were engineered to bind to temperature-sensitive
channel protein TRPV1. Upon increase in temperature, TRPV1 activates
a signal transduction cascade that in turn activates pro-insulin.
The expression of the latter resulted in improved glucose homeostasis. Small-molecule
drug-based intervention to treat physiological abnormalities in metabolic
disorder patients may provide a controlled way of therapeutic delivery,
yet prolonged daily administration of a drug can lead to unwanted
side effects. To this end, the development of closed-loop circuits
would be advantageous since it would remove the reliance on repeated
administration of a therapeutic. Implementation of this approach was
described using a prosthetic gene network that could sense and restore
normal physiological uric acid levels through controlled expression
of urate oxidase. Urate oxidase was put
under direct control of bacterial uric acid sensor HucR, which binds
its target DNA motif in the absence of uric acid. The synthetic circuit
stabilized the blood urate concentration in urate oxidase-deficient
mice with acute hyperuricemia. In another example, a gene circuit
for the treatment of diet-induced obesity in mice was designed. To this end, a binary synthetic transcription
factor was constructed by fusing peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-α (PPARα) to bacterial DNA-binding repressor
TtgR (Figure b). PPARα is a lipid receptor
and transcription factor that recruits endogenous co-activators in
the presence of fatty acids, but associates with endogenous co-repressors
in the absence of fatty acids. TtgR-regulated promoter was used to
express an appetite-suppressing peptide hormone pramlintide. Engineered
cells were encapsulated and implanted in mice with diet-induced obesity,
which consequently showed significant reduction in food consumption
and blood lipid levels. Mammalian Open-Loop Optogenetic
Devices Switching from drug-dependent gene regulation to
molecule-free
electromagnetic gene regulation  for therapeutic
applications is becoming another appealing approach. Thus, the field
of optogenetics is becoming increasingly popular due to anatomical
specificity and precise temporal control of gene expression. Recently,
the first optogenetic device for the controlled production of a therapeutic
protein in an animal disease model was reported. Here, shGLP-1 hormone was put under transcriptional control
of melanopsin, a blue light sensor protein. Melanopsin belongs to
a family of ion channel proteins, such as channelrhodopsin, that transform
the light-based energy to ion-based membrane potential and trigger
an intracellular signaling cascade. The calcium-dependent signaling
cascade eventually activates a transcription factor that controls
the expression of the hormone. Encapsulated cultured human cells were
implanted in a mouse model of human type II diabetes. Upon illumination
with blue light, type II diabetic mice showed improved glucose homeostasis. However, a major limitation of implementing melanopsin and similar
ion channels is that animal tissue is an impenetrable obstacle for
light waves, and implanted devices are required for the delivery of
the signal. A different solution was proposed, where instead of visible
light, radio frequencies, which can penetrate deep tissues with minimal
energy loss, were used. Unlike tissue,
metal nanoparticles strongly absorb radio wave energy and heat up
as a result. The antibody-coated nanoparticles were designed to bind
TRPV1, a modified temperature sensitive channel in the membrane of
the target cells (Figure c). Upon exposure
to low-frequency electromagnetic energy, the local heating activated
TRPV1, which in turn activated the downstream calcium-dependent signaling
cascade and expression of modified human insulin gene. Mice with tumor
xenografts expressing the bioengineered insulin gene that were exposed
to radio waves were shown to have insulin expression activated and
blood glucose lowered. Despite being a relatively new discipline, synthetic biology holds
a great promise for the development of next generation therapeutics.
Although traditional genome engineering strategies can potentially
correct some of the genetic disorders, many human disorders are not
strictly genetic. Thus, complex ailments such as infectious diseases,
cancer, metabolic disorders, and many other known diseases are far
more complex to be tackled by a simple genetic correction. For example,
infectious diseases, as well as cancer, being agents capable of evolving
and adapting, are the most difficult in tackling due to the development
of resistance to human interventions. Therapeutic agents with exceptional
specificity and efficacy, in combination with agents that inhibit
adaptability of infections and malignancies, would be required for
tackling these disorders. Many metabolic, immunological, neurological,
and other disorders often develop in response to a combination of
complex genetic background and variable environmental conditions.
These pathologies would require state-of the art devices capable of
sensing and self-regulating in response to fluctuating internal and
external factors. Thus, sophisticated devices, such as those proposed
by synthetic biology, are necessary for development of more potent
therapeutic solutions than those currently available in the clinic. In this review, we have discussed some of the current developments
of synthetic biology in addressing human disorders. Synthetic bacterial
and viral devices were developed from well studied, model microorganisms
with an established genome manipulation and functional toolkit and
showed potential for the development of even more complex devices.
The
first mammalian synthetic circuits for therapeutic applications have
also been developed in the past decade; however, their development
lagged behind bacterial and viral devices due to the limited number
of functional parts, more complex metazoan gene circuitry, and the
absence of precise and robust genome engineering strategies. However,
with the development of cheaper gene synthesis methods, new state of the art genome engineering tools, and ongoing development of functional parts, this field is continually and increasingly growing. Despite the current progress, synthetic biology has still a long
road for clinical application. Yet, with the current tools and the
rate of development, it is easy to envision synthetic biology contributing
greatly to faster drug discovery and drug development as well as production
of new and more affordable medicines. Among other applications, clinical
application of commensal bacteria and bacteriophages against pathogenic
bacteria, immune cells that kill metastatic solid tumor cells, and
therapeutic sensor-effector devices for personalized medicine can
one day become a reality..