Nutritional
deficiencies result
in millions of deaths globally every year, with the burden disproportionately borne by developing countries.
A critical obstacle in addressing global malnutrition problems is
the lack of detailed knowledge about which areas are most heavily
affected by which nutritional deficiencies. This issue is particularly
salient in the case of micronutrient deficiencies, often referred
to as “hidden hunger” since people may appear to have
sufficient food intake but are lacking appropriate levels of key vitamins
and minerals (micronutrients). While aid agencies often use nutritional
survey instruments (for example, food diaries or dietary recall) to
estimate the intake of inhabitants of a given region, these methods
can have limits on their accuracy due to, among other factors, discrepancies
between varying local crop nutrient content and values in available
databases and bias of available information toward
subgroups least at risk of deficiency. The ideal approach to obtaining this data would be representative
sampling and clinical measurement of circulating markers for nutritional
status, but this is prohibitive on both logistical and economic grounds. As such, the development of low-cost ways to
measure nutritional markers in a logistically simplified fashion could
have a significant impact on global health efforts, providing more
detailed information on specific nutritional burdens in specific regions
of the world and ultimately informing the efficient allocation of
limited aid resources. Whole-cell biosensors are a promising
route for the creation of
such inexpensive and simple ways to measure nutritional status. Microbes,
as obligate consumers of a number of micronutrients, have evolved
a wide array of transcription factors that differentially regulate
genes in response to changes of nutrient levels in their environment.
This existing cellular machinery could be leveraged to sense and report
micronutrient levels in human biofluids at low cost. In addition,
microbes can be programmed to produce reporters that are visible to
the naked eye (e.g., pigments), which would minimize the need for
sophisticated or expensive analytical equipment and thus enable low-cost,
low-resource, portable measurement of micronutrient levels. An envisioned
schematic for how an assay based on these methods might look is depicted
in a. Briefly,
patient blood is taken in the field and separated on-site with innovative
low-resource centrifuges (paper centrifuge, egg-beater centrifuge) or perhaps paper-based
technology. The resulting plasma is exposed
to packaged, lyophilized cells. The whole-cell biosensor senses micronutrient
levels and responds by producing pigmented metabolites (here, the
red lycopene, orange β-carotene, and purple violacein), allowing
for unambiguous, minimal-equipment determination of micronutrient
status in the field. The work presented here focuses on the development
of an assay for zinc levels. Zinc is a critical micronutrient for human health, which
has long
been identified as a major public health burden in terms of contribution
to nutritional deficiency burden and related morbidity and mortality. Over 1 billion people across the
world are at risk for zinc deficiency, with at least 100 000 children under the age of 5 dying annually
as a result of the problem and millions more experiencing its developmental
and other deleterious effects. The Biomarkers
of Nutrition for Development (BOND) program identified zinc as one
of the six key micronutrient deficiencies for which consensus on accurate
assessment methodologies could have a major public health impact. While treatable, a significant challenge in
addressing zinc deficiency is its identification in populations in
a more precise way than estimated dietary intake or food surveys, yet in a more tractable way than traditional
state-of-the-art testing of blood in a laboratory setting. Measuring
serum zinc in the field as part of existing surveying efforts could
be used to indicate population zinc status and guide policy-making
decisions for zinc deficiency interventions. Previous work in
our lab was directed toward engineering the carotenoid
pathway for more precise control of metabolism to allow for the zinc-responsive
production of two pigments from one metabolic pathway. The zinc-responsive
activator ZntR and a cognate promoter,
P, were used to allow cells to respond to changes in
extracellular zinc. By altering ribosomal binding sites (RBSs) of
carotenoid genes, adding protein degradation tags, controlling gene
dosage though plasmid copy number, and increasing metabolic precursor
availability through supplementation of the mevalonate pathway, stable
zinc-responsive production of either lycopene or β-carotene
from the same strain was enabled that represented intermediate and
sufficient levels of zinc, respectively. The challenge overcome in that work was eliciting this response
over a fraction of ZntR/P’s natural dynamic
range (0–1.1 mM) that was closer
to a physiologically relevant range found in human serum (3–16
μM). Here, we present the results of our efforts to create
a whole-cell
sensor for zinc levels that uses multiple pigments as easy-to-read
reporters. We integrate the production of three pigments into a single
strain based on the zinc levels in which the cells are cultured. We
expand upon our previously reported engineering efforts by optimizing
regulator levels for increased dynamic range of promoters from 0 to
20 μM zinc, and we introduce a decoy-based tuning strategy for
violacein expression under control of a second zinc-responsive system
based on the promoter P and the zinc-responsive repressor
Zur. Finally, we demonstrate growth and
proof-of-principle performance in human serum, which would ultimately
be required for a device based on this biosensor. (a) Schematic of envisioned test implementation.
Patient blood
is collected in the field, separated using field-friendly approaches,
and combined with packaged sensor cells. The cells grow and produce
pigment indicative of subject micronutrient status. (b) Schematic
of regulator test construct. The promoters and ribosomal binding sites
(boxed) for zinc-responsive regulators ZntR and Zur were varied to
determine optimal expression for improved dynamic range over physiologically
relevant zinc concentrations. (c) Fluorescent reporter output demonstrating
sensor dynamic range from 0 to 20 μM Zn with different
expression levels for ZntR and Zur. Regulator pairs one and two (arrows)
were used in subsequent two- and three-color pigment biosensors. Error
bars indicate standard deviation. Dynamic
Range of Promoter Regulator Pairs In initial
efforts, we identified that the expression levels of the zinc-responsive
regulators ZntR and Zur can have a major impact on the dynamic range
(ratio of maximum to minimum output over a given input range) of the
promoters that they regulate (data not shown). Since a requisite step
in our efforts is the precise engineering of metabolic state to enable
production of (hopefully) only one pigment at a time, a high dynamic range would enable a transition between
repressed or uninduced levels of a pigment that are not visually detectable
and induced levels that are obvious to the naked eye in a reasonable
amount of time. We thus first sought to characterize the dynamic ranges
of the two regulator/promoter systems at varying expression levels
of the regulators. To identify regulator expression levels that
maximize the range of transcription rates available over a physiologically
relevant concentration range of zinc, a series of fluorescent reporter
plasmids was constructed consisting of transcriptionally insulated
P and P controlling expression of mRFP
and eGFP. The regulators ZntR and Zur were constitutively expressed
with different combinations of promoters and ribosomal binding sites
(b) of varying
strength. These plasmids were transformed into  and grown in minimal media with and without treatment by Chelex
100, a zinc-selective chelating resin, each with and without 20 μM
supplemented ZnSO. Fluorescent output of both reporters
was measured and compared to determine promoter performance over this
range of zinc. The dynamic range of each promoter was calculated by
taking the ratio of the largest to smallest fluorescence values of
each promoter/regulator system at 0 and 20 μM ZnSO. The dynamic ranges of both promoter/regulator systems are plotted
against each other in c. The two highest dynamic range regulator pairs (referred
to hereafter as Pair 1 and Pair 2) were selected for subsequent experiments
with two- and three-pigment output sensors. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00292/suppl_file/sb7b00292_si_001.pdf Supporting Information Tables S1–S3 These efforts yielded
some straightforward results as well as others
that were not quite as expected. Unsurprisingly, most of the best
performance was observed in the resin-treated media; both regulator
systems already exhibit some degree of response (induction or repression)
starting at low micromolar levels of zinc or below, so the trace levels
of zinc present in untreated medium would cause greater baseline regulator
activity in unsupplemented medium, ultimately yielding lower dynamic
ranges for untreated versus Chelex-treated media. Interestingly, the
regulator pairs that resulted in the highest dynamic ranges do not
simply correspond to the highest expected regulator expression levels
estimated by taking the product of the relative translation rate predicted
by the Ribosomal Binding Site Calculator and the previously characterized relative transcriptional output
of constitutive promoters (). A possible explanation for this behavior
is that the two regulators have different affinities for zinc and
are both competing for zinc from the same pool. Overexpression of these zinc-binding proteins likely affects the
natural partitioning of zinc ions throughout the proteome. As a result,
a change in expression of Zur could, for example, alter the availability
of zinc for ZntR and thus change P transcriptional
output for a given concentration of zinc, even though Zur does not
directly regulate P. Two- and Three-Color Pigment
Sensors Using regulator
levels from Pair 1 and Pair 2 from above, a library of pigment-based
reporters was constructed with varying ribosomal binding strength
and an LAA protein degradation tag on , the gene that converts lycopene to β-carotene,
under control of P. (When plasmids are described here,
they are identified by regulator pair and RBS on , with ‘L’ denoting the presence of a degradation tag
on , such as Pair 1 33 or Pair 2 33L.) The lycopene
operon from , , was constitutively expressed from a weak promoter.
The library was grown at 0, 10, 20, and 100 μM zinc in minimal
media for 24 h and carotenoids were extracted for HPLC analysis. a shows four
representative library members demonstrating a variety of behavior
over the tested zinc concentrations. First, at the two extrema, sensors
were produced that were unable to appreciably respond to changes in
zinc. In one case, the only accessible state at all tested zinc concentrations
was β-carotene. This is a challenge in using two consecutive
pigments in a metabolic pathway as reporters: tight control of downstream
enzymes is necessary to maintain a color output of an intermediate
metabolite, problems we previously found could be addressed by adjusting
precursor availability. This indicates
that even with superior dynamic range from regulator Pair 1, leaky
transcription from P is still sufficient to prevent
access to a lycopene-only state with a weak ribosomal binding site
alone. At the other extreme, adding a degradation tag to  in concert with a weak ribosomal binding site is sufficient to prevent
access to the β-carotene state. In between, stronger ribosomal
binding sites coupled with a LAA degradation tag shift the switch
point where cells become β-carotene dominated from between 0
and 10 μM Zn (32L Pair 2) to between 20 and 100
μM Zn (34L Pair 1), demonstrating that with these
regulator pairs, precursor supplementation is not strictly necessary
to switch states in the carotenoid pathway at these zinc levels. The
degradation tag offers another potential opportunity to tune the effective
dynamic range of the biosensor output; however, since we were primarily
concerned with minimizing uninduced levels of CrtY in order to access
the intermediate lycopene pigment state, only the strong LAA tag was
used in this work. A significant difference in fluorescent reporter output suggested
that switching between regulator pairs one and two would also allow
fine-tuning of pigment control over the concentration range tested;
however, two different pigment reporter constructs (32L and 34L) exhibited
little to no change based on the regulator pair with which they were
coupled (b).
In the case of 34L, no significant differences between the two regulator
pairs were observed in lycopene and β-carotene measurements
at any concentration range, including 10 and 20 μM Zn at which there were intermediate amounts of both pigments. The 32L
construct had significant differences in behavior of the two regulator
pairs only at 100 μM and only in the total amount of β-carotene
produced, as no lycopene was detected in either strain. This suggests
that the response of the carotenoid pigment reporter is relatively
robust to regulator expression levels. This was somewhat surprising,
as we had previously observed that similar reporter constructs with
genomic regulators alone or with genomic regulator operons coexpressed
on the reporter plasmid were unable to switch state between lycopene
and β-carotene and this was ameliorated by tuning regulator
levels. With the carotenoid reporter functioning over the desired
concentration
range in a few of the constructs, we selected the construct 31L Pair
1, which switched from a lycopene-dominated state to a β-carotene
dominated state closer to 10 μM, for subsequent experiments.
To 31L Pair 1, the second zinc-responsive promoter, P, was added to control expression of the  operon
that produces the pigment violacein. This resulted in a strain that
produced three distinct color states over a 20 μM Zn concentration range (a). At 0 and 0.1 μM Zn, P was derepressed and higher quantities of violacein were produced.
At 0.5 and 1 μM Zn, the sensor output was dominated
by lycopene production. An intermediate state in which both lycopene
and β-carotene were present in appreciable quantities was observed
at 5 and 10 μM zinc, but by 20 μM zinc, the sensor output
was dominated by β-carotene. The strategy in using these pigments
was to tune violacein production to visually overpower lycopene in
low zinc states such that the cells would appear purple even though
lycopene was still present. In this construct, violacein production
was not high enough at low zinc concentrations to produce a cell pellet
in which only violacein was visibly detectable (b); however, there remained a clear difference
in pellet coloration between the high violacein states at low zinc
and all other conditions. Additionally, though measured levels of
both lycopene and β-carotene were intermediate at 5 and 10 μM
zinc, there was little observable difference between the cell pellets
from
these conditions and those from 20 μM, at which essentially
only β-carotene was detected in appreciable quantities in extractions.
The result of this is three distinct color states between 0 and 20 μM
Zn. Some replicates with no supplemented zinc displayed
some inhomogeneity
in pigment production and formed a striated pellet in which cells
with low or no violacein production formed the base of the pellet,
making violacein difficult to detect visually (b). Similar behavior was not observed at
0.1 μM. This behavior was not apparent in the extracts, as no
substantial difference in normalized violacein production was measured
at the two lowest zinc conditions (a). (a) Representative output of two-color biosensors showing
two extreme
cases in which sensor output does not switch (left, right) and two
intermediate cases demonstrating a shift in concentration of zinc
at which sensor switches from lycopene-dominated to β-carotene-dominated
(middle). (b) Carotenoid output comparing regulator pairs. While a
substantial difference between regulator pairs was observed with fluorescent
reporters (c), two different pigment reporters (32L and 34L) show different
lycopene production behavior in response to zinc but little difference
in carotenoid production as a function of regulator pair. Error bars
indicate standard deviation. (a) Demonstration of a three-color sensor. At very low
zinc, the
cells produce substantial violacein and lycopene. At increasing concentrations
of zinc, violacein production is repressed and the sensor is in a
primarily lycopene state. As zinc increases further, lycopene is consumed
and cells enter a primarily β-carotene state. (b) Cell pellets
from the experiment in panel a. (c) Fluorescent reporter output in
test with 32 decoy Zur operators and inducible Zur. Asterisks indicate
significance at  < 0.05. (d) Violacein extract
levels from decoy Zur operator test and varying RBS strength on inducible
Zur. A construct without a decoy array or inducible Zur is presented
for comparison (blue). Double asterisks denote statistical significance
( < 0.05) between red and blue. Single asterisks
denote statistical significance between gray and blue ( < 0.05). Error bars indicate standard deviation. Tuning P Response with Decoy
Operators http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00292/suppl_file/sb7b00292_si_001.pdf Supporting Information Figure S1 Unfortunately, the concentration range at which
violacein production
becomes visually undetectable in the construct depicted in a,b (less than 1
μM) is below medically relevant levels in human serum. To address
this issue, we explored the use of additional “decoy”
binding sites to sequester zinc-bound Zur and thus increase the zinc
concentration necessary to yield sufficient zinc-bound Zur to repress
expression of the violacein operon. We introduced to the plasmid an
array of eight decoy binding sites for Zur comprising a combination
of P operators and completely
palindromic P operators. On a fluorescent reporter
construct for P and P with no additional
regulator expression (only genomic expression), the decoy array had
the effect of significantly increasing the levels of the fluorescent
reporter under full zinc repression, but it did not significantly
alter () the zinc concentration at which expression first reached its minimum. In an attempt to rectify this, the number of decoy binding sites
was increased to 32 and  was placed under the
control of P with either a weak (33) or intermediate
strength (31) ribosomal binding site (c), decreasing Zur levels at low zinc concentrations.
Induction from 0 to 20 μM produced higher P output
in the reporter with the weaker RBS for Zur compared to the stronger
RBS at all zinc concentrations, though these differences were only
significant ( < 0.05) at 0.1 and 5 μM Zn. This is consistent with the hypothesis that driving expression
of Zur from P yields insufficient Zur at low zinc concentrations
to saturate the decoy array and P. As transcription
from P increases with Zn concentration,
additional Zur is produced, further repressing P (though
with the weaker RBS, there is still insufficient Zur to fully repress
fluorescence). P output was also increased significantly
at all concentrations except 0, 0.1, and 5 μM Zn ( < 0.05). The interpretation of this is less
straightforward, but a possibility is that for any given concentration
of zinc, there should be less Zur expressed from plasmids with the
weaker RBS and thus fewer molecules to compete with constant ZntR
levels for zinc binding. Though this strategy no longer relies directly
on the natural dynamics of zinc binding to Zur to regulate P, these results demonstrate that the decoy array and inducible expression
of the repressor are effective at shifting the apparent concentration
at which expression from P is fully repressed from
about 0.3 μM (no decoys and regulator Pair 1, data not shown)
to between 1 and 5 μM (32 decoys with strong RBS on Zur) to
greater than 20 μM (32 decoys and weak RBS on Zur). This suggests
that the threshold between sensor color output for a given strain
can be effectively tuned based on the final needs of the sensor using
this approach. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00292/suppl_file/sb7b00292_si_001.pdf Supporting Information Figure S2 The same changes were made to the pigment reporter
construct. Violacein
extractions (d) and cell pellets () both show trends similar to those seen with the fluorescent
reporter. The violacein content of strains with the stronger RBS on  was significantly higher at all zinc concentrations
above zero, and the weaker RBS was significant under all conditions
except 5 and 20 μM Zn (while the trends were consistent,
increased variability brought the differences below  < 0.05). Though the strain harboring the weaker RBS had more
violacein on average, the difference between the two decoy strains
was not statistically significant at any concentration of zinc. These
results demonstrate that behavior of the decoy array and inducible
repressor is replicated using pigments, meaning that the concentrations
at which violacein becomes undetectable and thus the sensor color
output changes can be effectively tuned using this approach. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00292/suppl_file/sb7b00292_si_001.pdf Supporting Information Figure S3 A likely source of variance in the violacein measurements is instability
in the decoy array. We observed significant loss of violacein pigmentation
in biological replicates during some experiments and suspected that
the decoy array might be altered in cultures exhibiting that behavior
due to the number and proximity of repeated nucleotide sequences in
the decoy array and the high cellular strain of enzyme expression.
To assess this, plasmid DNA from a sample of the cultures was amplified
using PCR, showing significant deviations from the expected band length
() and
frequently revealing an assortment of decoy array lengths. Though
the presence of repeated sequences on a plasmid might be inherently
unstable, we note that we only observed this phenomenon in plasmids
using pigments as reporters. Since loss of decoy sites would significantly
reduce expression of the  operon, this observation
suggests that violacein expression is a significant burden on cells
and such deletions are probably selected for evolutionarily, putting
practical limits on the number of decoy sites possible in arrays. Ultimately, the application
of a field-deployable biosensor will require the direct measurement
of a common biofluid. For zinc, this necessitates biosensor growth
and/or response in human serum or plasma. One of the prevailing recommendations
for evaluating zinc status is plasma zinc, but to facilitate development, we chose to use pooled commercial
off-the-clot serum to avoid any potential interference from coagulants
or anticoagulants. While there is a potential discrepancy between
serum and plasma zinc levels, this is solely due to how the fluids
are commonly handled prior to analysis, and choosing serum zinc allowed
us to evaluate the sensor in a similar matrix to what would be expected
in the field. To simulate zinc deficiency,
the serum was treated with Chelex 100 resin to remove zinc, allowing
retitration to measure the response of the sensor at various concentrations
of zinc. In initial experiments, cultures were inoculated with
small volumes of resuspended colonies from agar plates. We grew these
in mixtures of serum and media with increasing percentages of serum,
but we were unable to grow cultures in even our lowest (10%) serum
concentration (data not shown). This interference with bacterial growth
may have been due to the passive immune functionality present in human
serum in the form of the complement system, a cascade of proteins with the ability to form pores in foreign
cell membranes, ultimately causing lysis. To test if something
similar to complement system protein activity
in serum was interfering with growth, we compared cultures with low
percentages of normal human serum (NHS), heat-inactivated normal human
serum (HI NHS), and fetal bovine serum (FBS) that had not been heat-inactivated.
Heat inactivation should render the complement system or similar protein
actors inactive and prevent lysis of the biosensor; although FBS should
have some form of a complement system, it should have lower levels
of complement than adult serum. DH10B
grew robustly in all tested concentrations below 10% in both HI NHS
and FBS but only at 0.1% NHS (a), suggesting that the complement system or something
similar interferes with cell growth. To test sensor response,
we compared our fluorescent reporter in
HI NHS, Chelex-treated HI NHS, and zinc-supplemented resin-treated
serum (b).
We achieved robust growth up to 10% serum under all conditions, but
none at 50% serum. (While a standard protocol was used for heat inactivation,
it is likely that the complement system was not completely inactivated
in these experiments as growth was observed in higher percentage serum
in subsequent experiments.) The difference in fluorescent reporter
output was statistically significant ( < 0.05)
between Chelex-treated and 10 μM supplemented Chelex-treated
serum at 5% for P and at both 5 and 10% for P, indicating that both promoter/regulator pairs could detect changes
in a physiologically relevant zinc concentration in low-percentage
serum media. The lack of significant difference in P output observed with and without the addition of zinc could be due
to an incomplete removal of zinc by the commercial resin. P and Zur respond below 0.5 μM in minimal media, and a small
amount of zinc remaining in serum could cause the discrepancy between
5 and 10% serum media. Since achieving consistent and inexpensive
heat inactivation in
the field poses significant challenges, we investigated alternative
methods of achieving growth in NHS. Since growth was observed in initial
serum experiments at 0.1%, we sought to identify at what percentage
serum the culture growth becomes significantly reduced and if this
was dependent on the initial inoculum. Titrating serum down in 0.1%
increments from 1%, we saw significant growth below 0.7% NHS (c) with significantly
increased growth relative to no serum at 0.2 and 0.1%. Additionally,
a 10-fold increase in inoculum achieved growth in 1% serum, suggesting
that it may be possible to simply overwhelm the complement system
with a sufficient bacterial inoculum. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00292/suppl_file/sb7b00292_si_001.pdf Supporting Information Figure S4 To further investigate
the potential for using high inoculation
density to overcome growth limitations due to the complement system,
overnight cultures were grown, pelleted, and concentrated in small
volumes of media (OD: 68). Different volumes of the
resuspension were inoculated in 96-well plates in 100 and 50% normal
human serum in M9 media. After incubation for 24 h, there was a clear
cutoff between a starting OD of 0.227 (0.5 μL
inoculum) and 0.0612 (0.135 μL inoculum) in 50% NHS (). Only higher
inoculum volumes were used in 100% NHS, and all conditions had positive
changes in OD; however, optical density changes were
significantly lower in 100% serum compared to 50%. To determine
appropriate serum conditions to test response of the
biosensor, the fluorescent reporter was inoculated in 75, 50, and
25% NHS and Chelex-treated NHS with and without supplemented zinc
(d). The fluorescence
readings of P could differentiate between NHS and Chelex-treated
NHS without zinc and between Chelex-treated NHS with and without zinc
at both 75 and 50% serum by volume ( < 0.05).
At 25% serum, the fluorescence readings could differentiate between
Chelex-treated NHS with and without zinc, but differences between
NHS and Chelex-treated NHS without zinc were not significant. Results
for P fluorescent output yielded the opposite results,
with detectable differences between NHS and Chelex-treated NHS and
between Chelex-treated NHS with and without zinc supplementation at
25% only ( < 0.05). As the most significant
challenge with the three-color pigment
system is sufficiently precise tuning of the highly zinc sensitive
Zur/P system, 25% serum was used to test the sensor
response in human serum. A starter culture with pigment reporter plasmid
harboring a 32× Zur operator decoy array and an intermediate
strength RBS on  was concentrated as described
above, inoculated at a starting OD of 0.325, and grown
for 24 h in 25% NHS and Chelex-treated serum with varying levels of
zinc supplementation. Extracts (a) and cell pellets (b) demonstrate a high violacein and lycopene
state at the lowest zinc concentration. All higher-zinc conditions
have a mixture between lycopene and β-carotene and decreasing
expression of violacein, showing the sensor in transition between
carotenoid states. Violacein production is substantial under all conditions
except for untreated NHS. Since pooled commercial NHS should contain
healthy zinc levels, these results clearly indicate that more tuning
of the carotenoid transition point will be necessary (which we have
demonstrated here and in previous work); however, it is extremely promising that violacein production has
dropped to a level such that it is not visible in cell pellets at
healthy zinc levels (b, left). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00292/suppl_file/sb7b00292_si_001.pdf Supporting Information Figure S5 Notably, violacein production is significantly
higher at low zinc
conditions in 25% serum than in M9 alone (compare a to d), and a large fraction of violacein is
found in the supernatant of serum cultures. This could be due to metabolic
changes in  induced by human
serum. Another explanation is that since violacein preferentially
partitions into the media when serum is present, intracellular levels
of violacein are kept lower in serum cultures than in M9 alone. A
possible explanation for increased violacein in serum-containing media
is solubilization of violacein by interaction with serum proteins
(most likely human serum albumin) or perhaps lipids. Removal of product
from the cells due to increased solubility in the media could help
pull on the metabolic pathway and/or prevent intracellular violacein
toxicity. Supernatants from M9 cultures show no visible violacein
retention, though small differences in absorbance are detectable between
butanol extractions of supernatant from cultures with cells harboring
different amounts of violacein. Cell pellets from M9 cultures were
observed to contain more violacein than those in 25% serum, even as
total violacein production in serum cultures was significantly greater
as assessed by measurement of violacein in the supernatant (). (a) Growth of DH10B in decreasing concentrations
of normal human
serum (NHS), heat-inactivated human serum, and fetal bovine serum.
Normal human serum cultures failed to grow at all concentrations above
0.1%. Asterisks indicate differences at  < 0.05.
(b) Fluorescent reporter demonstrating sensor response in heat-inactivated
human serum treated with Chelex 100 resin. At 5% serum, differences
were significant between cultures with and without zinc supplementation
for both P and P (**  < 0.01, *  < 0.05). Zinc supplemented as
if serum had 10 μM zinc. (c) NHS titration in M9. 10× inoculum
only used at 1% NHS experimental condition (*  <
0.05 compared to 0, **  < 0.05 compared to 10×
inoculum). (d) Large-inoculum test of fluorescent reporter in human
serum (*  < 0.05). Zinc supplemented as if serum
had 5 μM zinc. Specific statistical comparisons relevant for
discussions in the text are highlighted; lack of a comparison does
not indicate lack of significant differences. Error bars indicate
standard deviation. (a) Extract from biosensor culture in 25% NHS. Chelex-treated
serum
exhibits violacein-dominated low zinc output. NHS is characteristic
of output in a healthy individual. (b) Cell pellets from 1 mL of 24
h culture of biosensor in 25% serum. Zinc supplementation levels were
selected to mimic NHS. Here, NHS (left) shows characteristic pigment
output of sensor in the presence of healthy zinc levels from commercial
pooled serum. Chelex 100-treated serum (right) shows pigment output
characteristic of low zinc to intermediate zinc states. In summary, we have demonstrated a proof-of-concept whole-cell
biosensor that produces outputs detectable and interpretable by the
naked eye at physiologically relevant zinc levels in 25% human serum.
By optimizing expression levels of regulators for improved dynamic
range of P/ZntR and P/Zur between 0
and 20 μM Zn, we demonstrated the ability to tune
the sensor output between the carotenoids lycopene and β-carotene
to indicate borderline and healthy zinc levels. A strategy to adjust
the response of P, initially occurring at nonphysiologically
low concentrations of zinc, was demonstrated using arrays of decoy
binding sites for Zur and using P output to control
Zur, fully repressing it at zinc levels found in healthy serum and
allowing violacein expression at levels expected to be physiologically
relevant. Interference with sensor cell growth in human serum by the
complement system or something similar was overcome via high-density
inoculations, and a proof-of-concept test of a three-color sensor
was presented. The final transition thresholds between purple, red,
and orange for a final field-deployed device cannot be determined
now, as they will ultimately depend on the final form factor and assay
protocol (e.g., percentage serum) of a field-friendly packaged and
preserved device (which is the subject of ongoing efforts). Our proof-of-principle
presented here for the sensor—demonstrating three color regimes
in media cultures and the ability to produce the same pigments in
serum culture—combined with our demonstrated ability to tune
those transition thresholds suggests that whatever the final desired
thresholds may be will be readily achievable using the tools and approaches
demonstrated here. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00292/suppl_file/sb7b00292_si_001.pdf Plasmids and primers
from this work appear in . Oligonucleotide synthesis and sequence verification
of all constructed plasmids were performed by Eurofins Genomics. All enzymes were purchased from New
England Biolabs. PCR amplification was performed with Q5 polymerase.
Plasmids were constructed with standard restriction endonuclease cloning
or Gibson assembly. All experiments used
the  strain DH10B. For routine
cloning, cultures were grown in LB supplemented as necessary with
chloramphenicol, tetracycline HCl, and kanamycin sulfate at final
concentrations of 33, 15, and 50 μg/mL, respectively. Plasmid
purification was performed with (Omega) kits. Purification of PCR
products was performed with Qiagen kits. To construct the array
of decoy Zur operators, oligonucleotides were synthesized containing
portions of a modified palindrome and the Zur operator site in P and appropriate restriction sites with sufficient overlapping
sequences. These oligonucleotides were mixed and extended with Q5
polymerase (New England Biolabs) to create double stranded DNA, which
was purified with a Qiaquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen), digested,
and cloned into vectors to convert them to standard BioBrick format.
These were then serially cloned to produce the 8× and 32×
decoy arrays. One milliliter
of culture was
centrifuged for 5 min at 17 900 rcf. The supernatant was decanted,
50 μL of deionized water was added, and the pellets were vortexed
for 5 min in a VWR VX-2500 multitube vortexer on the maximum speed
setting. 250 μL of water-saturated butanol was added, and tubes
were vortexed for an additional 5 min. Butanol suspensions were centrifuged
for 5 min at 17 900 rcf, and the organic phase was transferred
to fresh tubes and centrifuged again. The supernatant was transferred
into microcuvettes and measured in a Genesys 20 spectrophotometer
for absorbance at 571 nm using water-saturated butanol as a blank.
For serum cultures and select M9 cultures, an additional measurement
of the supernatant was taken for absorbance at 571 nm. Cultures were centrifuged and resuspended
as above, and then mixed with 800 μL of acetone at 50 °C
to which 1 μg/mL Sudan I had been added as an internal standard.
Tubes were agitated regularly for 10 min and then centrifuged at 17 900
rcf for 5 min. 450 μL of the extract was transferred to autosampler
vials for HPLC analysis. Vials were stored at −80 °C until
analysis for no more than 24 h. HPLC analysis was performed on
a Shimadzu Prominence UFLC with a UV–vis detector. Separation
was done on an Agilent Zorbax Extend-C18 Analytical 4.6 × 50
mm 5-μm column. Mobile phase composition was 50:30:20 methanol/acetonitrile/isopropanol
at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Peaks were identified by comparison with
standards purchased from Sigma (lycopene, ≥ 90%) and TCI America
(β-carotene, 97%). Reported carotenoid levels were calculated
from the ratios of carotenoid peak areas with Sudan I peak areas normalized
by the OD of the source culture. When indicated, materials were
treated with pH-corrected Chelex 100 resin (Biorad) using the manufacturer’s
batch protocol. Following treatment with Chelex resin, media were
filter sterilized with 0.2 μm filters. A modified minimal medium similar
to M9 except with organic phosphate to allow zinc titration was used
for all experiments in minimal medium. A 5× salt solution was
made containing 10 g/L β-glycerophosphate, 8.2 g/L KCl, 22.5
g/L NaCl, 5 g/L NHCl, and 19.5 g/L MES, which was adjusted
to pH 7.4. The salt solution was combined with 1.92 g of SC-ura amino
acid mixture (Sunrise Science), 2 mL of 1 M MgSO, 100
μL of 1 M CaCl, 5 mL of 80% glycerol, 10 mL of 20%
glucose, and 10 mL of 1% Thiamine HCl, diluted to a final volume of
1L, and filter sterilized. All cultures were inoculated
from freshly
transformed DH10B colonies. For minimal media and small-inoculum serum
experiments, colonies were resuspended in 52 μL of M9. Five
milliliter cultures were inoculated with 3 μL of these resuspensions.
For large-inoculum serum experiments, six 8 mL overnight feeder cultures
were grown in M9 with 1 μM supplemented ZnSO and
resuspended in a volume of 400 μL of M9. The optical density
of a serial dilution of the resuspension was used to determine inoculum
volumes. Cultures were grown aerobically for 24 h at 37 °C. For
fluorescence experiments, optical density measurements and fluorescence
readings were taken on a Synergy H4 (Biotek) plate reader using 150
μL aliquots of cultures in 96-well plates..