Viral diseases
represent a significant
challenge for medical therapy, and the human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) is one of the most difficult viruses to treat because
it hijacks the cells of the immune system. HIV-1 uses the viral glycoproteins
gp120 and gp41 to bind to cellular receptors, reverse transcriptase
to transcribe its RNA into DNA, integrase to integrate viral genome
into the host, and viral protease to cleave viral polyprotein into
functional proteins. All of these viral proteins have been and still
are investigated as targets for therapeutic inhibitors to interfere
with the viral lifecycle. The main reason for the difficulty in developing
effective drugs is the lack of proofreading in the reverse transcriptase
of HIV-1. As a consequence, mutations occur with high frequency, thereby
modifying the sequence of the HIV-1 proteins. Resistance evolves quickly,
rendering many of the chemical inhibitors or antibodies useless. The
most effective current treatment is based on highly active antiretroviral
therapy, which employs a cocktail of several antiretroviral drugs
against different targets based on different inhibition mechanisms,
thereby decreasing the probability of simultaneous mutational escape. HIV-1 viral proteins are translated as
a Gag-Pol-polyprotein that
is cleaved by the viral protease into 11 polypeptide chains. Without
this proteolytic cleavage, the virus remains noninfectious. Dimeric aspartic viral protease, which cleaves
this polyprotein, is specific to the virus, and proteases from human
cells cannot supplement its function. Random
mutations of HIV-1 protease that abolish its activity—or the
pharmacological inhibition—disrupt HIV’s ability to
replicate and infect additional cells. HIV-1 protease was one of the first targets of therapy, and protease
inhibitors are still being used in treatment. However, mutations that
occur within the protease may retain a sufficient fraction of the
proteolytic activity that supports viral survival and renders the
protease resistant to inhibitors. The rapid mutation rate of the HIV-1
virus results in a large number of variants, even within an individual
patient, and the selective pressure of antiviral therapy leads to
the proliferation of drug-resistant HIV-1 protease strains. The G48V
mutant is considered to be the key signature residue mutation of HIV-1
protease in the development of resistance against saquinavir (SAQ)
therapy. G48V usually co-occurs with the
resistance mutations I54T and V82A. Mutations
at position 54 contribute to the resistance of the virus against all
of the approved protease inhibitors, and
the V82A mutant is one of the first drug-resistant mutations to occur
in HIV-1 protease in patients receiving antiviral therapy. In this study, we have considered the possibility of employing
synthetic biology principles to engineer a cellular device that can
detect the HIV-1 infection and trigger production of reporter or antiviral
proteins. We reasoned that an effective biological antiviral device
should be based on essential viral function rather than on a specific
protein with a defined sequence or tertiary structure that is targeted
by chemical inhibitors or antibodies. By relying on the viral function,
the viral detection should be less sensitive to mutations. One possible
use of this device could be for the production of effectors that can
alert the human immune system for the presence of a virus (e.g., the
production of interferons [IFNs], chemokines). Once the viral activity
is detected, the device should be able to transduce this signal to
activate the selected effector. The signaling device should produce
a robust and specific signal. The principle behind the genetically
encoded device for the detection
of the viral protease activity is based on the proteolytic cleavage
of the peptide linker, which links the orthogonal transcriptional
activator Gal4-VP16 to the membrane anchor. The viral presence (specifically
the viral protease activity) is sensed by the irreversible proteolytic
step, which causes the release of the transcriptional activator Gal4-VP16
from the membrane and activation of the selected transcriptional response.
The Gal4-VP16 activator, therefore, exists in two states: an inactive
state, where the transcriptional activator is located at the membrane
and where it cannot bind to the respective operator site, and an active
state, where the Gal4-VP16 is translocated into the nucleus where
it can bind to and activate the selected effector gene (e.g., reporter
or human IFN-β1). We engineered a hybrid transcription
factor (Gal4-VP16, which is
composed of the DNA-binding domain [Gal4] and the activation domain
[VP16]) to be linked through the HIV-1 protease cleavage site to the
cellular membrane by the transmembrane and ectodomains of the CD4
or FAS receptors (Figure ). Yeast regulatory
protein Gal4, which is comprised of a
DNA-binding domain, linker, and a coiled-coil dimerization domain,
has been used previously as an orthogonal transcription factor in
mammalian cells. A domain of the herpes
simplex virus protein VP16 recruits host-encoded elements of the transcriptional
machinery upstream from the promoter. The selected
peptide linker was comprised of the HIV-1 protease cleavage site with
the amino acid sequence SQVSQNY↓PIVQNLQ, which is also called
the p17/p24 peptide and is used as the
synthetic HIV Protease Substrate 1. For
an efficient anchor to the membrane, we selected the nonfunctional
transmembrane and ectodomains of CD4 and FAS, which are type-I transmembrane
receptors that are found on the surface of immune cells, such as T-helper
cells, monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells. Supporting
Information Figure S1 Activation of the device by the
viral protease was observed with
fluorescence confocal microscopy, where we used the fluorescent proteins
cyan florescent protein (CFP) or mCherry linked by a cleavable linker
peptide (a HIV-1 protease cleavage site [hivp]) to the cytosolic side
of the transmembrane domain. Human embryonic kidney (HEK)293T cells
were transfected with the plasmid coding fusion proteins CD4(HA)-hivp-CFP-6xHis
or FAS(HA)-hivp-mCherry-2xNLS and cotransfected with a replication-incompetent
HIV-1 pseudoviral genome on a pNL4–3.HSA.R–.E–
plasmid, thereby encoding the functional viral protease. In the absence
of the HIV-1 genome, the fluorescence was clearly localized to the
plasma membrane (Figure a and c). In the cells
cotransfected with an HIV-1 genome, the fluorescent CFP was released
from the membrane into the cytosol (Figure b), while mCherry, which is comprised of two copies of SV40 large
T-antigen nuclear localization sequence (NLS), was translocated to
the nucleus (Figure d). The expression of
the transmembrane proteins CD4(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16 or FAS(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16
at the surface of the cell membrane was also confirmed by staining
the HEK293T cells with anti-HA antibodies, as the HA-tag was positioned
at the extracellular side of the receptors (). The incorporation of the transmembrane
receptors into the membrane demonstrates the appropriate protein folding
and localization, suggesting that the sensor could be functional. Supporting Information Figure S2a Supporting Information
Figure S2b Supporting
Information Figure S2a Supporting Information Figure S2b We demonstrated the sensing
and transcriptional activation of the
device using a luciferase reporter assay, with which we measured the
expression of the luciferase gene induced by the transcriptional activator,
Gal4-VP16. The transcriptional activity of Gal4-VP16 was triggered
by the cleavage of the linker to the transmembrane receptor by the
HIV-1 protease, which released Gal4-VP16 into the nucleus and activated
the transcription of the luciferase under the control of the Gal4-responsive
operator. The luciferase activity was observed only in cells cotransfected
with the HIV-1 genome, and the plasmid for CD4(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16
() or
FAS(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16 (). Synthetic HIV-1 protease inhibitors inhibited
the activation of Gal4-VP16, as in the presence of 5 μM SAQ
or 5 μM ritonavir (RTV), activation of the reporter was reduced
by more than 70% for CD4(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16 () and more than 90% for FAS(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16
(). Supporting Information
Figure S3 Supporting Information Figure S4 Supporting
Information Figure S5 The salient feature of our device is that it should be less sensitive
to the mutations that cause resistance to protease inhibitors. The
viral genome encoding drug-resistant HIV-1 protease mutants G48V/I54T
and V82A exhibited slightly reduced proteolytic activity in comparison
to the wild type for both device constructs, CD4(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16
or FAS(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16 (), probably because of the impaired specific activity
of the mutated protease. However, their proteolytic efficiency is
still sufficient for processing the viral polyprotein and viral replication.
Both clinically observed HIV-1 protease mutants were significantly
less sensitive to the therapeutic protease inhibitors or their cocktails
(atazanavir, SAQ, and RTV) than the wild-type HIV-1 protease (Figure d–f). However, our device was able to robustly
sense the activity of both HIV-1 protease mutants and trigger gene
transcription regardless of the presence of 1 μM SAQ or a cocktail
of 1 μM SAQ and 1 μM RTV, as shown in Figure a–c for the CD4(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16 device.
We obtained similar results for FAS(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16 (these data
are not shown). These findings demonstrate that the synthetic genetic
device is still activated by the protease mutations that are resistant
to clinically used inhibitors. We have also demonstrated the activation
of our device with nontoxic HIV-1 protease precursor fused to green
fluorescent protein (GFP). For the activation
of the device in HEK293T cells, significantly lower amounts of GFP-PR
in comparison to the pNL4–3.HSA.R–.E– were required
(). The
protease mutant GFP-PR(G48V/I54T) was also sensed by our device. We
found that mutant GFP-PR(G48V/I54T) was almost completely resistant
to 1 μM SAQ, and we used Western blot to demonstrate the expression
levels of both precursor proteins (). To demonstrate that our device could
drive expression of different selected effector genes, we selected
the gene for human IFN-β1. IFN-β1 is a member of the type
I IFN family; these IFNs are usually secreted as the consequence of
elevated levels of dsRNA in cells and are used in antiviral therapy. We found that the expression level of IFN-β1
that was produced in HEK293T cells—transfected with our signaling
device—was dependent on the amount of transfected HIV-1 protease
(Figure ). Our work presents an orthogonal cellular signaling device
that
is activated by the specific protease from HIV-1. The use of the HIV-1
protease to trigger the selected activity has been previously reported but not for triggering the cellular genetic response
program. In addition, eukaryotic signaling pathways have been previously
rewired using synthetic biology. Daringer
et al. recently reported a synthetic device in mammalian cells that
senses extracellular ligands through ligand binding-induced dimerization,
which releases an orthogonal transcription factor that is independent
of native cellular components. Engineering
sensing devices may also serve as tools to address the difficult problem
of the host defense against rapidly mutating viruses or viruses that
avoid immune surveillance. The detection of specific viral functions
by coupling to a synthetic signaling pathway could be utilized to
trigger almost any selected transcriptional response. For antiviral
defense using our device, the reporter gene is replaced with one or
several effector genes. We have demonstrated that our system is able
to trigger the production of human IFN-β1, which can serve as
an “alarm” that signals neighboring cells to defend
against a viral infection. The amount of produced IFN-β1 can
reach up to 25 ng/mL, which is several orders of magnitude higher
than the systemic IFN concentration in antiviral therapy (e.g., 0.2
mg/day every other day for the treatment of hepatitis C virus [HCV]). One potential application of our synthetic device
could be as a detection assay for screening the library of drug-resistant
HIV-1 protease mutants and inhibitors in mammalian culture cells using
different reporters, including cell toxic proteins as the selection
markers. The advantages of using cell line–based assays for
HIV-1 protease activity have already been reported; authors used different
HIV-1 protease precursors (GFP-PR or
Gal4-PR) or probe proteins, such as Förster
resonance energy transfer-based HIV-1 protease-sensitive sensors. Through experimental implementation of our signaling device, we
have found that it is also faster than two-round phenotyping assays
for testing HIV-1 isolates. The
primary purpose of the described device is the targeting of
essential viral function, regardless of the specific sequence or spatial
structure of the particular viral components. This approach has an
important advantage in comparison to the detection or therapy that
targets specific viral proteins through antibodies, chemical inhibitors,
or specific interfering RNA molecules. Their efficiency and robustness
depends on the selection of an invariant segment that is independent
of viral mutations or relies on the statistical advantage based on
targeting multiple viral proteins. The described principle is highly
specific and could be tailored for any specific protease. Replacing
Gal4 with a designable DNA-binding domain (e.g., TAL effector–based
activators) could also rewire the signal
to regulate the production of selected endogenous genes. The same
principle for the function-based mutation-independent signaling system
could also be applied to the detection of other pathogens, particularly
viruses (e.g., severe acute respiratory syndrome [SARS]; West Nile
virus; hand, foot and mouth disease; etc.). Many viral proteases have
a well-defined substrate specificity, which could be implemented in
a straightforward manner for the design of a linker peptide. For example,
HCV protease, a NS3/4A serine protease that is essential for viral
replication as it is responsible for proteolytic cleavage of the HCV
polyprotein precursor, cleaves specific amino acid sequences. The core sequence of the cleavage site for the
SARS-coronavirus 3C-like cysteine protease, which is responsible for
the maturation of functional viral proteins, is also highly conserved. The Murray Valley encephalitis and West Nile
virus NS2B/NS3 proteases also have an unusual sequence recognition
specificity that is not found in mammalian proteases. Finally, the same function-based principle could be used
to detect other specific viral functions, such as reverse transcription
or integration. Design
of a mutation-resistant antiviral signaling device based
on HIV-1 protease activity. The transcriptional activator Gal4-VP16
is anchored to the transmembrane protein domain (CD4 or FAS), where
it is inactive. The activation step occurs via the HIV-1 protease,
which cleaves the linker between the transcription factor and membrane
anchor, thereby comprising the HIV-1 protease cleavage site. After
the irreversible proteolytic step, Gal4-VP16 is released from the
membrane and translocates into the nucleus, where it transcribes the
selected genes under the control of the GAL4 operator, such as the
reporter genes or genes that provide defense against viral infections. HIV-1
protease triggers the release of the membrane-bound reporter.
In cells without HIV-1 protease, the membrane localization of (a)
CFP and (c) mCherry-2xNLS was observed. In the presence of HIV-1 protease,
(b) CFP was released to the cytosol and (d) mCherry was released from
the membrane and translocated to the nucleus. An overlay of the image
showing the nucleus stained with Hoechst 33342 and mCherry is shown
on the left (d). The microscopic images are representative of five
separate observations. Scale bar = 10 μm. The HEK293T cells
were transfected with (a, b) 40 ng CD4(HA)-hivp-CFP-6xHis or (c, d)
40 ng CD4(HA)-hivp-mCherry-2xNLS, as well as with the (b, d) HIV-1
genome-encoding plasmid pNL4–3.HSA.R–.E– (320
or 360 ng). Synthetic anti-HIV-1 signaling device
detects the activity of HIV-1
protease mutations resistant to protease inhibitors. (a, b, c) HEK293T
cells were transfected with a reporter plasmid coding for the firefly
luciferase, a plasmid constitutively expressing the  luciferase, 10 ng of CD4(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16, and increasing amounts
of pNL4–3.HSA.R–.E– (pNL4–3 in the figure)
or HIV-1 protease mutants (G48V/I54T or V82A) in the medium with or
without saquinavir (SAQ) or saquinavir and ritonavir (SAQ/RTV). The
cells were lysed 24 h after transfection, and the expression of the
firefly and  luciferase reporter genes was
analyzed. (d, e, f) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids expressing
the firefly luciferase reporter and the constitutively expressed  luciferase, CD4(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16 (10 ng) and pNL4–3.HSA.R–.E–,
G48V/I54T, or V82A (all 120 ng) in the medium with or without the
HIV-1 protease inhibitors atazanavir (ATZ), atazanavir and ritonavir
(ATZ/RTV), saquinavir (SAQ), or saquinavir and ritonavir (SAQ/RTV).
The cells were lysed 24 h after transfection, and the activity of
the firefly and  luciferase reporters was
measured. Error bars represent the SD obtained from four experimental
replicates. The data are representative of two or three independent
experiments. The two-tailed Student’s -test
(assuming a two-sample equal variance) was used for pairwise comparisons.
*** < 0.005. Synthetic anti-HIV-1 signaling device triggers production of human
IFN-β1 in response to the viral protease. HEK293T cells were
transfected with an effector plasmid pABM2(IFN-β1) coding for
human IFN-β1, 10 ng of CD4(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16, and increasing
amounts of pNL4–3.HSA.R–.E– (WT in the figure)
or HIV-1 protease mutants (G48V/I54T or V82A). IFN-β concentrations
(ng/mL ± SD) were determined through a comparison with a human
IFN-β standard curve. The data are representative of three independent
experiments with duplicate samples. A detailed description of
the methods used in this study can be
found under . We prepared the following plasmids:
CD4(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16, FAS(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16, CD4(HA)-hivp-CFP-6xHis,
and FAS(HA)-hivp-mCherry-2xNLS (). We prepared the HIV-1 protease mutants pNL4–3.HSA.R–.E–(G48V/I54T)
(hereafter referred to as G48V/I54T) with the G48V and I54T mutations
within the HIV-1 protease sequence and pNL4–3.HSA.R–.E–(V82A)
(hereafter referred to as V82A), in which the HIV-1 protease sequence
contains a mutation for V82A. The same mutations were also introduced
into the vector pcDNA3/GFP-PR (hereafter referred to as GFP-PR) to
prepare the construct GFP-PR(G48V/I54T). The effector plasmid pABM2(IFN-β1)
was prepared from the plasmid pABM2 with GAL4-binding sites and coding
for firefly luciferase, a kind gift from Dr. Mark S. Ptashne. The HEK293T cells were harvested
from an actively growing culture and plated on 96-well tissue culture
plates at 2 × 10 cells per well. After 24 h at approximately
70% confluence, the cells were transfected with appropriate plasmid
combinations: a plasmid for fusion protein CD4(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16
or FAS(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16, a plasmid coding for the (wild type or
mutant) HIV-1 protease, reporter plasmid pABM2 (15 ng), and pHRL-TK
coding for the constitutive  luciferase transfection
control. The cells were harvested 24 or 48 h after transfection. The
activities of the firefly luciferase and  luciferase
were measured using the dual-luciferase assay. HEK293T cells (5 × 10 cells/well) were seeded in
8-well tissue culture chambers.
At 30% confluency, the cells were transfected with plasmids: 40 ng
of CD4(HA)-hivp-CFP-6xHis or FAS(HA)-hivp-mCherry-2xNLS with or without
320 ng or 360 ng pNL4–3.HSA.R–.E–. The images
were acquired 2 days after transfection. Quantification of IFN-β1
Levels The HEK293T cells
were harvested from an actively growing culture and plated on 96-well
tissue culture plates at 2 × 10 cells per well. After
24 h at approximately 70% confluence, the cells were transfected with
a plasmid CD4(HA)-hivp-GAL4-VP16 (10 ng), a plasmid coding for (wild
type or mutant) HIV-1 protease, and an effector plasmid pABM2(IFN-β1).
At 48 or 72 h after transfection, we collected the culture medium
and determined the IFN-β1 level in the medium..