Timekeeping elements coordinate
and synchronize most processes required to sustain life, from the
physiology of individual cells to the daily rhythms of entire organisms. The design principles underlying the operation
of biomolecular clocks have been investigated by dissecting natural
systems, as well as by building  molecular oscillators
in an effort to identify minimal requirements for periodic behaviors. Experiments and modeling have established that a necessary requirement for a system to exhibit
oscillations is the presence of a negative loop. Conversely, any negative
feedback loop potentially leads to oscillations provided that the
loop includes destabilizing features, for instance delaying elements
associated with a large feedback gain. Delay can be introduced by a variety of phenomena.
In addition to transcription and translation steps, delay is increased
by transport, mRNA splicing and stabilization, phosphorylation, and
protein maturation. While an explicit delay term is useful to aggregate these phenomena
in a single, black-box parameter, in other instances it is possible
to model their individual kinetics as a chain of interconnected subsystems. In a linearized closed-loop system,
a chain of slow subsystems has the same effects as an explicit delay
in inducing oscillations. The overall
delay of the negative feedback chain depends on all the time constants
of the dynamic elements. Given a sufficient delay, the larger the
feedback gain, the likelier is the onset of persistent oscillations. Despite the simplicity of these design principles, it is unclear
how the individual time constants and the overall gain affect the
emergence of oscillations. Are we equally likely to observe oscillations
in a system with homogeneous  nonhomogeneous
time scales? How large should the loop gain be in either case? These
questions are particularly relevant in the context of genetic oscillators,
where time constants are determined by mRNA and protein degradation,
transport, and processing rates, which may widely vary among the oscillator
components, and a large loop gain is energetically expensive, because
it depends on the production rate of the components. In this
paper, we address the following question in mathematical
terms: Given a negative loop of first order elements, each associated
with its own time constant, which is the choice of the time constants
that requires the smallest gain to allow for persistent oscillations?
We demonstrate that homogeneous time constants are the most favorable
choice when a small loop gain is desired. In particular we prove that
(1) the smallest negative feedback gain required to trigger oscillations
is achieved when all time constant are equal; (2) the smallest gain
is invariant under a homogeneous scaling of all time constants and
the period of the oscillations is proportional to the scaling factor;
(3) as a converse result, in a negative feedback loop, the best strategy
to avoid oscillations is to have a single element of the chain that
is much slower than all the others, and this fact explains why, in
several pathways with negative feedback, the presence of a slow element
ensures a robust nonoscillatory behavior. We apply our results
to well-known genetic oscillators, the Goodwin
oscillator and a two-node (inhibitor-activator) oscillator, and we
derive exact (necessary and sufficient) conditions for the existence
of parameters that ensure oscillations. Architecture of Candidate
Negative Feedback Oscillators As candidate oscillator architectures,
we consider negative feedback
loops of the following form:representing
the series connections of  ordered subsystems in
which any element has a positive
influence, quantified by parameters  > 0 (with  = 2, ..., ), on the next one, while  is a perturbing
input
that triggers oscillations. Each ordinary differential equation (ODE)
in the model in  is
suited to model phenomena such as production, conversion, processing,
and degradation of molecular components (mRNA and proteins) interconnected
in a regulatory chain. The model can
also capture enzymatic processes that operate at low substrate concentration
relative to the binding affinity of the enzyme and substrate; in this
regime, Michaelian or Hill-type reaction rates become approximately
linear (first-order rates). A negative feedback loop is generated  the inhibitory effect of the last element in the chain
on the first one, quantified by parameter  > 0. The parameter τ represents
the time constant of process  (which can be seen
as the speed of the reaction of the species  due to the regulatory effect of ). A similar
negative feedback structure can be found in many oscillatory systems. We now take the Laplace transform of these ODEs:
we formally replace () with () and the derivative / with the complex variable , () → (). After Laplace-transformation, the model in  can be rewritten as a block-interconnection
of elements:as shown in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00442/suppl_file/sb7b00442_si_001.pdf The time constants τ, which introduce an overall  in the loop; A sufficiently large feedback gain κ
> 0. The quantityis called the  and
has a fundamental role. It is the product of all the interaction strengths
and thus represents the cumulative strength of the loop. It turns
out that the characteristic polynomial depends on the product κ
only, and not on the individual parameters ; hence, even if the individual rates  are changed, the system behavior
remains the same as long as their product is unchanged (see the  for the detailed derivation).
The onset of oscillations in this negative feedback loop is therefore
associated with two fundamental ingredients: In the next section we ask ourselves
whether there is any ideal
relationship between the loop gain and the time constants to achieve
or avoid oscillatory behavior. Loop of  first order systems: block
diagram. Influence of Time Constants on the Oscillatory
Regime We next investigate how the time constants τ influence the onset of persistent oscillations.
We define
τ = [τ τ ... τ], the vector of time constants, and consider
the characteristic polynomial associated with the (linearized) system
of ODEs:For κ = 0, the roots
of (, τ) are λ = −1/τ, real and negative, hence the system response
has an exponentially
decreasing pattern. For large values of κ, (, τ) has complex
roots, associated with oscillations. The oscillations are damped
if the roots have a negative real part. To have persistent oscillations,
the roots of (, τ) must reach and cross the imaginary axis in the
complex plane. This can happen only if(as discussed
at the end of this section;
see also ref ()).
Henceforth, we assume that the necessary condition  ≥ 3 is verified. For  ≥ 3,
let us increase κ. Then,
there exists a  κ* such that,
for all κ > κ*, (, τ) has complex roots with positive
real part (namely, the system becomes unstable). For κ = κ*, (, τ)
has two purely imaginary roots ± ω*,
while the other roots have negative real part. The limit value κ*
is associated with the onset of an oscillation with frequency ω*/2π;
we call ω* . Note that ω*
≠ 0: (, τ) cannot have 0 as a root for κ > 0,
since (0, τ) = κ + 1 ≠ 0. We can formally define the critical gain κ* as the smallest
value of κ for which (, τ) has a pair of purely imaginary
roots (corresponding to the stability limit). The value κ* depends
on the time constants τ and we
can write Which
are the most favorable values of τ to promote oscillations? We address this question in terms
of the , by seeking a value
τ* = [τ τ ... τ] that minimizes the critical κ*(τ)
enabling the onset of oscillations. : Find
a value τ* that minimizes κ*(τ)
in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00442/suppl_file/sb7b00442_si_001.pdf : The problem is solved by a value τ*
withThis result is proved in the  (Theorem 1): our proofs
are based on
frequency analysis tools, linear algebraic tools and principles of
convex optimization. Therefore, an essential factor to promote
oscillations in a negative
feedback loop is the homogeneity of the time constants of the subsystems
involved in the loop. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00442/suppl_file/sb7b00442_si_001.pdf Further, we find that scaling the time
constants influences exclusively
the critical pulsation, without affecting the critical gain: when
the time constants are scaled as τ → στ, for arbitrary
σ > 0, the critical gain κ* is invariant, κ*(στ*)
= κ*(τ*), while the critical pulsation scales proportionally
to σ: ω* → σω* (. Corollary 1, ). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00442/suppl_file/sb7b00442_si_001.pdf Also, the critical gain κ* is a decreasing function of the
number of elements in the loop (see the , Proposition 2, for details). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00442/suppl_file/sb7b00442_si_001.pdf Our result
(the critical gain that allows for oscillations is minimized
when all the time constants are equal) indirectly suggests how to
prevent a system from oscillating. This aspect is relevant in the
context of biological and biochemical feedback loops, in all the situations
where it is important to preserve homeostasis and oscillatory behaviors
must be avoided. Being κ* a decreasing function of , long feedback chains are more prone to instability, which can be
of an oscillatory type. Hence, a natural question is which is the
best strategy to avoid oscillations in the loop. Our result suggests
that incongruous time constants lead to a robustly nonoscillatory
behavior. Let us now consider the complementary question: assuming
(without restriction) that the time constants are normalized aswhere  is
the , which is the best distribution
of time constants to prevent oscillatory behaviors? We find that,
roughly speaking, it is better to have the delay concentrated in a
single subsystem (see the , Proposition 3, for details). Then, a robust strategy to prevent
oscillations is, for instance, including in the loop a single subsystem
that is much slower than the others, so that their time constant is
negligible with respect to the slow part. This result also explains
the previous statement about the necessity of condition  ≥ 3 to have persistent oscillations. Indeed, setting τ = 0 is mathematically equivalent to neglecting
the th process, since then 1/(1 + τ) = 1. an effective strategy to preserve stability and prevent oscillations A fundamental consequence
of our results is the following: in a
negative feedback loop, the presence of a single slow element is . Indeed, several negative feedback loops in nature are practically
always stable, and this can be explained by noting that the involved
time constants are very different. For example, biologically, degradation
rates of mRNA and proteins may vary in a broad range and, as foreseen
by our results, this variability could contribute to stabilizing negative
loops, making it difficult to achieve oscillations. Yet, we point
out that, when the kinetics of a molecular species are much slower
or much faster than the rest of the system, they can be simply eliminated
from the model  time scale separation methods; this type of drastic time scale variability
may affect the capacity for oscillations when the system dimension
collapses below 3. Our results allow us to
derive analytical
bounds in the parameter space for the oscillatory regions of general
families of genetic oscillators. These bounds are also numerically
verified in the following sections  random parameter
sampling. The well-known Goodwin oscillator is
associated with the following equations: http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00442/suppl_file/sb7b00442_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00442/suppl_file/sb7b00442_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00442/suppl_file/sb7b00442_si_001.pdf The model
is characterized by the number  of stages, by the
cooperativity (Hill) coefficient , by the apparent
dissociation constant , and by the rate constants  and . Rates  and  can model
protein translation and degradation,
mRNA processing phenomena, or protein phosphorylation/dephosphorylation. All these parameters are positive. As shown
in the  (Section
2.1), the system admits a single positive equilibrium. The emergence
of sustained oscillations depends on the choice of the parameters,
which influences the values of both the variables at steady-state
and of the entries of the Jacobian matrix. By applying our main result
to the Goodwin oscillator model, we discover that there exists at
least one choice of the parameter values that leads to oscillations
(namely, for which the linearized system admits complex eigenvalues
with nonnegative real part) if and only if(the full derivation
is in the , Section
2.3). The characteristic
equation, equating the characteristic polynomial to zero, isHere,  is the steady state
value of  derived by
solving the equilibrium equationfrom
which existence and uniqueness of the
equilibrium are proven in the  (Section 3.1). If we could arbitrarily choose the rates  and , then we could achieve  steady-state . Hence, the gain in ,could take
any value in the interval: 0 <
κ() < . The value of the th time constant for
this system is τ = 1/. Hence, our result tells us that the
(minimum) critical gain is obtained by setting  =  = ... =  =  (which leads to
equal time constants), henceThe condition in  is necessary and sufficient for  to admit imaginary solutions.
As
exemplified in , if the condition in  is satisfied, oscillations are possible if the rates  are large enough with respect to the
rates ; this guarantees
a large equilibrium value , hence κ() is larger than the critical gain. Note that, if the oscillator includes three stages
( = 3), the condition in  becomes  and the minimum value of the Hill coefficient  to have oscillations is  = 8, consistently
with the results in ref (). In  we numerically
compute the oscillatory region in the – space when  =  and  = , for all . In each
panel, the black line represents the condition in  converted to an equality, and delimits
the region where oscillations can occur. As a further numerical experiment,
we fixed  =  for all  and randomly generated different
values of the parameters , taken from different distributions (normal and uniform distribution)
with the same expected value  = 1 and variance ϵ. With this
sampling method, the total delay is not necessarily constant for all
samples: the degradation rates are randomly generated and are drawn
from different distributions, which all have the same average, but
which can be more or less spread depending on the value of the variance
ϵ. The lower the variance, the more homogeneous are the degradation
rates .  shows the fraction of oscillating
samples (parameter choices for which characteristic polynomial has
positive-real-part roots) as a function of ϵ. As predicted by
our analytical results, decreasing the variance increases the likelihood
of oscillations. Choosing homogeneous time constants favors oscillations,
but also other design decisions are important: for instance, the overall
loop gain needs to be high enough. Goodwin oscillator: equilibrium
conditions for different ratios . The orange line represents the first
expression in , while
the blue lines represent the second expression in  for different values of the ratios /. Their intersections give, on the vertical axis,
the equilibrium values of  for various choices of /. Oscillatory domain of the Goodwin oscillator
with  = 1 in the (, ) plane, for various
choices of homogeneous rates,  =  and  =  for all . The black
line represents ; hence,  is satisfied in the whole
region above. We compute
the solutions of : red dots indicate an oscillatory behavior, blue dots indicate no
oscillations, while gray dots indicate that no equilibrium can be
found computationally due to numerical problems. The fraction of oscillating samples of the Goodwin oscillator is
largest when randomly drawn degradation rates are homogeneous. We
simulated the model with  = 1 and  = 5; in the top panels  = 8, while in the bottom
panel  = 10. We took  =  and randomly generated rates  with expected value  = 1 and
variance ϵ. (In each simulation, the randomly generated parameters
are kept constant during all the integration steps of the ODEs.) We
show the fraction of oscillating samples as a function of the variance
ϵ when the rates  are taken from a normal distribution (top left, and bottom) and
a uniform distribution (top right). In all panels, 1000 parameter
samples are drawn per data point. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00442/suppl_file/sb7b00442_si_001.pdf Consider a two-node oscillator
given by the feedback interconnection of an activated module and an
inhibited module:The ODEs of variables  and  represent
mRNA dynamics,
and ,  represent protein translation. As earlier,  is
a Hill coefficient, and  and  are apparent dissociation constants. Parameters
α and α are maximal mRNA transcription
rates, and β, β are mRNA degradation
rates. Finally γ, γ and δ, δ are protein translation and degradation
rates. This model can serve as a coarse-grained representation of
a variety of molecular clocks. Many genetic oscillators result from
the interconnected dynamics of inhibitor-activator elements, such as the p53-mdm-2 and the IκB-NF-κB oscillators;
this architecture has also been demonstrated in artificial  transcriptional oscillators. Here we assume that the mRNA dynamics evolve
on a time scale that is comparable to that of the proteins; this means
that the order of the model cannot be reduced  time scale separation arguments. On the basis of our main result,
we can prove that there exists at least one choice of parameters for
which the system exhibits sustained oscillations (namely, the linearized
system has complex eigenvalues with a nonnegative real part) if and
only ifThe
linearized system has characteristic equationwhere  and  are the steady-state values
of  and . The loop gainranges in the
interval 0 < κ(, ) < ; it is a decreasing function
of , and an increasing function
of . In view of our main result,
the minimum critical gain guaranteeing oscillations is achieved when
β = β = δ =
δ = τ. The corresponding critical equation
istherefore no unstable complex eigenvalues,
hence no oscillations, can be found unless  >
2
(the full derivation is in the , Section 3.3). Numerical simulations illustrating and confirming
this analytical result are in . We have also generated random instances of the oscillator
to show how increasing the variance in the delay decreases the chances
of oscillatory behavior (). We note that in this particular example, if the
mRNA dynamics are much faster than the protein dynamics, the model
can be reduced to include exclusively the protein kinetics; in that
case, oscillations cannot be achieved for any choice of the parameters. Oscillatory
regime of the two-node oscillator. We compute the solutions
of , with α = α = α, β = β = β, γ = γ = 1,
δ = δ = 1 and  =  = 1, and indicate with
red dots an oscillatory behavior, with blue dots no oscillations.
Parameter sets that give rise to oscillations cannot be found for  = 2, while they are easy to find for  > 2. The fraction of oscillating samples of the two-node
oscillator
is largest when randomly drawn degradation rates are homogeneous.
We simulated the model with  = 3, γ = γ = 1,  =  = 1, α = α = α and randomly generated (β, δ) with expected value [(β, δ)] = (1, 1) and variance ϵ. (In each simulation,
the randomly generated parameters are kept constant during all the
integration steps of the ODEs.) We show the fraction of oscillating
samples as a function of the variance ϵ when (β, δ) are taken
from a normal distribution (left) and a uniform distribution (right).
1000 parameter samples are drawn per data point. We have demonstrated that
homogeneity of the time constants within a negative feedback loop
can facilitate the emergence of oscillations, in that it minimizes
the critical loop gain (minimum gain to achieve oscillations). We
have also shown that scaling of the (uniform) time constants influences
the critical frequency, but does not affect the critical gain. A converse
result is that a candidate oscillator can be stabilized, , oscillations cannot occur, by increasing a single (arbitrarily
chosen) time constant of the loop with respect to the others. The
negative feedback architecture we consider is general, and it can
be specialized to model many biomolecular oscillators. The gain of the biomolecular feedback
loops we consider is proportional to the ratio of production and degradation
rates of its components, and to the cooperativity coefficient of regulatory
molecules (Hill coefficient ). Maintaining the lowest
gain that can yield oscillations in the network is therefore tantamount
to operating the circuit with minimum consumption of transcription
and translation resources, minimum kinase activity, as well as with
minimum copy number of regulators. This energy-efficient scenario
can be achieved when the time constants in each process are similar
(degradation, transport, and processing rates). This requirement may
be easy to satisfy if these time constants are globally regulated
for all components (for instance, mRNA and protein degradation). Short negative loops have
a stabilizing effect (which
makes the onset of sustained oscillations less likely, because a higher
loop gain is needed); Long negative loops
can favor the onset of sustained
oscillations, and the most favorable case is that in which the time
constants of the system in the loop are similar; If one or two time constants are significantly larger
than the others, then the long loop actually behaves as a short one
and the probability of having sustained oscillations is smaller (because
a higher loop gain is needed for the onset of oscillations). It must be pointed out that, in our analysis, we have considered
systems consisting of a : although this is a very common structure for biological oscillators, it is not the only one. For this particular structure, we have argued
that However, if several feedback loops are concurrently
present, our
analysis does not apply, and the above statements are no longer true.
In particular, our findings are valid in the absence of self-catalytic
reactions (, of positive self-loops). In the
presence of a positive self-loop, also a single negative loop involving
two nodes only can be easily destabilized. For instance, consider
the systemwhere , ,  and  are positive
parameters.
As shown by our results, this loop cannot be destabilized. However,
this system can exhibit sustained oscillations if  can be negative (take for instance  = −): in this case our results no longer hold, because now  is self-catalytic. A (possibly
short) negative loop can be destabilized
by the concurrent presence of another loop that is positive. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00442/suppl_file/sb7b00442_si_001.pdf In practice, positive
self-loops are not very common. Yet, a positive
feedback loop can result from a chain of reactions. Indeed, different
oscillator architectures are based on the coexistence of positive
and negative loops (it is important to stress that the presence of
a negative loop is necessary for the onset of oscillations). In particularAn example is the genetic network present in the
bread mold , which has been shown
in ref () to be a
successful biological
oscillator; we investigate this case study in the , where we show that the result proposed
in ref () are fully
consistent with our analysis. Negative-feedback oscillators
are very common in nature and appear
also very robust. For instance, the Hes1 and Hes7 oscillators in mammalian
embryos consist of a negative autoregulation loop where Hes protein
represses its mRNA production. These
oscillators could be modeled taking  = 2 in ; however, in this case
the ODE solution does not admit sustained oscillations even for very
large values of . Addition of an explicit delay,
discrete or distributed, to Hes autoregulatory models yields oscillatory
solutions for physically acceptable values of (,) (Hes1 and Hes7 are dimers). Similar observations can be made for
the p53-mdm-2 and the IκB-NF-κB oscillators. The explicit delay, which captures mRNA processing
and transport steps, could be alternatively
modeled as a chain of intermediate subsystems; while the number and
kinetics of these steps are unknown, our results suggest that oscillations
would be more likely to occur if they had similar time scales. Interestingly,
the Hes1 oscillator requires nearly identical mRNA and protein half-lives
(≈ 23 min) to operate. Our
results are particularly relevant for the design of artificial
negative feedback clocks. While the architecture of the Goodwin oscillator
is attractive due to its simplicity, it has been difficult to build
synthetic examples without including positive feedback, high Hill
coefficients, or additional nonlinearities to destabilize the system. The mathematical models developed to capture the dynamics of these
artificial oscillators often assume similar degradation rates for
all the mRNA and protein species. However, recent experiments on the
famous  circuit suggest that protein
degradation rates in the original design might have been subject to
temporal fluctuations caused by competition for shared proteolytic
machinery, occurring due to the presence of protein degradation tags
meant to reduce their half-life. Removal
of the degradation tags resulted in more regular (although slower)
oscillations at the population level. It is possible that in the absence
of degradation tags dilution (due to cells dividing) becomes the dominant
time constant, which should be uniform for all the repressor proteins.
In light of our results, a more homogeneous protein half-life could
explain the improved robustness of the oscillations. In conclusion,
our work highlights that the variability of time
constants within negative feedback oscillators could have under-appreciated
effects on the dynamics; better estimation of these parameters could
help explain the robustness of many natural oscillators. Conversely,
we expect that the construction or improvement of artificial oscillators
could be facilitated by ensuring that the modules being interconnected
evolve with similar time scales. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00442/suppl_file/sb7b00442_si_001.pdf The formal
proofs of our results, which employ mathematical tools
from dynamical systems and systems and control theory, as well as
the detailed mathematical analysis of the proposed examples, are in
the ..