The construction of a synthetic
minimal cell is a main challenge in synthetic biology, where bottom-up
approaches are being utilized to create biological mimicking structures.
The idea behind building a synthetic minimal cell is to assemble a
minimum of cellular components (nucleic acids, enzymes, lipids, .) to create a “living cell”, capable of
executing basal cellular functions. One of the key features defining a cell as a living entity is its
ability to self-reproduce in which the expansion of the cellular membrane
is a critical aspect. One approach toward a growing boundary layer
is the  synthesis of its building blocks followed
by its self-assembly. Previous attempts on  synthesis of membranes have mainly been based on fatty acids (FAs),
due to their ability to spontaneously assemble into micelles. However, the intrinsic properties of FAs give them a dynamic profile,
which allow them to appear as vesicles as well. Large multilamellar
FA vesicles could be grown by feeding the system with FA micelles,
causing the multilamellar structures to ultimately divide. Moreover, a simple nonenzymatic FA synthesis
reaction could be coupled to vesicular growth and division, as an
example of autocatalytic self-reproduction. Although, these are first steps toward the synthetic engineering
of a self-reproducing system, membranes based on FAs are intrinsically
unstable and do not encompass a sizable lumen. In contrast, biological
membranes consist of much more complex molecules, of which phospholipids
are the major component. Their amphipathic character allow them to
orient in a bilayer-like structure to support the barrier function.
Unlike the previously mentioned simple fatty acid containing membrane
mimics, additional intrinsic properties of the different types of
phospholipids are of major importance. This is illustrated
by the cytoplasmic membrane of ,
which consists almost completely out of the zwitterionic phospholipid
phosphatidylethanolamine (PE, 70–75%), the anionic phosphatidylglycerol
(PG, 20–25%) and depending on the growth phase, varying amounts
of cardiolipin (CL, 0–10%). While CL is a nonessential component,
a proper balance is needed between the bilayer forming PG and the
nonbilayer PE to support the activity of membrane proteins. Anionic
phospholipids are needed to stabilize membrane proteins and promote
membrane association of peripheral membrane proteins, while nonbilayer
lipids are needed for membrane protein folding and assembly. Evidently, any synthetic biology approach toward a self-reproducing
membrane must rely on phospholipids. Although some successes have
been obtained for  vesicle formation by assembly
and chemical synthesis of phospholipid-like structures, most research has focused on the addition of components to a pre-existing
membrane. Several attempts have been made to mimic boundary layer
growth  using synthetic compartments, of
which liposomes are considered the most suitable model due to their
structural similarity with cellular membranes. For example, chemical
synthesis of artificial phospholipid resulted in liposomal growth
and subsequent division of the giant vesicles, which could be coupled
to amplified DNA proliferation. A more biology based
approach is illustrated by the enzymatic addition of FAs to pre-existing
liposomes resulting in spontaneous incorporation, followed by expansion
of the membrane. Further enzymatic conversion
of fatty acids into phospholipids is, however, essential to support
the activity of membrane proteins and to obtain a stable membrane
system. The most realistic representation of membrane growth
would be to
perform the synthesis from within a liposome. In this respect, enzymes
derived from an  transcription/translation
system have been encapsulated into liposomes and enzymatic activity was confirmed, Unfortunately, the low fidelity
of this system combined with experimental limitations of liposome
encapsulation, render phospholipid biosynthesis highly inefficient
and insufficient to achieve appreciable liposome growth. To avoid
the problem of low enzyme production yields, liposomes were recently
fed with newly synthesized proteins and lipid precursors from the
outside. However, also in this case phospholipid
formation was inefficient and the claimed membrane growth of <1%
from supplied FA-CoA was too small to experimentally demonstrate expansion.
Furthermore, FA-CoA is an expensive compound and therefore an unsuitable
building block for the construction of an economically viable synthetic
cell. Therefore, any approach aiming at appreciable membrane growth
a mechanism of CoA recycling is needed. To circumvent issues
with protein synthesis through transcription/translation,
purified enzymes can be used. We have recently pioneered this method
to resolve some of the remaining open questions in archaeal ether
phospholipid biosynthesis. Complete reconstitution
allows for a simplified design with the potential to produce substantial
amounts of phospholipids to generate a membrane that grows by expansion.
Such a system would allow for studies on complex processes that in
living cells are linked to membrane expansion, among which cell division
and the insertion of membrane proteins into the lipid bilayer. Here,
we report on the design and engineering of a complete  phospholipid biosynthesis pathway using eight purified (membrane)
proteins, to realize the enzymatic conversion of simple fatty acid
precursors into the final phospholipid species phosphatidylethanolamine
(PE) and phosphatidylglycerol (PG), two major components of bacterial
membranes. Since synthesis coincides with the incorporation of lipid
precursors into a pre-existing liposomal membrane, biosynthesis of
chemical amounts of phospholipids resulted in membrane expansion and
yielded membranes in which the polar headgroup and acyl chain composition
can be altered on demand. Phospholipid Biosynthesis
Pathway Design Phospholipid
synthesis has been studied in great detail in the bacterium  and the enzymes involved have been identified
and characterized. We used the  system as a template to
develop a versatile  phospholipid biosynthesis
pathway, combined with enzymes derived from other sources (a). The main principle
of this pathway is based on a feed with free fatty acids (FAs) to
yield fatty acyl-Coenzyme A (FA-CoA) that is utilized with glycerol
3-phosphate (G3P) to generate phosphatidic acid (PA). The PA is further
converted into phospholipids with different head groups and acyl chain
composition through a series of additional enzymatic steps. In  phospholipid synthesis starts with the biosynthesis
of FA-CoA by the type II fatty acid synthase (FASII) using malonyl-CoA
and acyl-CoA as substrates. However, a more simple approach is to
use the catabolic enzyme FadD involved in β-oxidation of FAs. Whereas, FASII is a multicomplex enzyme, that carries out cycled
chain-elongation and subsequent acyl-carrier protein coupling, FadD
uses already premade FAs in a simple two-step conversion, resulting
in the direct production of FA-CoA from FAs, adenosine-triphosphate
(ATP) and CoA. The use of FadD further adds to the versatility of
the system, as the acyl chain composition in the system can be readily
determined by the feed of different FAs. The next step is the attachment
of two acyl-chains to glycerol 3-phosphate (G3P). In , two membrane-associated proteins are responsible for these acylation
reactions, , glycerol 3-phosphate acyltransferase
(PlsB) and lysophosphatidic acid acyltransferase (PlsC). PlsB transfers an acyl-chain on to the 1-position of G3P, resulting
in lysophosphatidic acid (LPA). Subsequently, PlsC attaches another
acyl-chain to the 2-position of LPA, resulting in PA, a central intermediate
in phospholipid biosynthesis. As both these enzymes recognize FA-CoA
as an acyl-chain donor, they can be easily combined with the aforementioned
FadD. Moreover, the CoA is completely regenerated in these steps and
thus made available to FadD to activate further FAs. Although a PA-only
membrane may fulfill some basic requirements such as the barrier function,
it will not support the activity of membrane proteins. Therefore,
PA needs to be converted into the two key phospholipid species, phosphatidylethanolamine
(PE) and phosphatidylglycerol (PG). For this purpose, the central
precursor cytidine diphosphate-diacylglycerol (CDP-DAG) needs to be
synthesized from PA with cytidine triphosphate (CTP) by CDP-diacylglycerol
synthase (CdsA). Next, two additional conversions are needed to yield
either PE or PG. CDP-DAG can be converted into phosphatidylserine
(PS) by PS synthase (PssA) utilizing serine, whereupon PS is converted
into PE by PS decarboxylase (Psd). CDP-DAG can also be converted into
phosphatidylglycerol-3-phosphate (PGP) by PGP synthase (PgsA) followed
by the removal of the 3-phosphate by one of the PGP phosphatases (PgpA,
PgpB, or PgpC) yielding PG. We have previously demonstrated the  conversion
of PA into PG and PS by using the above-mentioned enzymes from . Interestingly,
the enzyme PssA from  was far less active  compared to the corresponding enzyme from . Therefore, to develop a high fidelity  phospholipid synthesis pathway, the  PssA was employed. To construct an  phospholipid biosynthesis
pathway, a substantial quantity of the individual enzyme is needed.
Herein, the genes of all required enzymes, ,
8 in total (), were cloned separately into a His-tag containing pET-based overexpression
vector allowing their overproduction. As most of the enzymes are membrane
(associated) proteins, membranes were isolated from the overproducing
strains, after which the enzymes were solubilized with the detergent -dodecyl-β--maltoside (2%, w/v). Subsequently,
proteins were isolated using Ni-NTA agarose affinity chromatography,
resulting in pure enzyme fractions (b). Schematic representation of the  phospholipid
biosynthesis pathway and protein purification. (a) FadD converts simple
fatty acid (FA) building blocks into acyl-chain donors which are utilized
by the enzymes PlsB and PlsC to form lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and
phosphatidic acid (PA), respectively. PA is further converted into
CDP- diacylglycerol which serves as precursor for biosynthesis of
phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and phosphatidylglycerol (PG). (b) Coomassie
stained SDS-PAGE gel of the eight lipid biosynthesis enzymes purified
by Ni-NTA chromatography. The upper-band in lane 6 displays a dimer
of PgpA. The two bands in lane 8 represent the two individual subunits
of the Psd enzyme. Proteins Used in
This Study and Their
Characteristics number of
(predicted) TM segments PMP,
peripheral membrane protein. IMP, integral membrane protein. Formation of Phosphatidic Acid in Detergent Solution http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00265/suppl_file/sb7b00265_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00265/suppl_file/sb7b00265_si_001.pdf For
the biosynthesis of the bilayer forming phospholipid PA, only
three enzymes are needed (a). FadD catalyzes the coupling of CoA to a fatty acid
substrate. This two-step process is driven by the hydrolysis of ATP
into AMP, resulting in the production of the FA-CoA. When purified FadD was incubated with ATP, CoA and oleic
acid (C18:1), mass spectrometry demonstrated the formation of the
CoA derivative (a) concomitantly with the consumption of the FA. In the absence of
ATP, no conversion was observed. CoA-limiting conditions resulted
in a proportional consumption of oleic acid and generation of oleoyl-CoA,
and increased CoA concentrations resulted in higher levels of oleoyl-CoA
(a), without
any product feedback inhibition (). The activity of FadD was not further influenced by the presence
of phospholipids () and could
be carried out in solution. These data demonstrate that FadD can be
used to supply the anticipated biosynthesis system with FA-CoA derivatives. PlsB and PlsC both utilize FA-CoA
to attach the acyl chain on the
first and second position of glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P), respectively.
Previous studies on overexpressed PlsB suggest that the enzyme is
fully integrated into the membrane. However,
an analysis of the average predicted hydropathy-profile of a family
of bacterial PlsB homologues (b), does not signify any transmembrane segment, suggesting
the enzyme may rather be membrane associated. Nevertheless, PlsB could
be purified from membranes, and efficiently produced LPA from oleoyl-CoA
and G3P, but only in the presence of phospholipids (mixture of DOPG,
DOPE and DOPC, 1:1:1 molar ratio) (d). Interestingly, the oleoyl-CoA was completely
converted into LPA, which contradicts an earlier study that suggested
a negative feedback inhibition by free CoA on PlsB activity. Although a phospholipid requirement was noted
before, the need for individual phospholipid species
is as yet unknown. To further address this, PlsB activity assays were
performed in the presence of liposomes with different phospholipid
compositions. Whereas in the presence of both DOPE and DOPG, complete
conversion of oleoyl-CoA into LPA was obtained in 30 min, replacement
of either phospholipid species for DOPC resulted in significantly
lower conversion efficiencies. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00265/suppl_file/sb7b00265_si_001.pdf In contrast to PlsB, the average
hydropathy analysis of a family
of bacterial PlsC homologues (c) predicts a single transmembrane segment at the N-terminus.
This region may function as a membrane anchor to catalyze LPA to PA
conversion at the membrane interface. PlsC was isolated from membranes
of an  overexpressing strain (b). When purified
PlsC in detergent solution was fed with oleoyl-CoA and LPA, formation
of PA was observed (e). Although the addition of phospholipids seems to enhance
the PA production, they are not essential for PlsC its activity (e). When PlsC was
combined with PlsB in detergent solution, a feed with oleoyl-CoA and
G3P resulted in the formation of PA (), thereby setting the basic requirements for the projected phospholipid
biosynthesis pathway. Two fundamentally different approaches
toward a growing membrane
can be perceived, , the  synthesis of membranes through self-assembly of the phospholipids
into a bilayer, and growth of an already existing membrane through
further addition of phospholipids. The  phospholipid
synthesis pathway did not support  membrane
synthesis because of the necessity of phospholipids for PlsB mediated
acyl-chain attachment. Moreover, many of the other proteins involved
in phospholipid synthesis are multimembrane spanning enzymes, which
require membranes for proper functioning. Therefore, the system depends
on the use of already pre-existing membranes for  phospholipid synthesis and membrane expansion, thereby representing
the natural situation. activity of purified FadD, PlsB and PlsC.
(a) FadD activity: reactions were performed in the presence of purified
FadD, as specified. Subsequently, 0.1% of the internal standard DDM
was added. Products were analyzed by LC–MS, normalized for
the internal standard and plotted on the -axis.
Hydropathy profile alignment of (b)  PlsB
and (c) PlsC (red line), with the averaged hydropathy profile of their
bacterial protein family (black line). (d) PlsB and PlsC activity.
Reactions were performed in the presence of purified enzyme and 0.1%
DDM. Products were analyzed by LC–MS, normalized and plotted. Reconstitution of Phosphatidic Acid Formation To establish
a system for membrane growth, the enzymes needed for PA formation
were combined in a single reaction setup and reconstituted into liposomes.
Herein, PlsB and PlsC were added to a reaction mixture containing
liposomes such that the final detergent concentration remained below
its critical micelle concentration (CMC) (0.01%). In this way, the
liposomes remain intact. To these membranes FadD was added and when
supplied with oleic acid, CoA, ATP and G3P, a complete conversion
of oleic acid into PA was observed (a). When only FadD and PlsB were present,
small amounts of PA were formed, likely because of a contamination
of PlsB with some PlsC. Using this liposomal system, the phospholipid requirement
was re-examined.
In the presence of both DOPG and DOPE, large quantities of oleic acid
(2.7 mM) were completely converted into PA (b). In the absence of DOPE, the yield of
PA formation was reduced by 50% even though reactions were carried
out overnight, whereas in the absence of PG, still complete conversion
was obtained under the aforementioned conditions. Thus, in the liposomal
system, PlsB depends more strongly on DOPE than on DOPG. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00265/suppl_file/sb7b00265_si_001.pdf An
important feature of the three-step cascade reaction toward
PA biosynthesis is the recycling of CoA. Recycling was validated by
testing PA formation at concentrations of CoA that were up to 65-fold
lower than that of oleic acid, which thus would limit FadD for the
formation of oleoyl-CoA. Indeed, in the presence of FadD and limiting
amounts of CoA (50 μM), only part of supplied oleic acid (2.7
mM) was converted into oleoyl-CoA (b). Further addition of PlsB and PlsC resulted
in the conversion of all oleic acid into LPA/PA which implies that
the synthesis involves recycling of CoA. Furthermore, when the amount
of the PlsB and PlsC enzyme is taken into account, it can be concluded
that the system not only recycles CoA but also catalyzes at least
2500 turnovers under the conditions employed. Following this procedure
over time, in about 6 h almost all oleic acid is converted into PA
(). Due to the broad substrate
specificity of FadD in β-oxidation,
the FadD dependent conversion of other FAs into their FA-CoA derivatives
would provide a mechanism to generate phospholipids with an acyl chain
composition that mimics that of biological membranes. In addition
to oleic acid (C18:1). three other fatty acids, , stearic acid (C18:0), palmitoleic acid (C16:1) and palmitic acid
(C16:0) were tested for PA biosynthesis. Herein, an equimolar mixture
of these four fatty acids was supplied as substrates to FadD, and
formation of the different LPA and PA species was examined by mass
spectrometry. In the presence of FadD and PlsB, all FAs were converted  their respective FA-CoA derivatives into the corresponding
LPA molecules (a,b). Addition of PlsC results in the production of almost all possible
variants of PA, although a preference is noted for species with acyl-chains
that contain at least one double bond (c). Furthermore, stearoyl-CoA and LPA (C18:0)
both appear to be less preferred substrates as these were only slowly
incorporated into PA (b,c). Since this phenomenon was not apparent when only the
combined activity of FadD and PlsB was tested, these data suggest
that PlsC prefers the unsaturated and shorter acyl chain substrates.
This matches the  distribution of various
acyl chains in the phospholipids of (−) Summarizing, the reconstituted system supports a three-step conversion
of a multitude of FAs and G3P into PA with high efficiency, which
is limited only by the amount of FAs supplied to the system. synthesis of PA by
FadD, PlsB and PlsC.
(a) Stepwise conversion of oleic acid into PA. Reactions were performed
in the presence of purified enzymes reconstituted into liposomes.
Products were analyzed by LC–MS, normalized for the internal
standard POPG and plotted. (b) Synthesis of PA at high oleic acid
concentration. Reactions were performed as described above, after
which 0.1% of the internal standard DDM was added. Lipid products
were analyzed as described above and plotted. Synthesis of
PA with varying acyl chain composition. An equimolar
ratio of four different fatty acid species were mixed together and
incubated with FadD, PlsB and with or without PlsC, and reconstituted
into liposomes in the presence or absence (control) of ATP as indicated.
Levels of the four fatty acid species (a), four LPA species (b) and
nine PA species (c) are displayed for the three reaction conditions.
Products were analyzed by LC–MS, normalized for the internal
standard POPG and plotted. Reconstitution of Polar Headgroup Attachment The second
stage of phospholipid biosynthesis is the formation of CDP-diacylglycerol
(CDP-DAG), and the subsequent attachment of polar head groups. Previously,
we have shown that PA can be converted  into
PG and PS with the corresponding enzymes in detergent solution. However, for membrane growth these reactions
need to be performed in the absence of detergent. As several of the
enzymes involved in polar headgroup addition are integral membrane
proteins (),
reconstitution into liposomes was again achieved by low detergent
incorporation keeping the concentration of -dodecyl-β--maltopyranoside below the CMC. Biosynthesis of PE and
PG starts with the production of the central precursor CDP-DAG from
PA and CTP by the enzyme CdsA, which attaches a CDP onto PA by dephosphorylating
CTP. In the absence of CTP, the PA synthesized by the enzyme cascade
FadD/PlsB/PlsC could not be converted by CdsA (a,b). Addition of CTP resulted in formation
of CDP-DAG, but the activity was low and most of the PA remained unused.
Increasing the reaction time or the CdsA concentration did not improve
biosynthesis (data not shown). We hypothesize that the limited PA
conversion is caused by a feedback inhibition of CdsA by its product
CDP-DAG, a phenomenon that has been observed for the CDP-DAG synthesizing
enzyme from  as well. Therefore, the reaction was coupled to the conversion
of CDP-DAG into phosphatidylglycerol-3-phosphate (PGP). This reaction
is catalyzed by the enzyme PgsA that utilizes the glycerol 3-phosphate
(G3P) already present in the assay. Indeed, in the presence of PgsA,
high level production of PGP was observed while the further addition
of the phosphatase PgpA caused the complete conversion of PA into
PG (a). Similarly,
a high level of PS production was observed when the system was supplemented
with PssA and its substrate -serine. Subsequent addition
of phosphatidylserine decarboxylase, Psd, resulted in formation of
PE (b). In
these experiments, introduction of the polar headgroup enzymes and
their substrates resulted in a complete conversion of PA. Since CDP-DAG
now is an intermediate in the reaction and does not accumulate to
high levels, these data support the notion of feedback inhibition
of CdsA by its product CDP-DAG. More importantly, the work demonstrates
the functional reconstitution of the entire phospholipid biosynthesis
pathway with purified enzymes reconstituted in liposomes. biosynthesis of (a) PG, (b) PE and (c)
mixtures of PE and PG from oleic acid and glycerol 3-phosphate. Reactions
were performed in the presence of purified enzymes reconstituted into
liposomes. Products were analyzed by LC–MS, normalized for
the internal standard POPG and plotted. Reconstitution of a Mixed Phospholipid Membrane http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00265/suppl_file/sb7b00265_si_001.pdf The
next aim was to simultaneously synthesize PE and PG  by combining all the enzymes used in the aforementioned pathway
thereby mimicking phospholipid biosynthesis in  cells. In addition, the exact amounts of phospholipids produced
were quantified by calibration of the mass spectrometry signals based
on PE and PG standards (). Six enzymes involved in either PE or PG biosynthesis from FAs
were mixed, and synthesis was initiated by the addition of 2.7 mM
oleic acid. This resulted in the production of 1.2 mM PG (90%) and
1.35 mM PE (95–100%), respectively (c), which is close to the theoretically expected
conversion efficiency as two oleic acid units are needed to form a
single phospholipid. Subsequently, all eight enzymes were mixed to
yield a reaction in which both PE and PG are produced simultaneously.
By varying the ratio of the PG forming enzymes PgsA and PgpA, and
the PE forming enzymes PssA and Psd, the ratio of PG over PE could
be adjusted such that a phospholipid mixture is obtained that mimics
the typical native molar ratio of 30:70 (c). Again, in these reactions the conversion
of FA into phospholipid is nearly complete. These data show that the
lipid species composition of the membranes can be controlled on demand. Although phospholipids are synthesized from within the cell, in
our system substrates and enzymes are supplied from outside of the
cell. Hereby, we avoid the problem of low substrate availability encountered
in the past during attempts to mimic vesicle growth from within liposomes.
Our approach differs dramatically from previous attempts to generate
phospholipid (,) that could
only yield minute quantities of phospholipids under poorly controlled
conditions. As most of the proteins involved in phospholipid synthesis
are membrane proteins, correct insertion/reconstitution is essential
for their functionality.  this is a highly
regulated process where membrane insertion and folding occurs  the Sec-translocon in conjunction with protein synthesis
at the ribosome. Earlier attempts to synthesize phospholipids were
based on a low fidelity  enzyme transcription/translation
system, which resulted in slow and only partial (50%) conversion of
supplied substrates, while product quantities were too low to observe
any appreciable membrane growth. Instead, we used the membrane proteins
isolated from overexpressing  cells and
these were reconstituted into pre-existing liposomes through detergent
dilution. As a result, complete conversion of large amounts of substrate
through all expected intermediates into multiple phospholipid species
occurred simultaneously. Membrane Expansion by Phospholipid Biosynthesis To
visualize membrane expansion, a fluorescent assay was used which is
based on the self-quenching properties of the lipophilic fluorophore
octadecyl rhodamine B (R18). This probe is commonly used to follow
membrane mixing during vesicle fusion, and the degree of fluorescence
quenching decreases upon reduction of the R18 concentration in the
membranes. Thus, phospholipid biosynthesis
should result in increased levels of R18 fluorescence. The pre-existing
liposomes were supplemented with 5 mol % R18, resulting in highly
quenched fluorescence, which was relieved after the membranes were
solubilized with the detergent Triton X-100. Subsequently, the enzymes
and their substrates where added to the R18 labeled liposomes to initiate
phospholipid synthesis. This resulted in an immediate increase of
the R18 fluorescence that, by the addition of Triton X-100, increased
to the reference maximal fluorescence level (). The sudden increase in fluorescence, did
not dependent on phospholipid biosynthesis, but can be solely attributed
to the addition of FAs causing swelling and expansion of the liposomes.
Remarkably, the conversion of oleic acid into PA by the added enzymes
and their substrates did not result in a further change in fluorescence,
although under these same conditions mass spectrometry demonstrates
that all FAs were converted into PA (b). The data suggest that oleic acid initially
partitions into the liposomes, causing membrane expansion. However,
this expansion is maintained upon the complete conversion of the FAs
into PA. Since the level of R18 quenching is linearly correlated with
the
concentration of R18 in the membrane, the degree of membrane expansion
can be calculated being 25–30%. Based on the amount of FAs
provided (2.7 mM), and phospholipid present in the system (2.67 mM),
the maximum expansion expected upon complete conversion of FAs into
PA is 30%, which coincides with the experimentally obtained value.
The membrane expansion in this system is only limited by depletion
of substrate. We noted that during the process of phospholipid
production (PA,
PE and/or PG), white floating particles were produced in the reaction
mixture that readily disappeared upon the addition of EDTA. Therefore,
the morphology of the liposomes was examined by cryo-electron microscopy.
Herein, phospholipid biosynthesis was induced until PG formation.
As expected, the liposomes added to the reaction mixture showed a
general appearance as small unilamellar vesicles with sizes in the
range of 30–100 nm (a panel 1). Upon the addition of a large quantity of
oleic acid, significant swelling and likely fusion of the liposomes
was noted, showing an increase in size to 60–200 nm (a panel 2), which
confirms the notion of swelling as derived from the R18 assay. Next,
the enzymes and their substrates were added and phospholipid biosynthesis
was initiated until complete depletion of the FAs. This resulted in
the formation of the white particles that by cryoEM are visible as
stacked membrane layers comprising multilamellar like structures (a panel 3). Addition
of EDTA resulted in a complete dissolution of the stacked membranes
and dissolved the white floating particles (a panel 4) yielding normal liposomes. EDTA
addition did not affect the final R18 fluorescence signal (data not
shown). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00265/suppl_file/sb7b00265_si_001.pdf The phenomenon of white particles
already occurs with the production
of PA, but was not noted during synthesis of LPA. As the stacked layers
appear in time, likely during PG synthesis a critical concentration
of the intermediate PA is reached, which induces the white precipitation
(). PA strongly interacts with
divalent cations, such as Ca and Mg its negative charge, which can even result in the loss
of liposomal structures. In our system, this process may even be accelerated
by uneven growth of the outer leaflet of the membrane as compared
to the inner leaflet as the enzymes and substrates are added from
outside of the liposomes. As spontaneous phospholipid flip-flop is
a slow process (hours), while these lipids are synthesized in an asymmetric
manner, we hypothesize that the formation of Ca/Mg complexes of PA cause membrane stacking leading to the tubular
multilamellar structures seen by cryo-EM. These divalent cation-PA
complexes likely are unable to undergo flip-flop movements. As a consequence
of large quantities of PA together with an imbalanced growth of the
outer membrane leaflet size, the vesicle-like structures are disrupted
and stacked membranes are obtained. This idea is supported by our
observation that addition of EDTA results in the formation of normal
vesicle structures. Since the white precipitation is an undesired
phenomenon, reactions
were repeated but now with a lower Mg concentration to
prevent or slow down stacked layer formation. Furthermore, the addition
of oleic acid was dosed over time, which results in a more gradual
formation of the PG, thereby keeping intermediate PA levels at a minimum.
Again, the starting material are small unilamellar liposomes with sizes in the range
of 30–100 nm (b panel 1). Addition of the first small dose of oleic acid
together with the enzymes and their substrates resulted in hardly
any membrane expansion and no vesicle fusion (b panel 2). However, after applying several
doses of oleic acid, larger vesicles could be detected, indicating
growth of the liposomes. Furthermore, no stacked layer formation could
be observed (b panel 3) which underscores the need to control membrane expansion
by a dosed feed of FAs. Phospholipid biosynthesis induced membrane expansion of
liposomes.
Membrane expansion was measured with the R18-self-quenching assay.
Fluorescent emission spectra of R18 containing liposomes excited at
540 nm were recorded for the liposomes before (trace 1) and after
(trace 2) the addition of 2.7 mM oleic acid and the complete conversion
of oleic acid into PA (trace 3) by FadD, PlsB and PlsC as described
in the legends of b. Addition of Triton X-100 results in maximum fluorescent
levels (trace 4) and was used to normalize the samples. Transmission electron microscopic imaging of  synthesized membranes. (a) Different phases during phospholipid
biosynthesis, starting with small unilamellar liposomes (a1), the
addition of 1.5 mM oleic acid to yield large swollen vesicles (a2),
conversion of oleic acid into phospholipid resulting in stacked bilayer
formation (a3), which is reversed upon addition of EDTA (a4) to yield
large liposomes. (b) Different phases during phospholipid biosynthesis
upon the dosed addition of small amounts of oleic acid. Starting with
small unilamellar vesicles (b1), first addition of 0.3 mM oleic acid
which does not result in observable vesicle swelling (a2), and formation
of large vesicles, after multiple additions of small amounts of oleic
acid to a final concentration of 1.5 mM, converted into phospholipid
(b3). Here, we report the
development of an efficient and versatile system
to generate phospholipids from simple fatty acids, thereby growing
membranes in a test tube. Membrane biosynthesis is an important and
essential step in the development of synthetic cells. The system is
based on a cascade of eight purified (membrane) proteins, which are
reconstituted into pre-existing liposomes, allowing for the incorporation
of diverse fatty acyl chains and variations in the polar headgroup
composition to mimic the phospholipid composition of a biological
membrane, while recycling the CoA for continuous phospholipid synthesis. The membrane expansion obtained  this system
is an important step forward toward self-growing vesicles, but further
steps have to be taken. It should be noted that 2.7 mM of oleic acid
in the reaction mixture was about the maximal tolerable concentration,
as higher concentrations of oleic acid at the start of the experiment
inhibited biosynthesis (data not shown). For continuous phospholipid
biosynthesis and membrane growth, we therefore envision a controlled
feeding system in which oleic acid and other FAs are continuously
added to the reaction vessel, such not to exceed inhibitory concentrations
and prevent the formation of stacked membranes. Taken together, our
reconstituted system truly represents a growing cellular like compartment
that can be used to increase the complexity and address cellular processes
that are linked to membrane growth, such as membrane protein insertion,
phospholipid flip-flop and cell division. Bacterial Strain
and Cloning Procedures Genomic DNA
of  was used as a template for the
amplification of genes encoding for the enzymes FadD, PlsB and PlsC.  DH5α (Invitrogen) was used for cloning.
Plasmids for the  enzyme PssA and  enzymes CdsA, PgsA, PgpA and Psd were as reported. All primers and plasmids used in the present
study are listed in  and .  BL21 (DE3) was used as a protein overexpression host strain and
grown under aerobic conditions at 37 °C in LB medium supplemented
with the required antibiotics, kanamycin (50 μg/mL), chloramphenicol
(34 μg/mL) and ampicillin (50 μg/mL). Cloning and Expression Vectors Used
in This Study Expression vector (Kan), T7 promoter Expression vector (Amp), T7 promoter Expression vector (Kan), T7 promoter Expression vector (), T7 promoter gene
with C-terminus His-tag from  MG1655
cloned into pRSF-Duet-1 vector using the primers PrME001 and PrME002 gene
with C-terminus His-tag from  MG1655
cloned into pet-28b vector using the primers PrME003 and PrME004 gene
with C-terminus His-tag from  MG1655
cloned into pet-28b vector using the primers PrME005 and PrME006 gene
with N-terminus His-tag from  MG1655
cloned into pACYC-Duet vector using the primers 103 and 106 gene
with C-terminus His-tag from  cloned
into pACYC-Duet vector using the primers 89 and 90 gene
with C-terminus His-tag from  MG1655
cloned into pACYC-Duet vector using the primers 533 and 534 gene
with C-terminus His-tag from  MG1655
cloned into pRSF-Duet vector using the primers 551 and 552 with C-terminus His-tag
from  MG1655
cloned into pET-Duet vector using the primers 562 and 563 Oligonucleotide Primers Used in This
Study AGTCATTCAGTGGTGGTGGTGGTGGTGGGCTTTATTGTCCACTTTGC CATCCTGCCCGGCTGGCCACGAATTTACTAC CACTACGA TATATATCTTTCGTCTTATTATTACCG GCGCTTAGTGATGGTGATGGTGGTGATGATGATTCCATCTCCCAGACTCCAG GCGCTTAGTGATGGTGATGGTGGTGATGATGAAGCGTCCTGAATACCAGTAAC GCCGGCAGCCATCACCATCATCACCACAGCCTGAAGTATCGCCTGATATCTGC GCGCAAAACAATGGCCTGGAGGCTACCTTGTTAAATTCATTTAAACTTTCGCTAC GCGCTTAGTGATGGTGATGGTGGTGATGATGGACCTGGTCTTTTTTGTCGTCAAC CGCGTCAGTGATGGTGATGGTGGTGATGATGCTGATCAAGCAAATCTGCACGC CGGCCTAGTGATGGTGATGGTGGTGATGATGCGACAGAATACCCAGCG Expression and Purification of Phospholipid
Synthesizing Enzymes Proteins involved in phospholipid synthesis
were overexpressed
in  BL21 strain and induced with 0.5
mM IPTG. After 2.5 h. of induction (4 h. for inducing PssA and PgsA
synthesis), cytoplasmic and membrane fractions were separated as described. FadD present in the cytoplasmic fraction (supernatant)
was stored at −80. For all other proteins, the total membranes
fractions were resuspended in buffer A (50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0, 100
mM KCl and 15% glycerol) after which they could be stored at −80
as well. For further purification, 0.5 mg/mL of membranes were solubilized
in 2% -dodecyl-β--maltopyranoside
(DDM) detergent for 1 h. at 4 °C. The material was subjected
to a centrifugation (17 000) step for 15
min at 4 °C to remove insolubilized material and the supernatant
was incubated with Ni-NTA (Ni- nitrilotriacetic acid)
beads (Sigma) for 2 h. at 4 °C. The Ni-NTA beads were washed
10 times with 40 column volumes (CV) of buffer B (50 mM Tris/HCl,
pH 8.0, 100 mM KCl, 15% glycerol and 0.05% DDM) supplemented with
10 mM imidazole, and the proteins were eluted three times with 0.5
CV of buffer B supplemented with 300 mM imidazole. The cytoplasmic
fraction of FadD was further purified  Ni-NTA
agarose affinity chromatography using the same method as described
above, with the exception that buffer B did not contain any DDM. Purity
of the eluted proteins were assessed on 12% SDS/PAGE stained with
Coomassie Brilliant Blue and the protein concentration was determined
by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm. Extinction coefficients were
obtained from the ProtParam tool from ExPASy by applying the specific
amino acid sequence. Chloroform
stocks of the lipid
species DOPG, DOPE, DOPC or POPG, POPE, DOPC (Avanti Biochemicals,
Birmingham, AL) were mixed together in a ratio of 33:33:33, unless
stated otherwise. Next the lipid solution was dried under a nitrogen
gas stream for multiple hours, after which the dry lipid film was
resuspended in a 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0 buffer. For formation of liposomes,
a sonication cycle of 15 s on, 15 s off was repeated for 10–40×. Assays for Phospholipid Production All  reactions were performed in 100 μL
of assay buffer A containing a final concentration of 50 mM Tris/HCl,
pH 8.0, 10 mM MgCl, 100 mM KCl, 15% glycerol and 2 mM
DTT. The activity of FadD was assayed in buffer A using 0.5 μM
enzyme and 550 μM of oleic acid, 40 μM or 250 μM
CoA and with or without 1 mM ATP. The influence of lipids on FadD
activity was examined under similar conditions with addition of 2.67
mM of different lipids as indicated. Activity assays of PlsB and PlsC
were performed in buffer A with addition of 0.1% DDM, 100 μM
oleoyl-CoA, 0.5 μM enzyme and with or without 2.67 mM of various
lipid mixtures, 10 mM G3P or 120 mM LPA (see figure legends). Combined
activity assays of PlsB and PlsC were performed in buffer A with addition
of 0.5% DDM, 100 μM oleoyl-CoA, 2.67 mM of phospholipid, 1 μM
PlsB and 1.5 μM of PlsC and 10 mM G3P, unless indicated otherwise. The stepwise cascade conversion of oleic acid into PA was assayed
in buffer A in the presence of 0.5 μM FadD, 550 μM or
(2.7 mM) Oleic acid, 50 μM CoA, 2.67 mM of liposomes, 0.5 μM
PlsB and 1.5 μM PlsC, 1 (or 4) mM ATP and 10 mM G3P as indicated
in the figure legends. The conversion of multiple fatty acids into
a wide variety of PAs was assayed as above, but with 675 μM
of palmitoleic acid, palmitic acid, oleic acid and stearic acid, respectively. Conversion of oleic acid into PG and/or PE was assayed in buffer
A with addition of 0.5 μM FadD, 50 μM CoA, 550 μM
or 2700 μM oleic acid, 1 mM or 4 mM ATP, 2.67 mM liposomes,
10 mM G3P, 0.5 μM PlsB, 1.5 μM PlsC and, as indicated,
2 μM CdsA, 3 mM CTP, 1 μM PgsA, 1 μM PgpA, 1 μM
PssA, 3 mM -serine and 1 μM Psd, unless indicated
otherwise. All reactions were incubated overnight at 37 °C
unless stated
differently. Lipids were extracted two times with 0.3 mL of n-butanol,
and evaporated under a stream of nitrogen gas and resuspended in 50
μL of methanol for LC–MS analysis. Fluorescent
Assays for Membrane Expansion To visualize
membrane expansion, Octadecyl Rhodamine B chloride (R18) (Biotium
Inc. Fremont, USA) was incorporated into the liposomes at a concentration
of 5 mol % during liposome preparation. Synthesis reactions were performed
in buffer A with addition of 0.5 μM FadD, 50 μM CoA, 2700
μM oleic acid, 2.67 mM R18 liposomes (DOPC, DOPG, DOPE), 10
mM G3P, 0.5 μM PlsB, 1.5 μM PlsC and, if present 4 mM
ATP and 1% Triton X-100. Reactions were quenched with 10 mM EDTA,
and fluorescence was excited at 540 nm and emission spectra (560–680
nm) recorded using a QuantaMaster spectrofluorometer controlled by
the FelixGX program (Photon Technology International, Inc.). Cryotransmission
Electron Microscopy A few microliters
of sample was deposited on a holey carbon coated copper grid (Quantifoil
3.5/1). After blotting the excess of the sample with filter paper,
the grids were plunged quickly into liquid ethane (FEI vitrobot).
Frozen-hydrated specimens were mounted in a cryo-stage (Gatan, model
626) and observed in a FEI Tecnai T20 electron microscope, operating
at 200 kV. Micrographs were recorded under low-dose conditions on
a slow-scan CCD camera (Gatan, model 794). Samples from the  reactions
were analyzed using an Accela1250 HPLC
system coupled with an ESI–MS Orbitrap Exactive (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) as described. In short, 5
μL was injected into a COSMOSIL 5C4-AR-300 Packed Column, 4.6
mm I.D. × 150 mm (Nacalai USA, Inc.) operating at 40 °C
with a flow rate of 500 μL/min. Separation of the compounds
was achieved by a changing gradient of Mobile phase A (50 mM ammonium
bicarbonate in water) and mobile phase B (Acetontrile). The MS settings
and specifications used for this analysis were the same as described
before. Only for the simultaneous synthesis
of PE and PG (c) 5 μL of sample was injected into a Shim-pack XR-ODS/C18
column with dimension 3.0 mm × 75 mm (Shimadzu) operating at
55 °C with a flow rate of 400 μL/min. Separation of the
compounds was achieved by a changing gradient of Mobile phase A (10
mM ammonium formate with 0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile 40:60,
v/v) and mobile phase B (10 mM ammonium formate with 0.1% formic acid
in acetonitrile/propan-2-ol, 10:90, v/v). The MS settings and specifications used for this analysis were the
same as described before. Spectral
data constituting total ion counts were analyzed using the Thermo
Scientific XCalibur processing software by applying the Genesis algorithm
based automated peak area detection and integration. The total ion
counts of the extracted lipid products: oleic acid (/ 281.25 [M – H]), oleoyl-CoA
(/ 1030.35 [M – H]), LPA (/ 435.26
[M – H]), (DO)PA (/ 699.49 [M – H]), CDP-DAG (/ 1004.54 [M – H]), PGP (/ 853.50 [M –
H]), DOPG (/ 773.53 [M – H]), PS (/ 786.53 [M – H]), DOPE
(/ 742.54 [M – H]), palmitoleic acid (C16:1) (/ 253.22 [M – H]), palmitic acid (C16:0)
(/ 255.23 [M – H]), oleic acid (C18:1) (/ 281.25
[M – H]), stearic acid (C18:0) (/ 283.26 [M – H]). LPA (C16:1) (/ 407.22 [M –
H]), LPA (16:0) (/ 409.23 [M – H]), LPA (C18:1) (/ 435.25 [M – H]), LPA (C18:0) (/ 437.26 [M –
H]). PA (C16:1–16:1) (/ 643.43 [M – H]), PA
(16:0–16:0) (/ 647.46 [M
– H]), PA (C18:1–C16:1) (/ 671.46 [M – H]), PA (C16:1–16:0) (/ 645.45
[M – H]), PA (C18:0–16:1/18:1–16:0)
(/ 673.48 [M – H]), PA (18:1–18:0) (/ 701.51
[M – H]), PA (C18:0–C16:0) (/ 675.49 [M – H]), PA (C18:1–18:1) (/ 699.49
[M – H]), PA (18:0–18:0) (/ 703.52 [M – H]) were normalized for either DDM (/ 509.3 [M – H]) or POPG (/ 747.52 [M – H]) and
plotted on the -axis as normalized ion count..