Directed
evolution is commonly
used to evolve proteins toward user-defined goals. For enzymes, directed
evolution only needs to uncover mutations that alter the ligand binding
site to accept a non-native ligand. For proteins such as membrane
receptors, directed evolution is much more challenging, as the evolved
receptor must not only accommodate a non-native ligand, but also maintain
the ability to transduce the detection of the new ligand to any associated
intracellular components. The GPCR (G-protein coupled receptor)
superfamily is the largest
group of membrane receptors. Given the incredible range of molecules
GPCRs detect, including proteins, small molecules, ions, and photons, this superfamily is under-utilized as a starting
point for directed evolution of user-defined analytical tools and
diagnostics. To date, directed evolution of GPCRs has only been successful
for ligands that are closely related to the native ligand, and has been limited to small molecules. Specifically, directed evolution of peptide GPCRs could yield user-defined
sensors capable of interrogating or analyzing any peptide-dependent
biological state. Here we investigate the feasibility of using directed
evolution to yield a point-of-care (POC) biosensor to detect a human
peptide biomarker. Access to low-cost, POC diagnostics enables
screening, diagnosis
and treatment monitoring for several critical diseases. POC diagnostics
reduce hospital stays, increase adherence to treatment, and have wider
economic benefits compared to laboratory testing. POC diagnostics, such as lateral flow sandwich immunoassays,
nucleic acid amplification tests, and colorimetric chemical reactions,
are available for proteins, DNA/RNA, and small molecule disease biomarkers.
However, there is a technology gap for assaying peptides and small
proteins biomarkers smaller than 15 kDa, including known biomarkers
for several cancers, Alzheimer’s, diabetes, renal failure, and tuberculosis. These biomarkers are frequently degradation products of larger proteins and often appear in easy-to-access specimens such as urine and blood, suitable
for POC diagnostics. These biomarkers are often too small to be simultaneously
bound by two antibodies as required for sandwich immunoassays and
instead require more sophisticated assays like immunoturbidimetric
measurements and mass spectrometry, which can prove impractical and prohibitively
expensive at the POC level. Thus, a cost-effective POC peptide diagnostic
can improve early detection and treatment management for a range of
diseases. Baker’s yeast () is a particularly promising vehicle for a POC peptide diagnostic
because it is cheap, robust, and easily engineered with standard techniques.
Active dry yeast is simple to manufacture and can be freeze-dried
and reconstituted to provide easy distribution without requiring a
cold-chain. A yeast-based biosensor (YBB) diagnostic tool would not
require power for operation, and could be operated with minimal training
because all detection and processing happens automatically at the
cellular scale. Also, signal amplification can easily be built into
the system using standard Synthetic Biology techniques.Yeast contains a native G-protein coupled receptor
(GPCR) which detects the 13 amino acid
α-factor peptide. We hypothesized that Ste2p may be a useful
starting point for directed evolution to produce receptors for peptide
biomarkers that cannot currently be assayed at the POC. Directed
evolution has been used to evolve GPCRs to detect small
molecules, but not peptides. Directed evolution experiments
ideally start with proteins that have a low basal activity that can
be improved upon. However, most peptide biomarkers have sequences
that are very dissimilar from the α-factor, so Ste2p is not
likely to have basal activity for the peptide biomarker. The sequence
dissimilarity, representing a large evolutionary distance, is challenging
as many simultaneous mutations would likely be required for the receptor
to detect the biomarker. To overcome this difficulty, we chose substrate
walking as an alternative technique for covering large evolutionary
distances. In substrate walking, an enzyme
is evolved along a pathway of chimeric substrates which contains features
of both the native and desired substrates before being evolved for
the desired substrate. Substrate walking with peptide-receptor pairs
has not been explored, so we investigated the feasibility and constraints
of this strategy. Here, we chose a peptide biomarker of chronic
kidney disease (CKD).
CKD, the 12th leading cause of death worldwide, affects 10% of the adult American population and is a significant, emerging burden in low
and middle income countries. As CKD worsens,
the kidneys lose the ability to clear cystatin C from the body, and
cystatin C accumulates in the serum and
urine. Clinically, cystatin C satisfies
the criteria for a universal biomarker as it is independent of age,
weight, and muscle mass and is more sensitive
to early onset renal failure compared to creatinine, a commonly used
biomarker for CKD. Cystatin C is typically
measured with a nephelometer, which is costly and requires substantial
infrastructure to use and maintain. Because
a biomarker protein may not be consistently degraded in the body,
it is necessary to standardize the peptide length and sequence. We
used a tryptic digest to ensure heterogeneous degradation products
are cleaved into standard peptides. Though cystatin C is a 13 kDa
protein, trypsin digestion of cystatin C yields an 11 amino acid peptide that can serve as a CKD biomarker. In
this study, we present a generalizable method for producing
peptide biomarker receptors using substrate walking and directed evolution,
and validate the approach by developing a YBB that can detect a modified
peptide fragment of cystatin C, a biomarker for renal failure. Finally,
we demonstrate the clinical feasibility of the proof-of-concept YBB
by showing functionality in commercially sourced pooled human urine,
a relevant sample matrix. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration
of engineering a GPCR to detect fully orthogonal peptide sequences. Evolution of a Receptor for Cystatin C, a
Peptide Biomarker
of Kidney Failure http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf Toward the goal of determining if GPCRs
can be evolved for new peptide ligands, we developed a fluorescence-activated
cell sorter (FACS)-based high throughput screen. We coupled receptor
activation to green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression by cloning
GFP downstream of the Ste2p-activated FUS1 promoter. We used constitutive
RFP expression to control for cell-to-cell variations in size and
protein synthesis rate, and identified activated receptors by a ratio
of GFP expression to RFP expression. Multiple rounds of enrichment
were required to isolate rare receptors from the library due to stochastic
fluorescence at the single cell level (, Supplement Figure 7). For Ste2p, there are approximately
8 × 10 possible single amino acid mutants and 6 ×
10 possible double amino acid mutants. We typically created
libraries of approximately 10 receptor mutants using error-prone
PCR (epPCR). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf Supplementary Figure 6 and Supplementary Table 3 http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf An initial directed evolution experiment targeting
Ste2p for the 11 amino acid long cystatin C tryptic peptide Cys7 () failed to produce
any mutant receptors with detectable sensitivity, so we proceeded
with a substrate walking strategy. We calculated the step size for
each peptide as the evolutionary change per amino acid based on the
BLOSUM62 matrix. On the basis of this
rudimentary analysis () we estimated a maximum permissible step
size. We designed an evolutionary path containing chimeric peptide
ligands named Cys1–Cys7, where Cys1 is similar to the native
ligand, α-factor, and Cys7 is the trypsinized cystatin C fragment
(). The intermediate
ligands were designed qualitatively by previous knowledge of how specific
amino acid substitutions in α-factor affect the native α-factor-
Ste2p interaction (). A visualization of the
directed evolution strategy is provided
in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf To evolve for activity
for the chimeric peptide ligand Cys1 (), we mutagenized
the wildtype Ste2p receptor using epPCR and exposed the mutant library
to 100 nM Cys1 during enrichment sorting (). Though the wild type receptor had no detectable response to Cys1
at a saturating ligand concentration of 10 μM (), receptor Cys1H4 and receptor
Cys1H5, both isolated from this experiment, detected ligand Cys1 with
nanomolar sensitivity (A, ). As expected,
Cys1H4 and Cys1H5 showed no response to chimeric ligand Cys2 even
at 10 μM, the top of the linear range of detection for peptide
Cys1 (). Thus,
we further mutagenized receptors Cys1H4 and Cys1H5 using epPCR and
exposed the library to 100 nM Cys2 during enrichment sorting. From
this sort, we isolated receptors Cys2K2 and Cys2K3, which responded
to Cys2 with nanomolar sensitivity (B, ). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf Supplementary Figure 4B, Supplementary Table 1 http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf Fortuitously, both receptors Cys2K2 and Cys2K3
responded to chimeric
peptide intermediate Cys3 with micromolar sensitivity (), and receptor Cys2K3 responded to peptide Cys4 with micromolar
sensitivity (). Directed
evolution to further evolve sensitivity to chimeric ligand Cys4 by
mutagenizing receptors Cys2K2 and Cys2K3 via epPCR and exposing the
mutagenized library to 100 nM Cys4 yielded receptor Cys4L3. Subsequent
analysis of receptor Cys4L3 with a new stock of Cys4 peptide showed
a sensitivity of 1 μM. However, the receptor showed a 2.5-fold
improvement in sensitivity in detecting ligand Cys4 over parent receptor
Cys2K3 (C, ) and was used for further
directed evolution. Next, we used epPCR to mutagenize receptors
Cys4L3 and Cys2K3 to
evolve activity for the intermediate Cys5. Due to the increasing EC50
values of our receptors, we increased the concentration of peptide
used during directed evolution. Though an initial attempt using 5
μM Cys5 peptide failed to produce receptors, a sort using 10
μM Cys5 produced receptors Cys5R2, Cys5R7, and Cys5R9. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf Using these three receptors as a starting point for directed evolution
to detect intermediate Cys6 at 100 μM, a 10-fold increase in
ligand concentration from the previous directed evolution experiment,
failed. This was surprising as Cys5 and Cys6 differ by only one amino
acid. We believed that the failed evolution was due to poor binding
of the ligand as peptides Cys5 and Cys6 contain mutations on the C-terminal
end, which is the region responsible for binding to the GPCR in the
native Ste2p-α-factor interaction. As we wanted to maintain sensitivity of the receptor toward clinically
relevant concentrations of cystatin, we ceased directed evolution
for higher concentrations of ligand. Instead, we looked toward the
interaction of native peptide ligands and their GPCRs from other species
to aid our understanding of the system. For nonyeast eukaryotes, many
bioactive peptide ligands of GPCRs are amidated on the C-terminus. As C-terminal amidation increases peptide hydrophobicity, we hypothesized that amidated versions of our
peptide intermediates may improve binding to the GPCRs. Receptors
Cys5R2, Cys5R7, and Cys5R9 were found to respond to C-terminally amidated
Cys7 at 100 μM, 50 μM, and 500 μM, respectively
(D, ). Interestingly, receptor
Cys4L3, isolated from the previous round of sorting, also responded
to 100 μM amidated Cys7 (). Ste2p responds to 1 mM amidated Cys7 (). However, the most sensitive mutant,
receptor Cys5R7, shows a 20-fold improvement in sensitivity for amidated
Cys7. A diagram showing the locations of acquired mutations for receptor
Cys5R7 is provided in E. Along the course of evolution for carboxy terminated peptides,
the substrate walking method worked to evolve receptors that detect
peptides for which Ste2p cannot detect at all. We sequenced
the STE2 mutants in the strains isolated in the different
rounds of evolution and analyzed the sequences with respect to known
information on Ste2p. We hypothesize that the new receptor function
is a result of mutations that do not solely affect ligand binding.
To summarize the course of evolution, we first observed a mutation
that likely affected the binding pocket (M54I), then mutations that
are likely to be responsible for global stability (M218K, M218T, K225T),
followed by mutations that may affect interaction with other signaling
network proteins (truncations, T167R, N158Y, N158F). A detailed reasoning
of the proposed function of these mutations is provided in the Supplement
(Analysis of Mutations in Cystatin Receptors). Chimeric ligands used to traverse
the evolutionary landscape in a step-wise fashion. The sequences of
the native ligand, α factor, and chimeric ligands, as well as
the step-size scores are provided (see ). Substrate walking
directed evolution strategy to evolve a receptor
to detect a peptide biomarker. Mutant receptors and experimental conditions
used in the directed evolution of Ste2 to detect a cystatin C peptide
are detailed above. Though evolved to detect peptide Cys5, receptors
Cys5R2, Cys5R7, and Cys5R9 can detect the cystatin C peptide Cys7
(ALDFAVGEYNK). Response of native and mutant receptors to chimeric ligands. Response
of mutant receptors to chimeric intermediates throughout the evolutionary
pathway is shown here. Responsiveness for Cys7, the diagnostic peptide,
is gradually gained through the course of evolution. For peptides
Cys1–Cys3, each data point is the average for  = 2 technical replicates. For all other peptides, each data point
is the average of  = 3 technical replicates. The
experiment was replicated one additional time in our laboratory with
comparable results. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf Evolved receptors respond
in a dose-dependent manner to target
ligands. (A) The native Ste2p receptor does not respond to chimeric
ligand Cys1. Evolved receptors Cys1H4 and Cys1H5 respond in a dose
dependent manner to ligand Cys1. Each data point is the average shown
for  = 2 technical replicates. (B) The native Ste2p
receptor does not respond to chimeric ligand Cys2, but evolved receptors
Cys2K2 and Cys2K3 respond in a dose dependent manner to ligand Cys2.
(C) The native Ste2p receptor does not respond to chimeric ligand
Cys4. Evolved receptors Cys2K3 and Cys4L3 respond in a dose dependent
manner to ligand Cys4. (D) Evolved receptors Cys5R2, Cys5R7, and Cys5R9,
and native receptor Ste2p respond to amidated biomarker Cys7. The
evolved receptors display significantly higher responsiveness and
sensitivity when detecting amidated biomarker Cys7 as compared to
the native receptor. (A–D) Unless otherwise noted, each data
point is the average shown for  = 3 technical replicates
and error bars represent standard error of measurement. For all receptor–ligand
pairs, EC50 and Hill slope values are reported in . (E) Snake plot showing mutations acquired
during directed evolution for receptor Cys5R7, which displayed the
highest sensitivity toward the cystatin C peptide Cys7. Clinical Relevance of Evolved
Receptor To test whether
the proof-of-concept YBB diagnostic would be effective in a clinically
relevant sample matrix, we examined the receptors’ ability
to respond to their respective target ligands in urine. Given that
our biosensor detects a trypsinization fragment of cystatin C, practical
application of the biosensor would require us to trypsinize the human
sample matrix, which may liberate peptides that would stimulate the
receptor. When tested in trypsinized urine, receptors Cys4L3, Cys5R2,
Cys5R7, or Cys5R9 did not show any spontaneous activity () and all four receptors
were able to detect 500 μM amidated Cys7 in pooled human urine
(). The most
sensitive receptor, receptor Cys5R7, detects the trypsinized cystatin
C fragment at 50 μM sensitivity. Patients with CKD have been
reported to have urinary cystatin C concentrations ranging from 29
to 743 nM and commercially available
pooled urine from CKD patients has a minimum cystatin C concentration
of 750 nM. As this is 67-fold lower than
our receptor’s sensitivity threshold, a concentration step
coupled with the trypsinization and C-terminal amidation may bring the sensitivity within the range of
the current assay. Further optimization of receptor sensitivity would
likely be required before field applications of the biosensor can
be established. Engineered receptors are sensitive and specific in human
urine.
Ste2p and the Cys7 responsive receptors were exposed to pooled human
urine digested with trypsin and spiked with Cys7. The ability of receptors
Cys4L3, Cys5R2, Cys5R7, and Cys5R9 to detect the Cys7 fragment in
human urine is comparable to the receptor performance in media. Trypsinized
urine does not spontaneously activate the receptor. Each data point
is the average shown for  = 3 samples and error
bars represent standard error. ** < 0.001. * < 0.05 as determined by two-way ANOVA. This experiment
was not reproduced beyond the technical replicates. Our initial step-size
analysis using
the BLOSUM62 matrix failed to predict the difficulty of the evolutionary
leap from Cys4 to Cys7, so we sought to improve this analysis using
a more biophysical approach. We recently conducted a detailed study
of the promiscuity of Ste2p to determine the physiochemical properties
of peptides that are predictive of receptor response. We created a quantitative sequence–activity relationship
(QSAR)-based model that could qualitatively predict receptor response
for peptides that differed from α-factor. We used this model
to analyze the chimeric peptides and model responses for both the
wild-type Ste2 receptor and Cys1H4, which we had previously found
to have increased promiscuity. Cys1H4 was predicted to respond to
intermediates Cys1-Cys4 while Ste2 was predicted to not respond to
any chimeric peptide (). This implies that the first evolutionary step increased
promiscuity, enabling further directed evolution. The physiochemical model
identified the specific features and positions,
namely the hydrophobicity of residue 13, that had the greatest predictive
power for receptor response. In the model for receptor Cys1H4, only
residues 2, 4, 9, 11, and 13 contributed significantly to determining
response. In our work, residues 4 and 9 were left unchanged. Our model
reveals that the step from Cys4 to Cys7 was particularly challenging
because residues 11 and 13 were changed simultaneously. Thus, intermediate
steps Cys5 and Cys6 were required, in which only one highly predictive
residue was changed at a time. The predicted importance of the hydrophobicity
of residue 13 was also borne out experimentally as the change from
hydrophobic tyrosine to polar lysine resulted in a large decrease
in sensitivity. Amidation of this residue partially restored the hydrophobic
character and enabled receptor response. Thus, physiochemical modeling
can identify highly predictive features and provide valuable insight
into which residues and properties will be most difficult to evolve
experimentally. Prediction of receptor
responses to chimeric ligands. The results
of receptor response modeling for all peptides in the pathway are
shown. Increasing predicted normalized response indicates decreasing
sensitivity. We present in this work,
to our knowledge,
the first demonstration of engineering a GPCR to sense a completely
orthogonal peptide sequence. Our work demonstrates the feasibility
of applying mutagenesis and screening to enrich rare receptors and
traversing a large evolutionary space using the substrate walking
strategy for peptides. Evolution starting from Ste2p has resulted
in three mutant receptors that recognize a C-terminally modified biomarker
for CKD. Furthermore, YBBs are promising POC diagnostics. In this
work, we demonstrate that YBBs can detect a modified biomarker peptide
in human urine. Although sensitivity of the proof-of-concept YBB has
not yet been optimized, previously reported YBBs for human and plant
peptide pathogens using GPCRs as the detection element demonstrate
nanomolar and micromolar sensitivity. Additionally, several naturally occurring GPCRs can detect peptide
ligands at picomolar and subpicomolar concentrations, which are ripe to be exploited
with the methodology we present here. Specifically, further directed
evolution using a lower concentration of biomarker may optimize YBB
sensitivity. In general, we anticipate Ste2p directed evolution
to work particularly well for peptide ligands that share three features
with α-factor: length, a central type II β-turn, and C-terminal
hydrophobicity. In the current study, we chose a target ligand that
largely obeyed these rules. First, our target cystatin C peptide is
11 amino acids long, which differs in length from the 13-amino acid
long α-factor. The native Ste2p receptor can detect α-factor
variants between 9 and 17 amino acids in length, though activity is inversely
proportional to the length of the peptide, falling by as much as 100
fold with the 17th amino acid. Second, the type II β-turn spanning
residues 7–10 of α-factor plays a key role in orienting
the N-and C-termini of α-factor to provide an ideal interaction
with Ste2p. Disrupting the type II β-turn
can reduce receptor activity by as much 200 fold, and eliminating the turn can abolish ligand binding. Even so, peptide Cys7 from  has a disrupted β-turn; however, we were able to find mutant receptors
that detected Cys7. This is consistent with previous work showing
that α-factor variants with alanine substitutions at the predicted
β-turn (amino acids 7–10) are still detected by the native
Ste2p. While it is generally thought
type II β-turns are helpful for Ste2p binding, it does not appear
to be an essential condition. Additionally, as an estimated 25% of
all residues in all proteins are in β-turns, and β-turns
tend to be located at solvent-exposed surfaces, we do not anticipate that finding easily accessible peptide
biomarkers that contain β-turns will be problematic. Finally,
Cys7 contains at least two hydrophobic residues in the C-terminal
region. The C-terminus is reported to be important for binding of
the ligand to the receptor, mediated
by the presence of hydrophobic and aromatic residues. Making small steps through the evolutionary pathway
with chimeric
peptides was critical to obtain receptors for the CKD biomarker. Random
mutagenesis proved too inefficient to simultaneously provide the combination
of mutations needed to detect the cystatin biomarker, and it was necessary
to gradually traverse the evolutionary pathway using substrate walking.
We initially estimated permissible steps between peptide intermediates
with a BLOSUM-based distance approach. This approach treated each
residue of the peptide as equally important to determining receptor
response, and did not predict the importance of C-terminal effects.
When we instead employed a physiochemical model that included a residue
position previously derived for this system, we were able to identify
which residue changes were behind our experimental difficulties during
directed evolution. Insights from this model may be informative for
designing future chimeric peptide series. As we continue to understand
sequence/specificity relationships between the receptor and its peptide
ligand, targeted libraries may allow for larger evolutionary steps
along the pathway. Through substrate walking, we have enabled
the directed evolution
of GPCRs with sensitivity to orthogonal peptide targets. The successful
use of this method to create a GPCR for a modified CKD biomarker highlights
the potential application of our method to create YBBs as useful detection
reagents. Despite broadening of specificity, the receptors capable
of detecting the cystatin peptide fragment did not respond to any
proteins or peptides in human urine. YBBs have great potential for
many POC diagnostics, for example by eliminating the need for expensive
affinity enhancements and, when coupled
to a colorimetric output, replacing the
LC/MS detection step downstream of microdialysis
frequently used in neuropeptide detection schemes. However, this technology
is not limited to diagnostic applications, and has potential for a
range of applications including environmental monitoring and synthetic
communication. YBBs for the quorum sensing peptides of Gram-positive
bacteria could be used to monitor the presence, concentration, and
coordinated activities of organisms in our environment that pose a
threat to human health, such as pathogenic species of  and . This technology could also be used in exogenous control of eukaryotic
cell behavior, as GPCRs comprise one of the largest groups of eukaryotic
membrane receptors. For synthetic biology, our substrate walking directed
evolution approach could be used to create orthogonal peptide/receptor
pairs that do not exist in nature, contributing to the synthetic communications
toolkit. These new communication systems could be used to precisely
control cellular behavior, and enable cell-to-cell communication within
and between species. In summary, YBBs have great potential as
POC diagnostics, but until
now have been hampered by an inability to create receptors for specific,
non-native target stimuli. In this work, we enable development of
YBBs by demonstrating a platform approach for creation of peptide-responsive
GPCRs of novel specificity. By combining directed evolution with stepwise
substrate walking, we used a multistep pathway to evolve a receptor
for a modified version of a clinically validated renal failure biomarker.
The success and generalizable nature of this receptor creation method
demonstrate the potential of evolved YBBs as low-cost and easily distributable
diagnostic and monitoring devices for diverse applications. Strains,
Plasmids, Reagents, and Media Yeast strain
MPY578t5 was a gift from Bryan Roth. STE2
was obtained from the genomic DNA of strain ESM356-1 and yeGFP and
natNT2 were obtained from plasmid pCT191, which were both kindly given
from Michael Knop’s lab. p416GPD from the Mumberg plasmids
was obtained from Addgene. All oligonucleotides
were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, USA).
Pooled human urine (lot W09051) was purchased from Lee Biosolutions
(St. Louis, USA). Custom peptides with carboxy C-termini were synthesized
by Abbiotec (San Diego, USA) or New England Peptides (Gardner, USA).
α-Factor mating pheromone was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St.
Louis, USA). All C-terminally amidated peptides were kindly synthesized
by the Mrksich lab at Northwestern University (Evanston, USA). All
restriction enzymes were purchased from New England Biolabs (Ipswich,
USA). Yeast requiring nonselective media were cultivated in
YPAD media prepared with Yeast Extract-Peptone-Dextrose premix (Beckton,
Dickinson & Company, Sparks, USA) according the manufacturer’s
directions and supplemented with 80 mg/L adenine hemisulfate (Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, USA). When appropriate, 100 mg/L nourseothricin (Gold Biotechnology,
St. Louis, USA) was added to YPAD media and used for selection. Yeast with the uracil auxotrophy were cultivated in complete synthetic
media without uracil prepared with -His-Ura dropout supplement (Clontech,
Mountain View, CA) according to manufacturer’s instructions,
and supplemented with 20 μg/mL histidine and 80 mg/L adenine
hemisulfate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) To aid recovery from cell
sorting, yeasts were grown in synthetic dextrose with casamino acids
(SDCAA media), supplemented with 100
μg/mL streptomycin and 100 U/mL pencillin (ThermoFisher Scientific,
Pittsburgh, USA). Yeasts were passaged in CSM-Ura before each sorting
round. Strain and Plasmid Construction http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_002.zip http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_003.zip For flow cytometry,
fluorescent reporter genes were integrated into the genome of yeast
strain MPY578t5 [MATa, far1::LYS2 fus1::FUS1-HIS3 sst2::PSST2-G418R
ste2::LEU2 fus2::PFUS2-CAN1 ,
the last five amino acids of GPA1 (KIGII) being replaced with the
homologous mammalian Gαi (DCGLF)]. yeGFP was integrated chromosomally
under control of the Fus1 promoter with a NatNT2 selectable marker
to create strain JB005. A clone was sequence verified using primers
JB079 and JB080 (see  for details of sequence at this locus.) A constitutively expressed
mKate construct under the GPD promoter was chromosomally integrated
at the TRP1 locus to create strain JB013 (see  for details of sequence at this locus).
Transformations were done via a standard chemical method. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_004.zip STE2 was expressed from a single-copy
centromeric plasmid. STE2 was amplified from ESM356-1 genomic DNA
and cloned into p416GPD immediately downstream of the GPD promoter
using standard molecular biology techniques to create plasmid pJB036 (see  for plasmid sequence). A control strain expressing wild-type
STE2 was made by transforming JB013 with pJB036 to create strain JB015.
Transformed colonies were plated on CSM-Ura plates. The phenotype
was verified by looking for GFP production in response to alpha factor
peptide using flow cytometry. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf Strain notations and primer sequences
can be found in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.7b00410/suppl_file/sb7b00410_si_001.pdf To create a library of mutant receptors,
STE2 on plasmid pJB036 was subjected to error prone PCR using the
GeneMorphII random mutagenesis kit (Agilent Technologies) and primers
AVA015 and AVA016, according to the manufacturer’s instructions,
which resulted in 0–6 base mutations/kb as determined by sequencing
10 random clones. The primers used for epPCR added 40 base pairs of
homologous sequence on each side of the mutagenized gene to match
the digested backbone (), allowing the mutagenized receptor library to be introduced into
yeast using homologous recombination (gap repair) with plasmid p416GPD
digested at the HI and XhoI restriction sites.
The receptor libraries were transformed into yeast strain yJB013 using
electroporation, which typically resulted
in libraries of 10 mutants. Libraries were passaged in
selective media, either CSM-Ura or SDCAA-Ura, before screening and
selection. Receptor Induction and Flow Cytometry Yeast were grown
overnight at 30 °C and 225 rpm in 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks and
then diluted to an OD = 0.1 in the appropriate medium,
typically CSM-Ura or SDCAA-Ura, or commercially sourced pooled human
urine. Immediately after dilution, the peptide ligand was added. The
culture was incubated for 2.5 h at 30 °C with 225 rpm shaking.
Cells were centrifuged at 2000 for 5 min and supernatant
was removed. Cells were resuspended in 1x PBS in preparation for flow
cytometry. Analytical flow cytometry was performed with the
BD LSR II (BD Biosciences, San Jose, USA); yEGFP was read on the Alexa-Flour
488 channel, and mKate was read on the PE-Texas Red channel. Receptor
output was measured by dividing the mean GFP fluorescence by the mean
RFP fluorescence for a population. EC values were calculated
by fitting the receptor output to a four-parameter logistic curve,
and determining which ligand concentration produced an output equivalent
to half of the receptor’s maximum output. When trypsinized
urine was used as the sample matrix, urine was
mixed with Tryp-LE Express (Life Technologies, Grand Island, USA)
to a final concentration of 50%. Mixtures were incubated at 37 °C
overnight. Trypsin was inactivated by boiling the samples at 99 °C
for 10 min. Samples were stored at −80 °C until assayed. High Throughput Sorting by Receptor Activity For each
round of high throughput sorting, cells were prepared identical to
the analytical flow cytometry method above. The library of mutagenized
Ste2p receptors was sorted by FACS using the BD FacsAria sorter (BD
Biosciences, San Jose, USA); yEGFP was read on the FITC channel, and
mKate was read on the PE-Texas Red channel. The top 0.2% of the population,
as determined by the yeGFP to mKate fluorescence ratio, was sorted.
This population was grown in either CSM-Ura or SDCAA-Ura media, and
sorted again using the same yeGFP to mKate fluorescence ratio determined
by the first sort. To reduce false positives, the population was typically
sorted 5 or 6 times. After all rounds of sorting were completed,
colony PCR was used to amplify and isolate mutant receptor sequences.
The receptor sequences were retransformed into the parental strain
yJB013 with parental p416GPD backbone using either a chemical transformation
method or electroporation to remove effects from any background mutations
that may have occurred in the yeast genome or plasmid backbone during
sorting. Retransformants were plated on selective CSM-Ura plates to
isolate individual receptors, which were then sequenced and assayed. BLOSUM-based evolutionary
step size was numerically estimated using a replacement cost calculation
for amino acid residues. All predicted values were normalized to the
predicted value for alpha-factor for that receptor. Evolutionary step
size was numerically estimated using a replacement cost calculation
for amino acid residues. For each residue that was added, removed,
or mutated, a score was determined by BLOSUM62 matrix. The evolutionary
difficulty or cost () of replacement can thus be
calculated by comparing the self-replacement cost of the original
amino acid (the value on the diagonal of the BLOSUM matrix, ) to the replacement cost of the new amino
acid (): Lower cost indicates that such a chemically
similar replacement is evolutionarily easier to accommodate. In the
case of deletions, an  of −11
was used. For additions,  = 11. The results of the
analysis were insensitive to ±50% of the addition/deletion values.
The step size () can be calculated by summing the
cost for each amino acid change in the peptide and normalizing by
the number of amino acids in the original peptide. Physiochemical
response modeling was performed as previously described. Receptor Cys1H4 was independently found and
characterized in previous work and is reported as Mut1 in those results. Dose Response Curve Calculations Strain
and Plasmid Construction The dose response
curves were modeled to fit the following four-parameter logistic curve:where  is the minimum value,  is the maximum value,  is the EC50,
and  is the hill coefficient. The fluorescent receptor
output, , to a given concentration  of ligand, was determined by the following equation:where GFP is downstream
of the receptor pathway
and mKate is constitutively expressed (see , Methods Section). For graphing,
all EC50 values are scaled according to interaction between Ste2p
and the alpha factor, such that 0% is the basal output of Ste2p in
the absence of ligand, and 100% is the output of Ste2p in the presence
of 1 μM alpha factor, a saturating amount of ligand. Linear
and Dynamic Range Calculations Strain
and Plasmid Construction Data were fit
to the Michaelis–Menten equation:where the fluorescent
receptor output, y,
to a given concentration  of ligand, was determined
by the following equation:where GFP is downstream
of the receptor pathway
and mKate is constitutively expressed (see , Methods Section). A line, , was extrapolated with slope equivalent to the first derivative
of the Michaelis–Menten equation where  is
equivalent to the lower limit of the dynamic range:The upper bound of the linear
range is the  value at which line  deviates from the
Michaelis–Menten fit by 0.1%:The bound of the dynamic
range is defined
as the lowest ligand concentration, , needed to produce the maximal fluorescent output  where fluorescent receptor output is defined above.
The response in the receptor output, , at  is not statistically different
from the response in receptor output at any ligand concentration higher
than  (* >.05)..