In order to control population levels and facilitate drug delivery using bacteria, we engineered a synchronized lysis circuit (SLC) using coupled positive and negative feedback loops that have previously been used to generate robust oscillatory dynamics. The circuit () consists of a common promoter that drives expression of both its own activator (positive feedback) and a lysis gene (negative feedback). Specifically, the  promoter regulates production of autoinducer (AHL), which binds LuxR and enables it to transcriptionally activate the promoter. Negative feedback arises from cell death that is triggered by a bacteriophage lysis gene (X174 E) which is also under control of the  promoter. Importantly, AHL can diffuse to neighboring cells and thus provides an intercellular synchronization mechanism. The bacterial population dynamics arising from the synchronized lysis circuit can be conceptualized as a slow buildup of the signaling molecule (AHL) to a threshold level, followed by a lysis event that rapidly prunes the population and enables the release of bacterial contents (). After lysis, a small number of remaining bacteria begin to produce AHL anew, allowing the “integrate and fire” process to be repeated in a cyclical fashion. We used microfluidic devices to observe growth and lysis with a fluorescent protein (sfGFP) as a proxy for circuit dynamics in attenuated  ( and ). We observed periodic lysis events characterized by peaks in the fluorescent reporter expression that correspond to population lysis (). The fraction of lysed cells remains consistent across subsequent cycles, suggesting that lysis and survival occur in a stochastic manner (). Given the ultimate goal of implementation in an  microenvironment characterized by variable growth conditions, we tested a range of incubation temperatures (36°C to 40°C) and perfusion rates (100m/s to 200m/s), measuring an average period of 3 hours across all conditions (). These findings demonstrate that the SLC has the capacity to generate robust cycles of bacterial lysis in our microfluidic devices across a spectrum of environmental fluctuations that is likely to exist in an  context. The emergence of bacterial therapies in synthetic biology has accentuated the need for predictive modeling. This need stems from a bottleneck created by a difference in the timescales for bacterial cloning versus animal experiments; the circuits required for candidate therapies can be created much faster than they can be tested . Therefore, in order to quantitatively characterize the SLC concept before testing in animal models, we developed a computational model ( and and ) in order to define an optimal strategy for subsequent testing in a lower-throughput animal model setting. We found that high production and degradation rates of the feedback-controlling proteins resulted in a wider domain of oscillatory dynamics in the parameter space (). This model is consistent with our observations that oscillations in  were more robust than in , where rates of protein production and degradation were previously found to be lower ( and ). Since the ability to manipulate circuit behavior enhances the versatility of the system, we explored the tunability of the lysis period by adding an ssrA degradation tagging sequence on the LuxI protein. Consistent with model predictions, we observed an increased period and colony firing amplitude when tracking bacterial population dynamics ( and ). The SLC thus enables tuning of the period and magnitude of delivery, which will be necessary for eventual application of this platform in the complex and fluctuating conditions present . To incorporate a cytotoxic payload into the SLC strain, we added expression of Hemolysin E, encoded by  of , which has been tested as a pore-forming anti-tumor toxin. We initially confirmed the capability of the circuit to release intracellular contents by visualizing released sfGFP with a small microfluidic sink located beneath the growth chamber (). Then, in order to visualize bacterial lysis and killing of cancer cells  via HlyE, we engineered a microfluidic device so that cancer cells adhere inside a growth channel that is flanked by smaller bacterial growth chambers, which permits simultaneous single-cell visualization of bacterial lysis and cancer cell death (). After co-culturing human cervical cancer HeLa cells with  harboring the SLC circuit, we observed HeLa cell death upon the onset of bacterial lysis, indicating efficient toxin release (,  and ). Complete cell death occurred in the growth channel within ~111 min of initial sfGFP fluorescence (). Thus, the SLC bacteria were capable of releasing HlyE at levels necessary to kill tumor-derived cells. We assessed the toxicity of released SLC or control bacterial contents in batch culture. As anticipated, we found that HeLa cells exposed to supernatant from a culture of the SLC bacteria bearing the  module exhibited almost complete loss of viability (), while the viability of HeLa cells exposed to supernatants of and equivalent dose of non-payload bearing SLC bacteria were only slightly impacted (~15%). We concluded that bacterial lysis allowed for efficient HlyE release  and that natural intracellular bacterial contents do not significantly affect HeLa cell viability. We further investigated the delivery characteristics of the SLC bacteria with  by seeding variable amounts of circuit-harboring bacteria with HeLa cultures in well plates. We observed that the time to HeLa cell death following initial seeding increased with lower bacterial seeding volumes, presumably resulting from the extended time needed for bacteria to reach the quorum threshold ( and ). Initial seeding with a larger volume of bacteria resulted in increased firing rates which corresponded to shorter HlyE exposure times until cell death, consistent with a greater magnitude of lysis and payload release, although the cumulative toxicity threshold appears to be similar in all cases (). Based on these observations, one can adjust the seeding size of the bacterial population to determine the initial timing and release characteristics of the circuit. We next used a luciferase reporter to monitor bacterial population dynamics in grafted syngeneic colorectal tumors in mice. To minimize the extent of plasmid loss in the absence of antibiotic selection , we incorporated previously described stabilizing elements for plasmid retention and segregation into the SLC strain. Additionally, we placed both the payload and  genes (the  reporter module) under the  promoter as an indicator of  production and quorum firing via bacterial luminescence (). Using a subcutaneous model of colorectal cancer (MC26 cell line) in immunocompetent mice, we intratumorally injected a strain of SLC bacteria (SLC-hly). We observed pulsatile bacterial population dynamics within the tumor (, ) using In-Vivo Imaging (IVIS) technology, consistent with the design and  characterization (). Importantly, the end luminescence intensity was on average ~300-fold lower than the constitutive control strain, indicating a significant decrease in bacterial population levels within the tumor (). Given the ability to engineer bacterial population dynamics in tumor grafts, we next leveraged the versatility of the SLC bacteria as a delivery system to compare different classes of previously developed payloads. In addition to the hemolysin strain that was characterized in microfluidic devices, we created two additional SLC strains expressing genes to activate a host immune response (via T-cell and dendritic cell recruitment, using mCCL21) or trigger tumor cell apoptosis (using CDD-iRGD). Upon intratumoral injection, the immune recruitment strain elicited the strongest effect on tumor growth when compared to the hemolysis or apoptotic strains (). We observed that an equal mixture of the three strains generated a stronger response than any single strain ( and ), and on this basis we elected to pursue the “triple-strain” dose for further testing in order to minimize animal usage. In a side by side comparison, we observed that the tumor response to SLC triple-strain (SLC-3) injections was significantly larger than the response to unmodified bacteria (). Additionally, upon necropsy, histopathological analysis of remnant tumors was performed for mice treated with the SLC-3 strains, chemotherapy, or unmodified bacteria. In mice treated with SLC-3 and non-circuit bacterial strains, robust staining of bacteria was observed by anti-Salmonella antibodies, showing localization of Salmonella within tumors. TUNEL staining indicated higher levels of apoptosis and cell death in SLC-3 treated tumors (). As a first step towards monitoring the effect of bacterial injections on the host, we compared how the triple-strain system affected body weight when administered intratumorally and intravenously, since the administration route affects bacterial localization (). We found that treatment with the SLC strains generated the same weight change as unmodified bacteria when administered intratumorally (). However, intravenous administration of the SLC conferred a greater health benefit based on observations that SLC strains producing constitutive therapy were better tolerated than unmodified bacteria or non-SLC strains producing constitutive therapy (). While further targeted studies are required to systematically explore the impact of these bacteria on host health, these preliminary experiments suggest that the SLC design can reduce the burden of bacterial injections. To explore a proof-of-principle for the application of our circuit in the context of  tumors, we examined the efficacy of our system in an experimental syngeneic transplantation model of colorectal metastases within the liver. We had previously established that oral delivery of these bacterial strains led to safe and efficient colonization of hepatic colorectal metastases (see Methods), and that mice tolerated repeated dosing without overt adverse effects (). In the context of bacteria-based therapeutic candidates, previous studies have shown that anaerobic bacteria can occupy avascular tumor compartments where chemotherapy is thought to be ineffective due to poor drug delivery. Thus a synergistic effect may arise when bacteria are used to deliver drugs to the necrotic core of a tumor, while standard chemotherapy is used for the vascularized regions. Inspired by this paradigm, we tested the combination of SLC-3 bacteria with a common clinical chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil, 5-FU). Tumors exhibited similar growth trajectories in response to repeated oral delivery of either the bacterial therapy alone, or two i.v. doses of 5-FU on Days 0 and 21 (). In contrast, combination of these two applications led to a marked decrease in tumor activity over a period of 18 days, followed by a return to growth (). During the initial 18-day period, a large fraction of the tumors were scored as eliciting at least a 30% reduction in tumor activity (). The overall response led to roughly a 50% increase in the mean survival time for animals harboring incurable colorectal metastases (). Improvements may arise from strategies for long term circuit stability or the utilization of additional therapeutic cargo. The synchronized lysis circuit exemplifies a methodology for leveraging the tools of synthetic biology to exploit the ability of certain bacteria to colonize disease sites. In contrast to most drug delivery strategies, the synchronized lysis paradigm does not require pre-loading of a drug or the engineering of additional secretion machinery. In addition, it has the potential to decrease the likelihood of a systemic inflammatory response through population control; since the bacterial colony is pruned after each oscillatory lysis event, the design could mitigate an undesirable host response. The circuit may enable new bacterial drug delivery strategies through modulation of the frequency and amplitude of the population cycles over time. Along these lines, cyclic drug release may have broader implications, given recent insights into the effects of circadian rhythms on host-microbial interactions and metabolic disorders. Such engineering strategies may allow for the development of therapeutic communities within  environments, where population dynamics are driven by interacting viruses, bacteria, and host immune cells. Our circuit strains were cultured in LB media with 50 g ml and 34 g ml of Kanamycin and Chloramphenicol respectively, along with 0.2% glucose, in a 37°C incubator. Mammalian cells (HeLa CCL-2 from ATCC, verified by third party cell line authentication services using an STR multiplex system) were cultured in DMEM media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (CellGro 30-002-CI), placed inside a tissue culture incubator at 37°C maintained at 5% CO. Plasmids were constructed using the CPEC method of cloning or using standard restriction digest/ligation cloning. The activator plasmid (Kan, ColE1) was used in previous work from our group, while the lysis plasmid was constructed by taking the lysis gene, , from the ePop plasmid via PCR and cloning it into a vector (Chlor, p15A) under the control of the LuxI promoter. The  gene was taken via PCR from the genomic DNA of MG1655, while mCCL21 (mouse CCL21) and CDD-iRGD were synthesized. These genes were cloned into the lysis plasmid, under the control of either the ptac or pLuxI promoters. Co-culturing was performed with HeLa cells and either motile or non-motile , SL1344. For full strain and plasmid information, please refer to the . The microfluidic devices and experiment preparation protocols used in this study are similar to those previously reported from our group. The bacteria growth chambers were 100×100 m in area and approximately 1.4 m in height. For co-culture experiments on the chip, we first loaded a suspended culture of HeLa cells in the device media channels at very low flow rates, to allow for adherence, and then incubated the device in a tissue culture incubator for 0.5 - 2 days to allow for proliferation. On the day of the experiment, the device was transferred to the microscope and circuit-containing bacteria were loaded in the growth chambers before imaging. Acquisition of images was performed with a Nikon TI2 using a Photometrics CoolSnap cooled CCD camera. The scope and accessories were programmed using the Nikon Elements software. Additional details on microfluidics and microscopy can be found in the . All animal work was approved by the committee on animal care (MIT, protocol 0414-022-17). The cell line (MC26-LucF, Tanabe lab, Massachusetts General Hospital) was obtained from, and authenticated by, the Tanabe lab, MGH. The cell line was tested several times to be mycoplasma free before implantation in mice. Sample sizes for mice were determined by expected effect size to produce a power of 0.8-0.9. Mice were blindly randomized into various groups using a random number generator. Animal experiments were performed on 6 week old female BALB/c mice (Taconic Biosciences, Inc.) with bilateral subcutaneous hind flank tumors from an implanted mouse colon cancer cell line. The concentration for implantation of the tumor cells was 1e8 cells ml in DMEM (no phenol red). Cells were then implanted subcutaneously at a volume of 100 L per flank, with each implant consisting of 1e7 cells. Tumors were typically grown to an average of 300 mm before experiments. Experimental Liver Metastasis Model The experimental metastasis model was generated by injecting luciferase-producing mouse cancer cells into surgically externalized spleens of immuno-competent mice. Tumor cells seeded the liver during 90 seconds after which the spleen was removed to prevent ectopic tumor growth. The MC26-LucF cell line was used (Tanabe Lab, MGH) and injected at 5e4 cells/100 uL PBS into the spleens of female Balb/c mice 6 weeks of age (Taconic Biosciences, Inc.). For the liver metastasis model, tumors were grown for 5-7 days to an average total tumor burden of 143 mm before experiments. Bacterial Growth and Administration Bacterial strains were grown overnight in LB media containing appropriate antibiotics and 0.2% glucose as for the  experiments. A 1/100x dilution in fresh media with antibiotics was started the day of injection and grown until an OD < 0.1 to prevent bacteria from reaching the quorum threshold (for SLC specifically). Bacteria were spun down and washed 2-3x with sterile PBS before injection into mice. Intratumoral injections of bacteria were performed at a concentration of 5e7 cells ml in PBS with a total volume of 10-20 L injected per tumor, while intravenous injections were given at a total volume of 100 L. For the SLC-3 strains injection, this final volume was equally divided between the three strains at the indicated density. For liver metastasis experiments, bacteria were grown in LB media containing appropriate antibiotics and 0.2% glucose until they reached an OD of 0.05, after which they were concentrated to 1-5e9 bacteria/mL and delivered via oral gavage. Post-Administration Monitoring for Subcutaneous Liver Metastasis Models Luminescent signal was measured with the IVIS Spectrum  imaging system following bacterial injection. Measurements were compared relative to pre-injection values to follow dynamics. Subcutaneous tumor volume was quantified using calipers to measure the length, width, and height of each tumor throughout the imaging course (V=L×W×H). Volumes were compared to pre-injection values to follow physical tumor growth. Survival of mice was measured as the time from the beginning of the experiment up to the day when mice were moribund and euthenized. Statistical tests were calculated either in Microsoft Excel (Student's t-test) or GraphPad Prism 5.0 (ANOVA with Bonferroni post test, Log-rank test). The details of the statistical tests carried out are indicated in respective figure legends. Where data were approximately normally distributed, values were compared using either a Student's t-test or one-way ANOVA for single variable, or a two-way ANOVA for two variables. Mice were randomized in different groups before experiments. Various properties of the SLC. (a) The fraction and number of bacterial cells cleared per consecutive oscillatory cycle in the growth chamber for a typical microfluidic experiment for , including the effects of lysis and flow of cells outside of the trap (Strain 1). (b) Subset of time series images from the experiment in (a) showing a portion of the growth chamber where survivors of the initial lysis event (160 min frame, red outline) produce progeny (250 min frame, magenta outline) which are lysis sensitive. (c) Period as a function of the environmental temperature for  (Strain 13). The circuit does not oscillate for temperatures above 37°C in . Error bars indicate ±1 standard deviation for 12 - 19 peaks. (d) Colony amplitude at quorum firing for increasing degradation on the LuxI activator protein in the computational model. These simulation results are supported by batch well-plate experiments of the LuxI ssrA (black line, Strain 2) and non-ssrA (blue line, Strain 1) tagged versions of the circuit in  (inset). Investigating lysis mediated intracellular release. (a) A bacterial growth chamber with a 0.4m sink for sfGFP visualization after release. (b) Number of bacteria (red line), bacterial fluorescence (blue line), sink fluorescence (pink line) for a typical oscillatory cycle (Strain 1). (c) Fluorescence time series images of the microfluidic sink from (b). (d) General procedure for performing bacterial and cancer cell co-culture experiments in a microfluidic device (also see ). expression and therapy testing. (a) End-point  luminescence intensity for SLC strains after ~20 h of growth. Host strains A and B are the host bacteria for Strains 8 and 10. They are ELH1301 and ELH 430, respectively. Host A exhibits ~2-fold higher luminescence with the same circuit than Host B. (b) IVIS imaging over time of a mouse bearing subcutaneous tumors injected with a genomically integrated constitutively luminescent strain (Strain 9). (c) End-point  bacterial luminescence of the SLC-hly strain and the constitutively luminescent strain from the experiments presented in . Error bars represent the standard error of the mean bacterial luminescence from 9 tumors. (d) Post-injection  bacterial luminescence for the constitutively luminescent strain administered intravenously (vein) or intratumorally (tumor). Luminescence was measured ~20 h post-injection. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean bacterial luminescence from 6 and 9 tumors for the intravenous and intratumoral cases, respectively. (e) Average relative tumor volume over time for subcutaneous tumor bearing mice injected with the no-plasmid bacterium (Strain 7), 5-FU chemotherapy, the SLC-3 strains, and the combination of SLC-3 with chemotherapy. Bacteria were injected intratu-morally on days 0, 4, and 7 (black arrows), and chemotherapy was administered on days 2 and 9 (red arrows) (*P < 0.05, ****P < 0.0001, two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post test, n = 12 - 16 tumors, s.e.). (f) Fraction of mice from the cases in (e) which respond with 30% reduction of tumor volume over time. (g) Fraction survival over time for mice with hepatic colorectal metastases fed with either the SLC-3 strains (blue line) or the no-plasmid control (black line) (*P < 0.05, log rank test; n = 11 - 12 mice). (a) Histology of tumor sections taken from mice with different treatments 3 days post administration: (i) H and E staining for tissue sections intravenously injected with a combination of therapeutic bacteria (SLC-3), chemotherapy (5-FU), or a bacteria control with no therapeutic (Strain 7). (ii) TUNEL staining (red) in the same sections indicating cell apoptosis. (iii) Salmonella immunohistochemistry (red) in the same sections confirming presence of bacteria in tumors. Scale bars for (i), (ii), and (iii) denote 50m. (iv) and (v) TUNEL and Salmonella staining (red) in the entire tumor sections (examples indicated by arrows). Scale bars for (iv) and (v) denote 100m. DAPI staining (blue) was used to obtain a measure of live and dead cells in (ii) - (iv). Histology slices (n=6) from 20x images were compared across the groups and mean intensity of TUNEL staining, normalized by sample area, was demonstrated to be significantly higher for SLC-3 compared to the other two groups (P<0.0001, one-way ANOVA), and not significantly different between the chemotherapy and bacteria only cases. Shown are the main plasmids used in this study (see  for more details). A list of strains and respective plasmids used in this study (see  for more details). pTD103 luxI (−LAA) sfGFP + pZA35 X714E (+LuxR) pTD103 luxI sfGFP + pZA35 X714E (+LuxR) pTD103 luxI (−LAA) sfGFP + pZA35 X714E (+LuxR) ptac::HlyE pTD103 luxI sfGFP + pZA35 X714E (+LuxR) ptac::HlyE pTD103 luxI sfGFP + pZA35 X714E (+LuxR) pZE25 luxI luxCDABE hok/alp + pZA35 X714E (+LuxR) pLux::HlyE hok/alp pZE25 luxI luxCDABE hok/alp + pZA35 X714E (+LuxR) pLux::HlyE hok/alp pZE25 luxI luxCDABE hok/alp + pZA35 X714E (+LuxR) ptac::HlyE hok/alp pTD103 LuxCDABE hok/alp + pZA35 X714E (+LuxR) ptac::HlyE hok/alp pTD103 luxI sfGFP + pZA35 X714E (+LuxR) pZE25 luxI luxCDABE hok/alp + pZA35 X714E (+LuxR) pLux::CDD-iRGD hok/alp pZE25 luxI luxCDABE hok/alp + pZA35 X714E (+LuxR) ptac::mCCL21 hok/alp NIHMS795279-supplement-supp_info.pdf NIHMS795279-supplement-supp_videoguide.pdf NIHMS795279-supplement-video1.mp4 NIHMS795279-supplement-video2.mp4 NIHMS795279-supplement-video3.mp4 NIHMS795279-supplement-video4.mp4 NIHMS795279-supplement-video5.mp4 NIHMS795279-supplement-video6.mp4.