Metabolic pathways
and genetic circuits are commonly introduced
into microbes such as  or  to produce chemicals or to implement novel
functions. Such experiments typically require the fine-tuning
of gene expression to balance and optimize protein levels of metabolic
enzymes or regulators. In prokaryotes, protein production can be controlled
relatively easily using synthetic ribosomal binding sites. However, to fine-tune gene expression and protein
levels in unicellular eukaryotes, transcription is the most targeted
step and, to this end, various engineering tools have been developed. Most promoter engineering efforts in eukaryotes were
focused on yeasts, since they are the most commonly used eukaryotic
expression systems for complex multigene pathways. has most commonly been used for metabolic engineering endeavors,
but recently also alternative yeasts such as  have been increasingly used. Yeast promoter libraries
were designed either by random sequence modifications or by rational approaches with a focus on -regulatory modules (CRMs). CRM is a general term referring to regulatory
DNA sequences, also named enhancers in higher eukaryotes, while in
yeasts rather the terms upstream activating/repressing sequences (UAS/URS)
are used. CRMs interact with particular transcription
factors conferring specific activation/repression regulatory mechanisms. CRMs alone are however nonfunctional, requiring a core (minimal)
promoter sequence to recruit general transcription factors and RNA
polymerase II for transcription initiation. Similarly, the core promoter alone results
in basal to no expression at all, and requires a CRM for strong expression
and specific regulation. Engineering the core promoter and 5′
untranslated region (UTR) has mainly an impact on transcription strength,
translation initiation and most probably mRNA stability. In contrast,
engineering CRMs affects transcription strength but also impacts regulation
(, constitutive or inducible). For instance,
studies on the methanol inducible  () promoter () in (,,) showed that deletions or insertions of CRMs
(more specifically in predicted transcription factor binding sites,
TFBSs) resulted in promoter activity variations and also in regulatory
differences. One example for altered regulation were derepressed  variants. The wild type  is tightly repressed on glucose, remaining repressed even
when glucose is depleted and strictly requires methanol for induction.
Depressed variants however start expression once glucose is depleted
not requiring methanol induction. In contrast to such mutations
in CRMs, modifications of the core
promoter sequence impacted only promoter strength, leaving induction/repression
profiles unchanged. Additionally, studies
on CRMs are typically limited to one promoter, , its conclusions cannot be easily transferred to other promoters,
even in the same organism. For instance, information gained from deletion
studies of (,,) cannot be transferred to other
methanol inducible promoters in  due
to the low sequence similarly between these coregulated promoters. In contrast, core promoter function is conserved
even between related species. Hence, we hypothesized
that  designed synthetic
core promoters could be used as interchangeable parts between related
organisms. Such universal “tuning knobs” could be used
for regulating the strength of gene expression without interfering
with specific regulation in a given organism for different promoters,
or in different species. Since the designed promoters are artificial,
they have lower probability of recombining with natural sequences
in the genome which favors strain stability and also facilitates the
expression cassette assembly. To design such promoters, we used a
genome scale data set available for . is the most commonly used yeast
for basic research on transcription regulation and synthetic promoter
design. Recently,
comprehensive studies have also addressed the sequence/function relationship
of natural core promoters and 5′UTRs. Two
genome-scale studies were performed in this yeast by measuring the
expression of 859 natural promoters under different conditions and using this data set to deduce core promoter
properties affecting expression. Also,
nucleosome affinity in the core promoter was shown to be an effective
modification target for designing core promoters. For the interspecies comparisons we selected  and . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf is, after , the most commonly used
expression system for single proteins. The exceptionally strong and tightly methanol
regulated , has
motivated several research studies on transcriptional regulation mechanisms
(reviewed by and summarized in  alongside  studies). Recently, it has been reported that at least 15 promoters of genes
involved in methanol utilization (MUT) are coregulated with , some of which show higher
expression. Hence,  offers one of the largest sets of promoters that are coregulated
and easily applicable strategies for regulating their strengths would
be desirable. In the present study, we designed generic synthetic
core promoters
for protein production fine-tuning in yeasts. Acknowledging the fact
that manifold structural features contribute to the promoter strength,
we have incorporated in our design several factors, which were derived
from a  core promoter data set
(, TATA box position and nucleosome affinity). Using this design approach, we have created a library of 112 synthetic
core promoters and 5′UTRs that were validated with the  CRM (). Additionally,
we tested the best performing synthetic core promoters with alternative
CRMs of  and  promoters, demonstrating their applicability in different contexts. Computational
Design of Synthetic Core Promoters http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf Several
factors were simultaneously incorporated in the synthetic core promoter
design: (i) nucleotide occurrence along the sequence of 140 strong
natural  core promoters (as reported
by), (ii) the presence and position of
the TATA box, (iii) the position and number other motifs (other than
TATA box, as defined by) and (iv) nucleosome
occupancy profiles. Using this approach, we have
created a library of synthetic core promoters and 5′UTRs for
generic yeast cells. The method adopted in this study is represented
schematically in  and described in detail in . The input sequences were taken
from a library of  natural core
promoter sequences. We
used the genome wide  core promoter
sequences data published by Lubliner , in which 729 native  promoters were segmented into four groups (low, medium, high and
very high maximal expression). Subsequently, different structural
features were examined such as nucleotide frequency, nucleosome occupancy
and presence/number of short motifs (up to four nucleotides). Lubliner () showed that some of
these features are highly predictive of maximal promoter activity,
namely the high A and T content and TATA-box like elements around
the TSS. Also, it was demonstrated that there is a correlation between
promoter strength and low nucleosome affinity. Computation of the nucleotide probability
distribution along the sequence, calculated with a 20 bp windows size
and 10 bp windows step; Computation of the TATA box position
distribution along the sequence; Computation of the position and
frequency distribution of motifs along the sequence. Only the subset
of motifs with highest effect (positive or negative) on the promoter
strength were considered (defined by Lubliner ()); Computation of the average nucleosome
occupancy along the promoter sequence (using the software package
described in ref ()). We reasoned that this data set (input sequences)
could also be
used in a reverse way to generate a model and create synthetic core
promoters . We started from the subset of
140 strong core promoters and the respective 5′UTRs. First,
we have selected sequences of 150 bp (50 bp downstream and 100 bp
upstream of the transcriptional start site (TSS)) for analysis. Then,
to extract important sequence features, we have applied the following
computational procedure ( A): http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf Using this information, we have designed
4 groups (named P, T,
M, and A) of 28 sequences each for experimental screening (,  B and ). They differ in the presence
or absence of a TATA box and/or selected motifs (group P: without
TATA box nor motifs; group T: with TATA box and without motifs;
group M: with motifs and without TATA box; group A: with TATA box
and motifs). In this way, the synthetic core promoters were termed
according to their group and to the respective measured activity, , the 4 groups with 28 sequences each were termed “P#”,
“T#”, “M#”, “A#”, where
the letters stand for P: (nucleotide) probability, T: TATA box, M:
motifs and A: all, respectively. They were ordered in increasing expression
strength. The general properties of the designed sequences are available
in . The sequences were computed in a 4-step procedure as follows: Step 1: Generation of 400 random sequences using information on
nucleotide probability distribution only ( B). TATA boxes or any of the selected motifs
were searched and replaced by a newly generated synthetic sequence.
This procedure was repeated until no motif or TATA-box were found
in the generated sequences. Start codons upstream of the protein codon
region were also removed to avoid frame shift mutations or different
N-termini of the reporter protein. Lastly, due to the known relevance
of the nucleotides adjacent to the start codon, this region was replaced by the  Kozak sequence (CGAAACG) in the generated
sequences. These 400 sequences were partitioned in four groups of
100 sequences each. Step 2: Addition of a TATA box to groups
T and A. The TATA box
positioning followed a Gaussian distribution model with mean and standard
deviation computed on the natural strong core promoter sequences.
One TATA box was inserted per core promoter sequence ( C). Step 3: Addition
of motifs to groups M and A. The frequency and
position of each motif in each sequence also followed a Gaussian distribution
model inferred from the natural sequences, meaning that some motifs
might be present more than once while others might be absent in a
given sequence ( C). Step 4: Design space reduction. Twenty-eight synthetic
sequences
out of the 100 sequences of each group were selected for experimental
screening based on the nucleosome occupancy. The 28 synthetic sequences with higher similarity to natural promoters
concerning the predicted nucleosome average occupancy were selected
for screening. Before fusing these final 112 synthetic core
promoters to the  ( promoter CRM), we aimed to validate
the core promoter structure
of this promoter. Design strategy for synthetic core promoters. Three steps were
followed: (A) Computation of (i) nucleotide probability distribution,
(ii) TATA box position, (iii) position and frequency distribution
of motifs and (iv) average nucleosome occupancy along the sequence
of 140  natural strong core promoters aligned by the transcription start site. (B)
Generation of 400 random sequences using information on nucleotide
probability distribution. (C) Partitioning of sequences in four groups
(dubbed P, T, M and A), to which TATA boxes and motifs were added,
according to the group they belonged to (group P: without TATA box
nor motifs; group T: with TATA box and without motifs; group M: with
motifs and without TATA box; group A: with TATA box and motifs). Subsequently,
the nucleosome occupancy profile of each of the generated sequences
was compared to the average profile for the natural strong promoters.
The generated sequences with higher similarity to the average natural
nucleosome occupancy were selected to be tested . Establishing
the  screening
system (A) and testing the 112 synthetic core promoters
(B–F). Promoter activity was measured by fluorescence intensity
of the reporter protein after cultivation in 96-well deep-well plates
and under methanol induction for 48h. (A) Promoter activity mean and
respective standard deviation of control constructs: (i) wild type  (green), (ii)  fused to  core promoter, (iii)  without core promoter, (iv)  core promoter without CRM and (v) seven completely
random sequences fused to . (B) Overview of the groups of synthetic core promoters tested.
Box plot of the minimum, first quartile, average, third quartile and
maximum promoter activities for each of the four groups of synthetic
core promoters (Groups P, M, T and A). (C–F) Landscape of mean
promoter activity, and respective standard deviation, for each of
the four groups of synthetic core promoters (Group P, T, M and A,
respectively). The individual synthetic core promoter activity is
presented in increasing activity order. The legend of panel C applies
as well to panels D−F. Mean values and standard deviations
shown in this figure were calculated from at least three independent
cultivations in separate deep-well plates. Assessing Core Promoter-CRM Structure in
the  System http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf The natural
(wild type)  fused to an eGFP (enhanced green fluorescent protein) reporter
gene was used as positive control in this study. eGFP has widely been
used as reporter for promoter characterization studies in . All reporter protein fluorescence
measurements of promoter variants were performed with a 96-well
plate reader and are given relative to the wild type level normalized
to 100% (shown in green the bar plots in  A and C–F). The plate reader based
fluorescence measurements were also validated by flow cytometry measurements
yielding excellent reproducibility ( = 0.96, see ). A negative control variant was generated by deleting the  (−769
to −172 bp from start codon) to probe for its function. In
a second negative control, the core promoter was deleted (−171
to −1 bp from start codon). In both control variants there
was no detectable fluorescence thus the expression was completely
disrupted ( A). This confirms that the core promoter sequence with high affinity
to RNA polymerase II was completely removed in the variant without
core promoter. Likewise, the variant in which the CRM was removed
showed no fluorescence, confirming that all the relevant regulatory
protein binding sites were removed resulting in complete functionality
loss. To ascertain the principle of modularity in this system,
we characterized
a variant in which the  core promoter was replaced
by another strong core promoter, of the  gene. The promoter activity level was identical to the natural , showing that different
core promoters can be used interchangeably ( A). Given the complete loss of functionality
when the core promoter
or CRM are removed, as well as the modularity verified in this system,
the determined core promoter-CRM boundary was maintained in all subsequent
core promoter replacements. Namely, the core promoter boundary was
set to 10 bp upstream of the TATA box. Establishing a Baseline
Expression Level Seven control
variants were generated in which the  core promoter was replaced by completely random sequences ( A R1–R7).
The resulting expression levels measure the basal expression of the  given that there
is enough spacing between the CRM and the protein coding sequence
for RNA polymerase II to bind. We performed this experiment to test
basic background transcription in our system. The average relative
promoter activity of the seven control variants was 5.9% of the wild
type promoter fluorescence ( A). We have used this value as threshold to evaluate
whether the synthetic core promoters are significantly different from
random sequences. In this way, synthetic core promoters with an expression
value significantly lower than 5.9% were considered nonfunctional.
For this purpose, we have adopted the one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) statistical test. Synthetic Core Promoters under the Control
of the The aforementioned 112 synthetic
constructs were assessed by replacing the native  core promoter by each of the 112 synthetic sequences
and measuring eGFP reporter gene fluorescence. The overall promoter
activity landscape is shown for each group (P, T, M and A) in  C–F, respectively.
Seventy-eight percent of sequences showed a statistically significant
(-value of 0.05) higher activity than baseline expression
and are thus considered as functional. Within the functional subset,
reporter protein fluorescence levels ranged between 6.5% to 70.6%
with mean 17.0% and standard deviation 11.5%. Additionally, it was
observed that the mean activity levels in groups T and A, 18.7% and
19.3%, respectively, are roughly 2-fold higher than groups P and M,
9.2% and 9.1%, respectively. Furthermore, 16 out of the 25 nonfunctional
core promoters do not have a TATA box. This is a strong indication
that the TATA box is a key sequence element in the  system ( B). Regarding the presence of motifs
(group M and A), our data suggest that their presence does not significantly
affect the expression level, given that the mean activity level is
similar in groups with or without motifs (group P and T, respectively).
However, we might speculate that the presence of motifs in association
with other factors may explain the higher expression levels observed
for promoters A28 and A27, given that both have motifs ( F). Focusing the analysis
on the ten promoters with highest activity
(orange in  C–F) it is striking that the presence of a TATA box is a
common feature, whereas the presence of motifs is not. The only exception
might be the M28 promoter, which belongs to a TATA less group. M28
has, however, a TATA box like sequence in position −115 from
the start codon. Analysis of the Top-Ten Synthetic Core Promoter
Sequences The top ten synthetic core promoter sequences obtained
in the screening
with the  (T22, T23, T24, T25, T26, T27, T28, M28, A27 and A28) were scrutinized
in detail. They were examined by (i) BLAST analysis against the  genome to search for similarities to naturally
occurring sequences, (ii) multiple sequence alignment to assess the
presence of common motifs and (iii) nucleosome occupancy analysis
to evaluate its importance and common patterns. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf To search for
fragments of natural sequences, a standard nucleotide BLAST searching
procedure against the whole  CBS
7435 genome was adopted and no significant matches were found. The
detailed results are provided as . The highest -value (0.083) was
obtained for A28, T27, T26 and M28 sequences BLAST. The A28 and M28
matches were in protein coding regions and in an inter gene sequence
in the case of T26, thus making it unlikely to be characteristic regulatory
sequences. In the case of T27, the match was in a possible promoter
region in the  genome (10 bp upstream
of nucleolar protein coding sequence). The match position in the synthetic
core promoter sequence was however further upstream, close to the  (−147
to −130 bp). To perform the multiple sequence alignments
we used the EMBL-EBI
Clustal Omega tool. The resulting alignment
( A) shows
the conserved positions in seven or more sequences (shaded in blue
in  A). Some
of the marked positions are isolated, possibly caused by the higher
adenine and thymine content, characteristic of strong core promoter
sequences. In addition, three different
common motifs (with more than one consecutive position conserved)
were identified. The first one is located close to the TATA box region
(position 40 in  A). However, two sequences had the respective TATA boxes positioned
downstream from this region (T28 and T23), around position 70. This
may influence the subsequent AT rich motif (position 74). The last
conserved region is a thymine rich sequence (position 146), followed
by an adenine rich sequence (not marked), which may be related to
the TSS as suggested by Lubliner () Lastly, we calculated the nucleosome occupancy for the 10
best
synthetic core promoters ( B) using the model developed by Kaplan () C shows the sum of nucleosome affinity for
all the synthetic promoters. The data in  B unveil relatively low nucleosome occupancy
in several synthetic core promoters (, T28, A27
and T26) but without a clear pattern. There are however a few exceptions
(T27 and T25) with relatively high nucleosome occupancy. To ascertain
a possible correlation between promoter expression and nucleosome
affinity, we calculated nucleosome affinity for all the synthetic
promoters and compared it with the respective expression levels. It
revealed no statistically significant correlation, with a correlation
coefficient of 0.07 ( C). This somewhat unexpected result might be explained
by the diversity of synthetic sequences (discussed later). The
average position of the TATA box in the ten best promoters
is position −120 ( B) with variations of 20 base pair around the mean.
There are some promoters with lower activity with TATA boxes considerably
downstream of this interval. Yet it is not possible to draw a direct
causal relationship between TATA box position and promoter strength
since many other features differ between them. Analysis of the top ten synthetic core promoter sequences
obtained
from screenings with the . (A) Multiple sequence alignment, using Clustal Omega, (top 10 synthetic promoters used as input, ranked
in increasing order of promoter activity). The positions conserved
in seven or more of sequences are marked with a blue shade. The  core promoter sequence is shown as an example of a
strong natural core promoter to highlight the synthetic core promoter
sequence diversity. The synthetic core promoters and  core promoter alignment was performed separately to highlight sequence
features of the synthetic core promoters. (B) Nucleosome occupancy
profile heatmap of the top ten synthetic core promoters when fused
to . The
nucleosome occupancy was calculated with Kaplan  prediction package. The core promoter
is limited to 150 bp form the protein start codon. The TATA box location
is marked in blue. (C) 112 synthetic core promoter activity mean and
standard as a function of the respective cumulative nucleosome affinity
scores calculated using the Xi  software package. Second Round Screening:
Top-Ten Synthetic Core Promoters in
Different Yeasts and CRMs In the previous section, we validated
the designed method and its capacity to create completely novel core
promoters, demonstrating its functionality with the . Yet, we aimed to use synthetic
core promoters as general tools for fine-tuning expression. Thus,
they should be functional when fused to CRMs of any promoters. Hence,
the top ten synthetic core promoters obtained from fusion with the  ( and summarized in  B) were fused to
six different CRMs ( A), three from  (,  and :  C to E, respectively), and the other three
from  (,  and :  F
to H, respectively). These additional CRMs were chosen so that we
could benchmark the synthetic core promoters in different conditions, , under the control of inducible (,  and ) and constitutive (, ) CRMs. In all constructs,
the synthetic core promoter was delimited to 10 bp upstream of the
TATA box. Therefore, the core promoters have a different length depending
on the location of the TATA box and on the CRM length. A key result of these
experiments is that the top-ten synthetic
promoters show significantly higher expression when fused to CRMs
of inducible promoters, irrespectively of the yeast and inducible
mechanism, , the tested CRMs are inducible by
methanol (, , and  in ) and galactose ( in ). The minimum relative
promoter activity was 38% for  and , 27% and 53% in  and , respectively. With all these CRMs, the strongest synthetic
core promoter gave a higher relative expression than the , namely 82%, 122% and 176%
for ,  and , respectively, compared
to 70% for the . Notably,  and  gave even a higher expression value than the respective natural
wild type core promoters, 122% and 176%, respectively. It should be
stressed that these synthetic core promoters seem to be independent
of the regulatory mechanism, since they are functional under the control
of CRMs that respond to different stimuli (methanol and galactose)
and in different yeasts. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf Fusions of the core promoters to CRMs
of constitutive promoters
show a limited functionality with the maximum relative promoter activity
around 20% in ,  and . All these CRMs have a TATA box in their natural sequence. In yeast
there are mainly two types of promoters, TATA-positive and TATA-less
promoters. Most of the available promoter
studies were developed for the former group of promoters, thus we lack detailed understanding of critical
sequence elements for transcription initiation in the TATA-less promoters.
Hence, we have hypothesized that, although these promoters have a
TATA box in their sequence, the transcription initiation might be
TATA box independent. This would explain the apparent failure of the
constitutive CRMs since the presence of a TATA box and adjacent nucleotides
in the synthetic core promoters favor a TATA box dependent transcription
initiation mechanism. To test this hypothesis, we have disrupted the
TATA box in the natural promoter sequence by mutating it. We have
replaced three nucleotides of this motif by cytosine in the  (control), ,  and .
The resulting activity data showed that the expression is disrupted
after the TATA box mutation in all promoters (18%, 20%, 8% and 2%
of the wild type promoters for , ,  and , ). Expression is therefore depending on the TATA box
element in all cases. This finding does not confirm our hypothesis
and suggests that other so far unknown elements seem to be essential
for strong transcription from constitutive TATA box dependent yeast
promoters. Testing modularity of
the synthetic core promoters by fusing them
to CRMs of different promoters in  and . (A) Relative size and CRM-core
promoter fusion location of the different CRMs (, , , , ,  and , respectively)
tested. (B–H) Mean promoter activity (normalized reporter protein
fluorescence), and respective standard deviation, of fusions of the
ten synthetic core promoters with highest activity (with , ) to different CRMs (blue arrows in panel
A). CRMs of the following promoters were tested in two different yeasts:
The , ,  and  were tested in  (B–E), while ,  and  were tested in  (F–H).
Fluorescence measurements under optimal induction conditions are shown
for the respective promoters: ,  and  were induced with methanol,  was induced with Galactose.
Constitutive  and  promoters ,  and  were cultivated
on glucose containing media. All values represent single measurements
of at least three independent cultivations in separate 96-well deep-well
plates. In each case, the corresponding wild type promoter activity
is represented in green. The order of the synthetic core promoters
is kept the same (increasing promoter activity when fused to ), to facilitate
interpretation. The data of the core promoter fusions to  is also shown dispersed
in  and summarized
here in panel B. Correlation between the Activities of Synthetic
Core Promoters
Fused to Different CRMs http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf We have evaluated context dependency
and modularity of the top ten synthetic promoters by correlating the
activity data of each synthetic core promoter under the control of
different CRMs in different yeasts. This resulted in the correlation
matrix depicted in  A (heatmap showing all possible combinations of CRMs and
yeasts, ). It was
observed that the highest correlation coefficients are obtained within
the subset of inducible CRMs in ,
,  and  (,  B), with correlation
coefficients ranging between 0.40 and 0.63. Also relatively high correlation
coefficients (around 0.5) were found when comparing the  CRM and the constitutive
CRMs in  (,  C). On
the other hand, relatively low correlations are observed when comparing
CRMs of  against CRMs of  (,  D). The apparent low correlation
observed between the synthetic promoters controlled by the  and  might be explained
by the much lower expression levels in these particular experiments.
Finally, it should be noted that even when correlation is high, the
relative expression levels of the same synthetic core promoter under
the control of two different CRMs varies significantly, which means
that although functional and correlated, the synthetic core promoters
are not completely independent of the CRM to which they are fused. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf Correlation
analysis of the top ten synthetic core promoter activities
fused to seven different CRMs. (A) Heatmap of the correlation coefficients
of the top-ten synthetic core promoter activities fused to different
CRMs. All the possible combinations of CRMs are shown. The correlation
coefficients were calculated based on the average of single measurements
of at least three independent cultivations in separate 96-well deep-well
plates. The samples were taken 48 h after induction (, ,  cases) or inoculation (, ,  and  CRMs cases). , ,  and  were tested in , while the remaining
CRMs were tested in . Panels B–D
show representative data on the correlation coefficients: (B) Synthetic
core promoter activities when fused to  as a function of its respective activities
when fused to . (C) Synthetic core promoter activities when fused to  as a function
of its respective activities when fused to . (D) Synthetic core promoter
activities when fused to  as a function of its respective activities when fused to . The correlation
diagrams between other promoters are shown in . Functionality of Synthetic Core Promoters In this study
we have followed a  design approach to generate
synthetic core promoter sequences for yeast cells. The design was
based on natural  core promoters
resulting in synthetic core promoters that were at first experimentally
tested in . We have chosen this approach,
because we were primarily interested in developing regulatory elements
for , where generally applicable
promoter engineering strategies are scarce. In contrast to , where large
sets of experimental data on core promoters from large scale high
throughput studies are available, no such studies have been performed
in the widely used protein production host . Hence we used the data set from  due to the reported conservation of core promoters and previous studies which demonstrated functionality of  core promoters in . This design method delivered
77.6% of functional core promoter sequences with the  (). These sequences are markedly
different from naturally occurring sequences (no clear matches to
natural promoters were found by BLAST search), between each other
and substantially more diverse than variants typically obtained by
local random mutations of a natural core promoter. This lack of resemblance to natural sequences
is an important feature of this set of promoters. It may increase
the genetic stability in the genomic context, as these sequences have
low probability of recombining with any natural sequence in the genome.
This feature will be valuable for future  and  pathway assembly, when
assembling a multigene pathway using a different promoters for each
enzyme, with the objective of fine-tuning the production of each one
while employing a single inductor. In a recent study, 11 artificial
core promoter sequences were assessed
in . Of these, only two were generated  by consensus
sequence analysis of natural core promoters of , ,  and . The other nine sequences
were generated by replacements of short stretches in the natural  core promoter. For the
two consensus derived sequences, the activity levels were within the
range of the basal activity level obtained from randomized sequences
in this study ( A), suggesting that the previous design considerations had a nonsignificant
effect over using random sequences. The replacement method was more
successful, with activity levels as high as 117% of the natural . However, with the replacement
method the resulting sequences share a high degree of similarity with
the natural sequence, thus questioning the ability of the method to
generate truly synthetic sequences. As discussed by Dehli , a diversity inherent component design approach as
the one adopted here, is advantageous for synthetic biology problems,
as it facilitates orthogonality, modularity and standardization of
new components. We have obtained
an average activity level of 17% with a dispersion
of 11.5% and a maximum activity of 70% of the wild type . Overall, this reflects the ability
of the design method to span a wide spectrum of highly diverse synthetic
sequences. However, the relatively low average activity might be in
part explained by the way the experimental input data from  was obtained. Lubliner  deduced core promoter functionality
from reporter protein fluorescence measurements of the entire promoter
(including the CRM), whereas we fused all core promoters to the same
CRM. Hence expression strength of the  measurements may also be influenced by the CRM and not solely the
core promoter. Additionally, the phylogenetic distance between  and  may have complicated our efforts. It has been shown that core promoters
in distant related yeasts maintain their functionality but with lower
expression. To further support this statement,
it should be underlined that the highest relative expression levels
(176%) were obtained for  in . Another characteristic
that could compromise the synthetic core
promoters’ strength is the boundary between the core promoter
and the CRM. Here we maintained the same boundary condition in all
experiments (−10 bp from the TATA box), however, it might have
some influence in promoters’ strength and might be targeted
for optimization in future studies. No Motifs Except the TATA
Box Clearly Affect Expression B shows an
expression box plot for the four groups of sequences. The comparison
between groups P and M and groups T and A show that the introduction
of motifs does not affect the mean expression level, but might have
an effect in specific cases (, A28 and A27).
Indeed, the effect of motifs in core promoter strength is not consensual
in the literature. Recently, Seizl () suggested that the GAAAA 5-mer is a conserved
yeast promoter element, functioning as a TATA binding protein binding
site in promoters lacking a consensus TATA box element. However, Lubliner () studied knockout mutations
of 122 GAAAA 5-mers that showed little to no effect on protein expression.
Other studies have concluded that, with the possible exception of
the TATA box (when present), motifs are not determinant for  core promoter functionality. The comparison of groups P and M with groups T and A reveals
that the presence of a TATA box motif is a key effector of high expression
levels, which corroborates the data presented in previous studies. Indeed, within the top ten promoters only one sequence (M28) does
not have a TATA box. This apparent exception is however discarded
after a careful sequence analysis revealing that M28 has a TATA box
like sequence, namely TATTTAATA at position −115. Several previous
studies have shown that mutations in the TATA box region greatly affect
promoter strength. In another study, Mogno () analyzed libraries of
TATA-positive and TATA-less promoters in  showing that the TATA box mainly affects the transcription rate
by enhancing it. It was also shown that the location, orientation
and flanking bases critically affect TATA box function and core promoter
activity. However, given the size of
our data set (56 synthetic core promoters with TATA box), we cannot
draw solid conclusion regarding these aspects. The Role of Nucleosome
Occupancy Nucleosome occupancy
has been reported as having a fundamental role in transcription initiation. Variations in nucleosome occupancy alone may cause large differences
in promoter strength. Raveh-Sadka () showed that AT rich sequences are associated
with low nucleosome affinity and high promoter activity. Curran () have redesigned nucleosome
architecture in natural  promoters
with a 1.5- to 6-fold expression increase of a reporter protein (β-GAL).
They have hypothesized that nucleosome occupancy is an important causative
factor limiting the strength of native promoters and is likely an
evolutionary mechanism for controlling transcriptional strength. In our study, we observe no statistically meaningful
correlation between promoter strength and nucleosome occupancy ( C). This suggests
that other factors might have an even higher effect than nucleosome
occupancy, which was the main design factor studied by Curran () Similar results were
obtained by Lam , who have shown that the interplay of nucleosomes and motifs is important
to explain promoter activity variations in . Experimental data for  nucleosome
occupancy are still not available and might help to explain our observations
in the future. Effects of Core Promoter and 5′UTR Our design
approach of synthetic sequences implicitly included the 5′UTR,
as this region is interwoven with the core promoter (the beginning
of the 5′UTR, downstream of the transcription start site, was
found to be important for transcription initiation). Therefore, the variation in reporter fluorescence measurements
from our library of synthetic core promoters may be influenced by
transcriptional or translational effects. The mRNA levels may be affected
by the rate of transcription initiation as well as by the transcript
stability. In our setting, translation initiation at the start codon
was designed to be identical between all synthetic sequences, as we
have used the same Kozak sequence in every design. Namely, the Kozak
sequences of the  5′UTR was chosen, as
the respective protein is translated at exceptionally high levels. Hence, the Kozak sequence in our synthetic core
promoters should provide a best case scenario and translation initiation
should not be limiting. Ribosome scanning for the start codon may
be influenced by different secondary structures of the 5′UTRs.
However, as the 5′UTRs of the top ten synthetic core promoters
are AT-rich (and hence do not favor the formation of strong secondary
structures) little influence is expected in our setting. We
also tested fusions of the synthetic core promoters/5′UTRs
to the CRMs of different promoters (). The transition/spacing of the synthetic
core promoter to the CRMs may influence expression whereas the function
of the 5′UTR is expected to be independent of the upstream
CRM it is fused to as the 5′UTR of fusions of the same synthetic
core promoter to different CRMs is identical. If there was a strong
effect from the 5′UTR, it should influence reporter protein
fluorescence independently of the fusions to the CRM. A strongly positive/negative
effect of the 5′UTR of a synthetic promoter would increase/limit
expression in every context. However, the measurements shown
in  demonstrate,
that the core promoter fusions
showed in part varying responses when fused to different CRMs. Most
notably, synthetic core promoters fused to CRMs of constitutive promoters
showed considerably lower reporter fluorescence levels than when fused
to inducible promoters. It appears that the nature of the CRM/core
promoter transitions, influencing transcription, show a considerably
stronger effect, than 5′UTR function. Gaining deeper
mechanistic insights on transcriptional/translation
effects requires further studies. Reverse transcription quantitative
real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) experiments would therefore be ideal to discriminate
between transcriptional/translational effects. RT-qPCR using specific
primers for the eGFP reporter gene would allow to compare transcript
levels with the eGFP reporter protein fluorescence. Such experiments
appeared too extensive for the initial library
of 112 synthetic core promoters, as for each promoter/strain RNA needs
to be isolated separately (in case of biological replicates, the number
would further multiply). However, RT-qPCRs may be performed to mechanistically
characterize a subset of particularly interesting constructs (, core promoters showing exceptionally high reporter
protein fluorescence or surprising results depending on the design
group [for example promoters A27 and A28 in  F]). We validated the functionality and
general applicability of the best 10 core promoters by fusing them
to CRMs from different promoters demonstrating that they are not strictly
context dependent (, only functional if fused
to the  CRM, see ,  and section below). Nonetheless, RT-qPCR experiments
would be paramount to gain mechanistic
insights and may be run as concluding experiment in a similar setting
to quantify expression differences. Independently of the underlying
mechanisms governing reporter fluorescence
output, the applicability of the synthetic core promoters generated
in this study for modular expression fine-tuning was validated by
fusions to the CRMs of different promoters. Modularity of Synthetic
Core Promoters http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf To assess modularity,
we have inserted the top ten synthetic core promoters in  and in  under the control of
seven different CRMs, four of which are inducible (, ,  and ) and three constitutive (,  and ) ( and ). The fusions
of synthetic core promoters to the different inducible CRMs controlled
expression strength under different conditions, while leaving the
regulatory mode unaffected: Fusions of the synthetic core promoters
to the repressible  and  CRMs remained tightly repressed whereas fusions to the derepressed  promoter showed an expected increase in reporter protein
fluorescence (). The expression levels of the constitutive promoters are consistently
lower than the inducible promoters (). Although the compatibility between CRMs
and core promoters has previously been proven even between different
organisms, it appears, according to our data, it is
not universal. For instance, in  the CRM of the  gene is compatible with  and  core promoters, thus being
able to initiate transcription. This is however not reciprocal, , the  and  CRMs cannot initiate transcription when coupled with the  core promoter. We have
hypothesized that the tested constitutive promoters have a TATA box
independent transcription initiation, hence being incompatible with
this set of TATA box containing synthetic core promoters. We tested
this hypothesis by mutating the TATA box in the respective natural
promoter sequences. The results show that the expression is disrupted,
indicating that the transcription initiation of all constitutive promoters
in this study is TATA box dependent. Hence, the lower expression of
synthetic promoters fused to constitutive CRMs must rather be attributed
to unknown regulatory mechanisms specific for constitutive promoters. Within the group of inducible promoters, expression levels are
high, irrespective of the yeast and CRM specific regulatory mechanism.
Although the different CRMs in different yeasts respond to different
stimuli (namely, methanol and galactose) it had no effect on its functionality.
Some CRMs outperform the activity levels of the wild type promoter,
namely  and  in  and , respectively.  showed the highest relative activity
level (176% of the wild type ). This may reflect the fact that our design was based on  core promoters. The correlation
analysis of synthetic core promoters’ expression
levels under the control of different CRMs () shows that the correlations are higher
when comparing CRMs in the same organism. This is the case of  against  in  and  against  in . Correlations are in general
very low ( lower than 0.2) when comparing
CRMs of different organisms. For instance, in the case of  and  in  and , respectively. These data
suggest that comparable expression strength irrespective of the context, , modularity is maintained only within the same organism,
although the core promoters are also functional in other organisms.
Zeevi  described the conservation of orthologous
ribosomal promoter activity within closely related genus of yeasts. For instance, , showed high correlation with  while  diverged considerably.
Likewise, we can anticipate that the low correlation observed in our
study is due to the phylogenetic distance between  and  genus. All in all, our work demonstrated the feasibility
of a multi factor
rational synthetic core promoter design and its applicability as general
engineering tool for gene expression fine-tuning. Due to their sequence
diversity and independence of natural sequences, similarly designed
synthetic core promoters may become valuable tools for synthetic biology
and metabolic engineering applications in other eukaryotic organisms. The  CBS7435
(, NRLLY-11430) wild type strain and the  FY 1679–01B strain (isogenic to  S288c with an uracil auxotrophy) were
used as host organisms to screen the synthetic promoter activity,
while  TOP10 F′ was used to perform
the cloning work. Vectors and Cloning: Controls and Synthetic
Core Promoters Fused
to the http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf Ten different controls were created using the genomic wild
type  sequence as
template: deletion of the entire upstream regulatory region (CRM)
upstream of the core promoter, deletion of the core promoter, replacement
of the natural  core promoter with the core promoter
of the  gene and seven
completely random sequences. For the first control (deletion of CRM)
primers C-WO-CRM1 and eGFP-pAOX1–3prime were used. For the
remaining controls, pAOX1_Syn_dHI_SwaI-forward
was used as forward primer, while as reverse primers were C-WO-Core1,
C–W–HHF2+10 and R1 to R7, respectively. The primers
sequences are provided in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_002.zip http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf The synthetic core promoters were ordered as long
primers (Ultramer DNA Plate Oligo by Integrated DNA Technologies (Leuven,
Belgium) in 96-well microtiter plates), attached by PCR to the  and cloned into
the / shuttle vector pPpT4_SB-truncatedAOX1-eGFP, reported by Vogl () The plasmid genbank
file and respective map are available in the  and . The synthetic promoters were amplified using forward primer pAOX1_Syn_dHI_SwaI-forward and the reverse primers listed in . The
final PCR product was gel purified and cloned by assembly cloning
into the SwaI and NheI digested vector backbone. All constructs were
verified by Sanger sequencing. Controls and Entry Vectors
to Assess Synthetic Core Promoters
with Different CRMs in  and http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_002.zip http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf The best synthetic core promoters
were tested when fused to the CRMs of six additional promoters ( and , named , , , ,  and , respectively). Three CRMs were tested in  (,  and ), while the remaining three
were tested in  (,  and ). At first, the positive controls
were created. To do so, the genomic wild type sequences of the  promoters were amplified using the following
three primers groups: CAT-core and CAT-CRM-forw, DAS-core and DAS-CRM-forw
and GAP-core and GAP-CRM-forw (), resulting in promoter fragments of 500, 552, and 486 bp,
respectively. In each of the three PCR reactions, the respective wild
type whole promoter sequence was used as template. It was then cloned
into the / shuttle vector used in the previous screening, where the  truncated sequence had been removed (digestion with
SwaI and NheI). For the  whole
promoter plasmids (used as positive controls), the promoter sequences
were amplified from  genomic DNA
and cloned into a reporter vector (named Sc_eGFP_RFP_ARS) comprised
by pUC origin of replication for , the
ARS/CEN sequence for low-copy replication in , URA3–3′ and URA3–5′ integration sequences,
a stuffer sequence flanked by eGFP and RFP and the two transcriptional
terminators  and  as well
as a Kanamycin resistance cassette, consisting of  and  promoters for expression in yeast and , respectively, the KanMX6 resistance gene and
terminator TIF51A (plasmids kindly provided by Pitzer, J., unpublished
results). The plasmid genbank file is available in the  and the respective map
is shown in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_002.zip http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf For each CRM, an entry vector was created to facilitate cloning of
the synthetic core promoter fusions. Such entry vectors had a CRM
sequence (without core promoter), a placeholder fragment and the eGFP
coding sequence. The primers used to amplify the CRMs sequences for  were the following three groups: CAT-CRM-rev
and CAT-CRM-forw, DAS-CRM-rev and DAS-CRM-forw and GAP-CRM-rev and
GAP-CRM-forw ().
While for  CRMs sequences amplification
the reverse primer used were: ADH-CRM-rev, GAL-CRM-rev and GPD-CRM-rev
(). The forward primer
was, in these three cases, seqTomato19–41rev. The backbones
used were Sc_eGFP_RFP_ARS for  and
pPpT4-bidi-sTomato-eGFP (Vogl, T., unpublished results) for  (both genbank files are available in  and respective maps in ). The  vector was digested with AscI while the  vector was linearized with AscI and SwaI.
The digestion was gel purified and an assembly cloning was performed
for each of the PCR results, yielding a six entry vectors (one for
each CRM) and three plasmids containing a wild type promoter of interest
each (, , : to be tested in ), which were verified by Sanger sequencing. Cloning a Subset of Synthetic
Core Promoters with Different
CRMs in  and Each of the ten best synthetic core promoters identified
with the  (T22, T23, T24, T25, T26, T27, T28, M28, A27 and A28) was amplified
by PCR six times to include the different CRMs overhangs, to be used
for assembly cloning. The reverse primers used for each of the 10
best core promoters were T22-GFP-rev, T23-GFP-rev, T24-GFP-rev, T25-GFP-rev,
T26-GFP-rev, T27-GFP-rev, T28-GFP-rev, M28-GFP-rev, A27-GFP-rev and
A28-GFP-rev. Different forward primers were used depending on the
CRM to be fused. For instance, to amplify the 10 synthetic promoters
to be cloned in the  plasmid, the following forward primers were used: T22-CAT-rev,
T23-CAT-rev, T24-CAT-rev, T25-CAT-rev, T26-CAT-rev, T27-CAT-rev, T28-CAT-rev,
M28-CAT-rev, A27-CAT-rev and A28-CAT-rev. The three different entry
vectors for  containing the ,  and  were digested by AscI and NheI
to remove the placeholder fragment. The digestion products were gel
purified. The linearized plasmids were used for assembly cloning with
each of the respective 10 PCR core promoter fragments. A similar
approach was performed to screen the top 10 synthetic promoters in . The synthetic core promoters used the
same reverse primers, while the forward primers vary according to
the CRM sequence, as explained above. The entry vectors containing
the ,  and  were digested
by AscI and NheI to remove the placeholder fragment. They were gel
purified. The linearized plasmids were used for assembly cloning with
each of the respective 10 PCR core promoter fragments. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf All the
primers used to clone the ten synthetic promoters with
highest activity with different CRMs in  and  and the respective entry
vectors are listed in . Transformation of  and Cultivations http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00178/suppl_file/sb6b00178_si_001.pdf The aforementioned plasmids were digested with SwaI for linearization.  was transformed with low amounts of linearized
plasmid (approximately 1 μg of DNA) using the condensed protocol
reported by Lin-Cereghino () This low amount of expression cassette was used to reduce
multi copy integration and variability between transformants. Then, from the resulting transformants, 28 were
screened using a previously reported high throughput method. Briefly, cells were grown for 60h on 250 μL BMD1 and subsequently
induced with methanol (250 μL BMM2 [1% methanol] at 60h and
50 μL BMM10 [5% methanol] at 72h). The transformants were screened
for uniformity and three representative transformants from the linear
range of the landscape were selected for rescreening, using the same
protocol. Lastly, one transformant per construct was used for comparison
of the variants under the same growth conditions. Fluorescence measurements
were performed using a 96-well microtiter plate reader (Synergy MX,
Biotek, Winooski, VT, USA) as described previously. Biological
replicates from at least 3-fold cultivations of the same transformant
were used to calculate the mean and standard deviations values, which
are shown in –. These values represent the eGFP
fluorescence values normalized per OD600, where the background measurements
of diluted medium were subtracted. eGFP fluorescence (excitation at
488 nm and emission at 507 nm) and absorption at 600 nm (OD600, optical
density 600) were measured in micro titer plates, 48 h after the first
induction for the methanol inducible promoters (derived of , ), while the fluorescence values
of the constitutive  variants were taken 48h after the inoculation. A subset of
strains was also measured by flow cytometry using a BD LSRFortessa
cell analyzer (results shown in ). Cells were grown identically to plate reader measurements
in deep well plates in biological 8-fold replicates and diluted 1:20
in PBS buffer and 30.000 events measured for each replicate (doublets
were consistently <5% in all samples). Transformation of  and Cultivations was transformed with circular
plasmids (0.5 μg of DNA) using chemically competent cells. Then, from the resulting transformants, 28 were
screened using a similar protocol to the one used for . Briefly, cells were grown for 24h on 250 μL YPD. The  variants were
additionally screened using YPGal medium instead of YPD. The transformants
were screened for uniformity and three representative transformants
from the linear range of the landscape were selected for rescreening,
using the previous protocol. Lastly, one transformant per construct
was used for comparison of the variants under the same growth conditions.
Measurements were made in an identical way as to the  protocol..