Nucleic acids
are programmable materials because of their predictable Watson–Crick
base pairing and well-documented thermodynamics, kinetics, and mechanics. In addition to static
structures, nucleic acids can be programmed into dynamic devices using toehold-mediated
strand displacement, whereby kinetic
barriers to strand exchange are lowered via short complementary sequences
that bring components into proximity. Dynamic nucleic acid technology
utilizes toehold-mediated DNA strand displacement (DSD) to construct
(1) nonenzymatic catalytic chemical reaction networks for isothermal
signal amplification; (2) catalytic hairpin assemblies for diagnostics, therapeutics,
and theranostics; (3) nanomachines and walkers for work and motility; (4) circuits for energy transport and logic; and (5) networks for computation. Although they are compelling,
these demonstrations are limited in the scale and complexity necessary
for real-world applications by a single fundamental challenge: . Leakage refers to the production of an
unwanted output in the absence of an input, and it is the  of DSD systems, independent of the
DNA/RNA system under consideration. The challenge of leakage must
be overcome to achieve the device performance (i.e., speed, sensitivity,
selectivity, stability, and scalabilty) necessary for broader adoption. By design, DSD systems are metastable
networks designed to be set into operation by the addition of a specific
single-stranded sequence that triggers the reaction. Leakage occurs
when system components react in the absence of a trigger, and its
effect undermines the performance of catalytic networks, seesaw gates, catalytic hairpin assemblies, and hybridization chain reactions. Extrinsic sources of leakage, including chemical
impurities, defective oligonucleotides, and malformed network components,
can be minimized with careful processing. In comparison, intrinsic leakage results from the design of the
network, even if the components are perfect, and limits the ultimate
DSD performance. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf Sources of intrinsic leakage may be understood
by considering the catalytic reaction network from Zhang et al. illustrated
in a. In this representation, unique sequences are
represented by labeled domains and complementary domains are denoted
with asterisks (strand sequences are provided in  S1). This network consists of a three-strand  complex in which the “upper”  and  strands occupy domains
of the lower  strand. Briefly, network operation
is designed to be triggered by a single-stranded  strand that hybridizes with an exposed backbone toehold (y*) and
initiates three-way branch migration to displace the signal strand
and expose a sequestered backbone toehold (3*). The catalytic cycle
is completed by a similar process with the  strand
reacting with the backbone to displace the output strand, the original
catalyst, and form a  product, as illustrated.
As the end of a cycle results in no gain or loss of base pairs, this
network is driven forward thermodynamically by a net gain in entropy. In this network, leakage occurs when the substrate
and fuel react to produce signal in the absence of catalyst. This
leakage reaction depends on successful nucleation of the fuel strand
in the absence of an intended toehold. Fuel and substrate must bump
into one another favorably, meaning that key bases must have some
chance to interact and nucleate. Once nucleated, the leakage reaction
proceeds through a branch migration process until strand invasion
is complete. In this process, under the conditions reported here,
nucleation is the rate-limiting step for the leakage reaction. Example leakage reactions are
shown in b. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf Domain
representation of the catalytic DNA strand displacement system from
Zhang et al. and four example leakage
pathways. (a) In the catalyzed strand displacement pathway of the
reaction network, a catalyst strand initiates a reaction cycle driven
forward thermodynamically by a net gain in entropy. The strand displacement
exchanges the catalyst for the signal strand and exposes a sequestered
toehold on the substrate backbone for the fuel, which reacts with
the intermediate to complete the cycle and form a waste duplex. Sequences
and domains are listed in  S1. (b) In the four leakage pathways, the fuel reacts with the substrate
backbone in the absence of a catalyst by exploiting fraying at the
5′, nick, and 3′ locations of the substrate. Although often
considered to be a zero toehold strand displacement event, intrinsic leakage reactions are enabled by transient
toeholds created via thermal fluctuations at the ends of the substrate
and at the nick between the output and signal strands.  refers to the spontaneous dissociation of individual base pairs
in the interior of the duplex, and  is dissociation
of the terminal base pairs (at the duplex ends or nicks). Studies
of base pair fluctuations indicate that at room temperature the terminal
base pairs are 50% open and the penultimate bases (one base pair from
the ends of a duplex) are 10–20% open, whereas the fraction
of open interior base pairs is ∼10 with
an open lifetime of ∼0.1 μs. Additionally,
single-stranded DNA overhangs (toeholds or specificity domains, such
as domains y* and 9a in a) increase the stability of the neighboring duplex base pairs,
but they do not prevent fraying. Thus,
fraying of two base pairs at the ends and nick point of the substrate
duplex is expected to be the dominant leakage mechanism. These vulnerable
regions are highlighted in a. Leakage caused by fraying, when
compared to toehold invasion, is approximately 4–6 orders of
magnitude slower. Even this small leakage
drastically limits the scalability of feed-forward, cross-catalytic,
and autocatalytic networks, where fuel invasion will unintentionally
release the catalyst of the coupled networks. Thermal fluctuations
such as fraying have long been suspected as the source of intrinsic
leakage, and strategies to suppress it include (1) careful sequence
and domain design such as using GC pairs at the fraying locations, (2) use of proper reaction conditions, (3) use of GC-rich sequences or introduction
of buffer or clamping domains that are absent from fuel sequences, (4) sequestration of domains in hairpin structures, (5) use of extremely pure DNA strands made in bacteria, (6) incorporation of mismatches, and (7) novel domain level redundancy. While each of these approaches has shown some
effect, a clear set of design rules have not emerged for consistently
and efficiently reducing leakage. (a) Sequence and domain representation of the substrate
with fraying locations highlighted. (b) Sequence and domain representation
of the original fuel strand. Corresponding to the fraying locations
of the substrate, the locations of fuel base mismatches are numbered,
highlighted, and shown in bold font. They are 5′ end (bases
1 and 2), nick (bases 24 and 25), and 3′ end (bases 43 and
44). (c) Leakage rate constants for fuel modifications. The concentrations
for leakage reactions are fuel (1300 nM), substrate (14 nM), and reporter
(20 nM). The black bar represents the leakage rate with the original
fuel strand. Pink, orange, and blue bars represent leakage rates for
fuels with 1 and 2 nt modifications at 5′, nick, and 3′
locations, respectively. The rates are labeled by the identity of
the modified base and its location on the fuel (see panel (b) for
locations and originial base idenities). For example, GT indicates that base 1 was changed from C to G and base
2 was changed to C to T. Error bars show the standard deviation from
the mean for select samples in triplicate to estimate experimental
error. Insight
from Secondary Structure While previous studies have targeted
the location and thermodynamic cost of mismatches in strand displacement
systems, design principles such as mismatch positions,
mismatch numbers, and mismatch identities for suppressing leakage
have not emerged. Importantly, base pair mismatch modifications also
change the ensemble of DNA secondary structures, which can impact
their nucleation and branch migration rates. Here, we report a systematic investigation of the effects of mismatches
on intrinsic leakage suppression and network performance using the
network shown in . All one and two base-pair mismatches produced by fuel strand sequence
modifications were characterized at the 5′, 3′, and
nick locations (see a,b) by measuring the reaction rates of uncatalyzed (leakage)
and catalyzed reactions using fluorescence photometry. These locations
are related to locations on the substrate where fraying is expected
to occur and enable nucleation between the backbone and fuel in the
absence of catalyst. The results were analyzed on the basis of the
mismatch identity, mismatch position, mismatch numbers, and the secondary
structure of the fuel strands. To quantify the effects of secondary
structure on leakage rates, we calculated the probability that a base
is unpaired at equilibrium using NUPACK, as discussed
below. We define this probability as the  of a base and introduce availability as a design concept for analyzing
and engineering the stability of DNA reaction networks. To further
understand the relationship between leakage rates and secondary structures,
we define  as the sum of
all pairwise products of the availabilities of corresponding bases
between fuels and the backbone. Taking consideration of both mismatches
and secondary structure provides a more complete analysis of leakage
suppression, and inclusion of the availability and mutual availability
during our analysis provides insight toward rational design principles
for minimizing leakage. Effect of Mismatch on Leakage Rate Constants http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf The leakage
data for each fuel modification were fit with a second-order kinetics
model to extract the leakage rate constant,  ( S3),
and the results are shown in c. The largest leakage suppression was observed for
fuel modifications that created two mismatches at the 5′ end
of the fuel (bases 1 and 2) and one or two mismatches at the nick
in the substrate (base 25 and/or bases 24 and 25). While these locations
showed consistent leakage suppression, no clear pattern between mismatch
base identities and leakage rates emerged. For example, G–A
and G–T mismatches show no suppression at base 1 and a factor
of 2 suppression at base 25, whereas a G–G mismatch reduces
leakage in both locations despite the fact that G–G mismatches
have a lower energy penalty than other G or C mismatches when placed
within a DNA duplex. While the G–G
mismatch consistently reduces leakage at bases 1, 2, and 25, no clear
impact from mismatch identity is observed for bases 43 and 44. Although
excess fuel in solution could interfere with leakage from the 3′
end of the fuel (at the toehold of the substrate backbone; see  S4), the data indicates
that mismatch identity alone or an associated energy penalty does
not ensure leakage suppression. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf Beyond mismatch identity, key insight into leakage suppression
can be gained by analysis of the secondary structure ensembles of
the original and modified fuels. While domain level designs assume
the fuel to be purely single-stranded, thermodynamic analysis using
NUPACK reveals a range of secondary structures. The minimum free energy
(MFE) structures are shown in a and have a moderate level of base pairing between
six nucleotides of the fuels. Although the MFE structures indicate
base pairing between bases 5–23, 6–22, and 7–21
for all but one (G) fuel sequence, the probability of
pairing is affected by the modifications at bases 1, 2, 24, 25, 43,
and 44. The MFE structures for all fuels are provided in  S5. G indicates
that base 25 was changed from C to G. More generally, the letter denotes
the base identity and the number denotes the base position from 5′
end of the fuel. While the MFE structures are color-coded by the probability
for being in the particular MFE structure shown, greater clarity is
obtained by plotting the  for each base
in the fuel sequences, as shown in b,c (upper plots). We define availability
as the probability that a base is unpaired at equilibrium, and it
quantifies the per-base effects of a sequence’s ensemble of
secondary structures. Availability is calculated by NUPACK from the
predicted secondary structure ensemble lacking pseudoknots and non-Watson–Crick
interactions. Modifications to the fuel strand
alter the availability of the bases since each sequence has a unique
ensemble of secondary structures. b,c (lower plots) shows the changes in base
availabilities for modified fuel strands relative to the original
fuel sequence. NUPACK calculations were performed using the following
parameters: (1) 25 °C operating temperature; (2) 0.05 M Na and 0.0115 M Mg ion concentrations; (3) 14 nM
substrate component concentrations, allowed complex size of 3; (4)
1.3 μM fuel concentration, allowed complex size of 2; and (5)
dangles set to “all” in all cases to account for single-stranded
tails. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf Consistent with the MFE structures shown in a, the availabilities of fuel
bases 5, 6, 7, 21, 22, and 23 range between 0.1 and 0.6. However,
several other bases have availabilities less than 1, which influences
the probability of those bases nucleating a leakage reaction. Additionally,
availability calculations exhibit subtle changes for modified fuel
strands (b,c)
that have a large impact on leakage and are not limited to the modified
bases. For example, the availabilities of several bases were considerably
different between the original fuel and the GT fuel (b),
especially for bases 1–4 and bases 13–18, which show
a drop, and bases 21–23, which show a rise. While most modifications
decreased availability for certain bases or left them nearly unchanged
(for example, AA; b), the C fuel modification
increased the availability of several bases when compared to that
of the original fuel (c) and exhibited the highest leakage rate measured (c). The base availabilities
for all fuel modifications are provided in  S6 and are ordered in terms of leakage rate in . The data clearly show the positive
correlation between lower fuel base availability and lower leakage
rate. To fully exploit the concept of availability for understanding
the source of leakage, the availability of the bases of the substrate
backbone must also be considered because both fuel and backbone bases
must be available simultaneously for nucleation to occur. d,e shows the MFE
structure of the substrate and availability of the backbone bases.
Ideally, the backbone would have zero availability within double-stranded
domains (bases 1*–44*) and unity availability at the toehold
(bases 45*–50*). However, the availabilities are ∼0.1
at base 1* ∼0.24 at base 24*, and ∼0.23 at base 25*,
indicating that the substrate is vulnerable to leakage at these locations
(i.e., nucleation with bases 1, 24, and/or 25 of the fuel strands).
Thus, in the context of the substrate, availability quantifies the
degree of fraying or breathing of the duplex bases. Minimum free energy (MFE) structures and base availabilities for
select fuel strands and the substrate backbone. (a) MFE structures
of the original fuel strand and fuel modifications AA, GT, GG,
and C calculated by NUPACK. The Gibbs free energy of
each structure is provided in units of kcal/mol. (b) Base availabilities
for the original fuel and fuel modifications AA, GT, and GG (upper
plot) and the differrence in base availabilities (ΔA) for each
modification relative to the original fuel (lower plot). (c) Base
availabilities for the original fuel and fuel modification C (upper plot) and the difference in availability relative to the
original fuel (lower plot). (d) MFE structure of the substrate calculated
by NUPACK. (e) Availability of each base in the backbone strand of
the substrate. Because the fuel strand hybridizes with the backbone
strand on the substrate, the base positions of the backbone strand
were plotted on the  axis and labeled to correspond
to the complement of the fuel strand. Base Modifications at the 5′ End of the Fuel http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf Given that bases 1*, 24*, and 25* of the substrate backbone are most
vulnerable to leakage, fuel modifications that reduce availability
for fuel bases 1, 24, and 25 can be expected to exhibit the lowest
leakage, and this is shown to be the case. For example, leakage was
suppressed for the G, GT, and
GG fuel modifications. The G leakage
drop corresponds to a 5% reduction in the availability of bases 1
and 2 ( S6). In addition,
the availability of bases 1 and 2 of GT decreased
40%, whereas for GG, the availability of bases
1 and 2 decreased 40 and 54%, respectively (b). These modified fuels yielded a 4-fold
reduction in leakage when compared to that of the original fuel strand.
In contrast, the base availabilities in A, T, and AA strands are nearly identical to
the original fuel strand (b and  S6), and their leakage suppression was minimal. Here, the changes
in availability for single bases on the modified fuel strands provide
a compelling explanation for the variation in leakage rates. Base Modifications at the 3′ End of the Fuel http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf The low availabilities at backbone bases 43* and 44* imply a lack
of fraying, which would be expected to minimize the impact of changes
in the availabilities of fuel bases 43 and 44 at the 3′ end
of the fuels. This hypothesis is consistent with the uniform and relatively
minor leakage reductions for fuels with reduced availabilities at
bases 43 and 44, such as TT and GT ( S6). However, the data for leakage at bases 43* and 44* are confounded
by spurious hybridization of the fuel’s y domain with the y*
toehold domain of the substrate (bases 45* to 50*). This hybridization
causes the x domain of both the fuel strand and the signal strand
to compete to bind with the x* domain of the substrate ( S4). The competition is
expected to be significant since the fuel is at 100× excess concentration.
This spurious hybridization is expected to sterically hinder leakage
at bases 43* and 44* of the backbone and is likely an important factor
in the lack of variation in the leakage rate for base modifications
at the 3′ end of the fuel strand. Base
Modifications of the Fuel at the Nick Location http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf Base 24* and
base 25* on the substrate backbone have high availabilities, which
suggests a greater degree of fraying (e). Consistent with this expectation, all
fuel mismatch modifications at base 25 were observed to suppress the
leakage rates. We attribute the reduced leakage for mismatch modifications
at fuel base 25 to the lower availabilities at base 25 for the modified
fuels compared with the original fuel. For example, availabilities
at base 25 for A, T and G were
reduced from 21% to 62% and the leakage was reduced from 49% to 68%
compared with original fuel. A similar correlation between availability
and leakage rate was observed for mismatch modifications at fuel base
24. The single base mismatch at fuel base 24 reduced the leakage for
T, for which the availability of base 24 decreased by
72%. The leakage nearly doubled for C, which exhibited
a 16% higher availability for base 24. Lastly, no change in leakage
rate was observed for A, for which the base 24 availability
increased by 9%. An additional factor in the increased leakage observed
for C may stem from its increased availability at several
bases when compared to the original sequence (c). An increase in availability corresponds
to a decrease in secondary structure, which then lowers the activation
energy for nucleation between fuel and substrate. For further consideration,
an analysis of base availability in the context of the intuitive energy
landscape model of Srinivas et al. is
provided in  S7. On the basis
of the above observations, base availability is a potentially powerful
new design tool with base-specific resolution. In our qualitative
explanations, we focused on the separate availabilities of the bases
of the fuel or substrate backbone strands. However, as noted above,
leakage reactions require nucleation of these strands with each other.
To analyze the combined effects of the availabilities of bases from
both strands and to find a quantifiable correlation, we define and
analyze a  () and  (). The mutual availability is simply the product
of the availabilities of any two bases, defined as  = , where  is the
availability of base  of the fuel strand and  is the availability of
base  of the backbone strand within the substrate
complex. The total mutual availability is defined as  = ∑() = ∑(), where  indexes the
complementary base pairs in the fuel-substrate waste product in correct
registration. In other words, * is the base position
of backbone strand that matches the complementary position  of the fuel strand. For nucleation to occur, key
bases of the fuel and backbone must be available to hybridize. Total
mutual availability, , as defined above, provides
a quantitative metric for analyzing fuel and substrate sequence interactions.
To assess whether  could be correlated with leakage
rate, a plots
leakage rates versus the calculated values of  for
all fuel sequence modifications. On the basis of the apparent exponential
dependence, the natural log of the leakage rate constant is plotted
versus  in b and is colored-coded by 5′, 3′, and
nick modifications of the fuel. Select experiments were repeated in
triplicate, and the scatter of the data is greater than the experimental
error. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf Linear fits to the data are provided as guides to the eye.
The 5′ and nick modifications exhibited linear trends and were
fit individually. Given the near zero availability of base 44* of
the backbone, 3′ fuel modifications had very little impact
on total mutual availability. The nick fuel modifications and their
corresponding fit are depicted in green and have a slope of 2.87 with
an adjusted  value of 0.50. 5′
fuel modifications and their corresponding fit are depicted in blue
and have a slope of 18.26 with an adjusted  of 0.81. While the primary discussion here is focused on
single location fuel modifications, multiple location modifications
(e.g., 5′ end  nick locations) further
reduced the leakage rate to an almost undetectable level (about 100-fold),
which are presented and discussed in  S8. These data provide further support for total
mutual availability as a metric for leakage. The leakage rate
constant appears to be exponentially related to the total mutual availability
of the fuel and substrate backbone, suggesting that  may be related to a nucleation activation energy barrier. However,
our data do not distinguish between barriers to nucleation and branch
migration nor can they identify the critical nucleus for leakage to
proceed. The scatter in  may result from the incompleteness of our mutual availability
model, which does not include branch migration steps, and limitations
in total mutual availability as a measure of nucleation barriers.
For example, NUPACK does not include pseudoknots, G-quartets, nick
overhangs, and the coaxial stacking parameter into its calculations.
Additionally, base availability, as defined, does not include tertiary
nucleic acid structure. The correlation between the leakage rate constant
and total mutual availability also needs careful consideration. For
example, as the number of fuel mismatches increases, the leakage rate
approaches zero, and the reaction stalls because of a lack of thermodynamic
driving force. In comparison, when the total mutual availability is
high, an effective toehold is formed, and the nucleation barrier is
reduced, which means diffusion is the rate-limiting factor. The relationship
between  and the leakage rate constant is thus constrained
by these limits. (a) Leakage
rate constants for each fuel modification plotted versus total mutual
availability between the fuel strand and the backbone strand on the
substrate. The leakage rate for the original fuel is shown in black,
while the 5′ end, nick and 3′ end fuel modifications
are shown in blue, green, and orange, respectively. Representative
error bars of select samples are shown, indicating that the scatter
of the data is greater than the experimental error. Error bars represent
the standard deviation of the mean of three samples. (b) Natural log
plot of the leakage rate constant versus the total mutual availability.
The green, and blue lines are the fits for the nick modifications,
5′ end modifications. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf It has generally been observed that the rate constants between catalytic
reactions and leakage reactions are coupled. It has been shown that
when leakage rates were reduced by introducing mismatches, catalytic
rates were also decreased or maintained. Likewise, here we also found that some fuel mismatch modifications
maintained the original catalytic rate while decreasing the leakage
rates. The kinetics data of each fuel modification were fit with a
third-order kinetics model with an approximation to extract the catalyzed
rate constant,  ( S3). Catalyzed rate constants ranged
3 orders of magnitude for the fuel modifications and are plotted in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf Table S1 and Supporting Information S8 The effect of fuel sequence modifications on the catalyzed
reaction can be understood via the reaction mechanism. The modification
positions play a critical role in the catalyzed reaction, as discussed
further in  S8 and
S9. In , trends
can be observed by grouping the modification positions of the fuel
strand at the 5′ end (bases 1 and 2) with base 24 of the nick
and at the 3′ end (bases 43 and 44) with base 25 of the nick.
As expected from the reaction mechanism shown in , mismatches at base 25 of
the nick location have the greatest impact because it affects fuel
hybridization with the intermediate (I3), followed by mismatches at
the 3′ end that impede catalyst release. Fuel modifications
at the 5′ end and base 24 of the nick locations have minimal
impact on the catalytic rate. A strategy to speed up the catalytic
reaction is to increase the fuel toehold length by deleting one nucleotide
at the 5′ end of the catalyst. Preliminary experiments for
multiple-location fuel modifications indicate that this approach is
effective for fuels that include a modification at base 25, whereas
it has a counter effect for other fuel modifications (). Since one catalytic reaction cycle in this system has many intermediate
steps including toehold exchange, toehold-mediated strand displacement,
and spontaneous toehold dissociation, the correlation between the
overall catalytic rate constant and the total mutual availability
of the catalyzed reaction was not studied in this work. Rate constants of catalyzed
reactions between the catalyst (1 nM), fuel (13 nM), substrate (14
nM), and reporter (20 nM) monitored via fluorescence. The black bar represents the original fuel strand.
Pink, orange, and blue bars represent 1 and 2 nt modifications at
5′, nick, and 3′ locations, respectively. Error bars
show the standard deviation from the mean for select samples in triplicate
to estimate experimental error. An ideal DNA strand displacement
system would have elevated selectivity to the catalyst, sensitivity
to the catalyst, high catalytic turnover (high ), stability in the absence of the catalyst (low ), and scalability because of suppressed
crosstalk and leakage. Thus, as a practical metric for the performance
of the system, we use the ratio, /. The larger the ratio, the greater will
be the capacity to distinguish a response to the catalyst from the
background leakage. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf Given that the leakage rate is strongly
coupled to the catalytic rate for fuel sequence modifications at bases
25, 43, and 44, the suppression of the catalytic reaction reduced
performance more than leakage suppression increased it. Locations
of strong coupling between catalytic rate and leakage rate can be
considered to be limitations of intrinsic leakage suppression; they
are a result of the domain design of this system and will be different
for other domain level designs. Modifications at base 24 had no net
benefit due to the low availability of the substrate at this location.
Improvements in performance came from introducing sequence mismatches
at the 5′ end of the fuel (bases 1 and 2), where leakage and
catalytic reaction rates are decoupled. As measured by the / ratio,
the GT fuel modification has the best performance
overall ( S10). This
modification targeted the vulnerability at base 1* of the backbone
strand due to nonzero availability. It reduced the leakage reaction
rate by a factor of 4 but maintained a catalytic rate close to the
original fuel strand (a). In the literature, mismatch modifications
have shown more dramatic improvements to leaky systems and systems
using low-quality strands. Mismatches in Jiang et al.’s DNA
catalytic hairpin design with large leakage showed 25-fold improvements
in signal-to-background ratio compared with that of the original hairpins. By contrast, Bhadra et al.’s optimized
RNA catalytic hairpin system shows only 7-fold leakage reduction,
without disturbing the catalytic reaction rate, by introducing mismatch
modifications. However, when using unpurified RNA strands in this
system, a 13–15-fold reduction in the leakage is observed when
compared to that of the control. Zhang
et al.’s system was optimized and purified, having an intrinsic
leakage rate of only ∼8 M s. This work demonstrates that a 4-fold leakage reduction in this
system can be achieved while leaving the catalyzed reaction rate nearly
unchanged. Mismatches at substrate fraying locations reveal the power
of availability to influence circuit performance. (a) Ratio of the catalyzed to leakage reaction rates (/) for single location
fuel modifications to evaluate overall system performance. Catalyzed
reactions were performed with the catalyst (1 nM), fuel (13 nM), substrate
(14 nM), and reporter (20 nM), monitored via fluorescence, and uncatalyzed
leakage reactions were performed with fuel (1300 nM), substrate (14
nM), and reporter (20 nM). The black bar represents the original fuel
strand. Pink, orange, and blue bars represent 1 and 2 nt modifications
at 5′, nick, and 3′ locations, respectively. Error bars
show the standard deviation from the mean for select samples in triplicate
to estimate experimental error. (b) Representative fluorescence data
of catalytic reactions: the original fuel (empty black circles), GT modified fuel (empty red triangles), CT modified fuel (yellow diamonds), and GA modified fuel (empty blue stars). (c) Representative
fluorescence data of leakage reactions: the original fuel (solid black
circles), GT modified fuel (solid red triangles),
CT modified fuel (solid yellow diamonds),
and GA modified fuel (solid blue stars).
The gray lines are the calculated fits to each curve, and the solid
blue and purple lines represent reactions between the reporter and
the original fuel and the reporter and the substrate, respectively. Availability Analysis of Other Networks http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf The concept
of mutual availability is expected to apply to other network designs
as well. In an effort to validate the mutual availability concept
with another network design, we analyzed a hairpin design from Jiang
et al. Their study provided sufficient
data to apply an analysis of total mutual availability, and we estimated
the rate constants for the hairpin design, as described in  S11. Even though the total
mutual availability values vary relative to the Zhang et al. network,
the observed trend is the same, even in a different buffer. The results
provide compelling support for the validity of mutual availability
as a metric for sequence-level network analysis and design. The effects of base-pair mismatches on
leakage suppression and total network performance were systematically
investigated using the well-established catalytic reaction network
from Zhang et al. Fuel modifications
at the 5′, 3′, and nick locations were chosen because
they correspond to vulnerable substrate locations where nucleation
is expected to occur. Qualitatively, availabilities of the substrate
and the fuel strand bases were found to correspond well to observed
trends in the leakage rate data. Quantitatively, a trend between the
total mutual availability and the leakage rates was observed regardless
of mismatch identities, mismatch numbers, and mismatch locations.
This work suggests availability and mutual availability as design
concepts for optimal performance of nucleic acid reaction networks. Future work can further explore the correlation between the total
mutual availability and the activation energy, aiming at a more detailed
model of leakage mechanisms. In addition, the correlation between
the overall catalytic rate constant () and the total mutual availability of the catalyzed reaction should
be studied to allow predictions of the practical metric for the performance
of the system (/). This study also leaves room for refinement against
other interactions that NUPACK does not calculate, such as G-quartets,
non-Watson–Crick interactions, pseudoknots, and geometric constraints.
With improved design metrics and refined design tools, nonenzymatic
amplification systems can be used as amplifiers for diagnostics, and
nucleic acid chemical reaction networks will become more robust tools
for theranostics, molecular computation, and synthetic biology. Chemicals and DNA Complex
Purification Solvents and chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
unless otherwise noted. DNA oligonucleotides were synthesized and
purified with high-performance liquid chromatography by Integrated
DNA Technologies (IDT). Reporter strands were labeled with 5′
fluorophores (TET) and 3′ Iowa Black dark quenchers (IABkFQ)
by IDT. Oligonucleotides were prepared in 1× TE buffer (10 mM
Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, diluted from 100× TE). Final stock
concentrations (100 μM) were confirmed by measuring the 260
nm absorbance (Eppendorf Biophotometer) using extinction coefficients
provided by IDT. TAE buffer (10×; 40 mM Tris, 40 mM acetate,
1 mM EDTA) was purchased from Hoefer or Fisher Scientific and then
mixed with 125 mM Mg(CHO)·4HO. DNA components were diluted to 30 μM
in 1× TAE buffer with 12.5 mM Mg. DNA components
were annealed at 95 °C for 5 min using a thermocycler (Eppendorf
Mastercycler Nexus Gradient) and cooled to room temperature over ∼90
min to form substrates and reporters. Substrate and reporter
complexes were purified by native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(N-PAGE). To eliminate malformed substrates, fuel and substrate were
stoichiometrically incubated at 15 μM for 1 h at room temperature
before loading the gel. The loading buffer contained a 1:1 ratio of
bromophenol blue dye and ficoll solution (type 400, 20% water). Substrates
were purified by N-PAGE in 14% acrylamide gels (made from 30% acrylamide/bis-acrylamide
solution in a 29:1 ratio), which were run at 150 V for 7 h. Reporters
were also purified by N-PAGE in 10% acrylamide gels, which were run
at 150 V for 2 h. For both processes, the cooling system (VWR International)
was set to 20 °C. The bands of interest were cut out of
the gels and eluted in 1× TE/Mg buffer for 2 days
at 4 °C. The buffer included 1× TE with 12.5 mM MgCl·4HO (Acros Organics) added. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf Because
Mg binds to EDTA, the effective Mg concentration
was estimated to be 11.5 mM. Substrate
and reporter concentrations were quantified via measuring absorbance
at 260 nm and calculated using extinction coefficients predicted by
nearest-neighbor models ( S2). Typical yields were 30% for the substrate
and 50% for the reporter. All experiments were carried out in 1× TE/Mg buffer
with a total volume of 1 mL in 4 mL disposable methacrylate cuvettes
(Fisher Scientific) at 25 °C. DNA stock solutions were normally
diluted to 2 μM before being added to each sample. A poly-T
strand (dT) was added into all dilute stock samples (1
μM and lower) to reach a final concentration of 1 μM and
prevent DNA loss via nonspecific binding to the microfuge tubes and
pipet tips. All solutions were gently
mixed by pipetting. Fluorescence intensity versus time was measured
via fluorescence spectrophotometers (Agilent Technologies, Cary Eclipse).
Sample solutions were excited at 510 nm, and the emission was measured
at 538 nm. Slit sizes used were 2.5 nm for excitation and 10 nm for
emission. Fluorescence was normalized so that 1 normalized unit (a.u.)
of fluorescence corresponded to 14 nM (the substrate concentration)
for leakage reactions and 13 nM (the fuel concentration) for catalyzed
reactions. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00231/suppl_file/sb5b00231_si_001.pdf For leakage reactions, the fluorescence intensity was continuously
monitored for the first 12 h (shown in c) with the samples maintained at 25 °C
and then periodically measured until the reaction reached completion
at room temperature (∼21.5 °C). Substrate (14 nM) and
reporter (20 nM) were reacted with ∼100-fold excess of the
fuel strands (1300 nM) to expedite leakage reactions and to extract
intrinsic leakage specific to fuel and substrate interaction. Reaction
between substrate and reporter was undetectable under this condition
(c). With the
assumption that extrinsic leakage dominates at shorter times and intrinsic
leakage dominates at longer times, leakage
was measured over the long term to extract intrinsic effects. For
catalyzed reactions, the catalyst (1 nM), fuel (13 nM), substrate
(14 nM), and reporter (20 nM) were reacted for 10 h (b). During the experiments,
substrate reactions were inferred by monitoring the production of
signal strand through its reaction with the reporter ( S1)..