Realizing
the potential of
engineering mammalian cells requires the predictable construction
of synthetic sensors and circuits. In the clinic, cell-based therapies
could function to integrate physiological markers, migrate to a disease
location, and execute a multistep treatment. Cells involved in the manufacturing
of biologics, such as the workhorse Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell
line, could be engineered to respond to inducers that stage a multistep
production process. Other applications include the programmable spatial
organization needed for artificial organs and regenerative medicine,
responsive living prosthetics (., sensing blood
glucose and controlling insulin production), and high-throughput drug
screens based on readouts of cell state. These advanced applications require circuitry that
encodes signal processing and control algorithms, the implementation
of which requires more regulatory parts than are currently available. While the number of such parts for prokaryotes has exploded, there is currently a lag in building the analogous
toolboxes for mammalian circuit design. In prokaryotes, TetR transcriptional repressors constitute
one
of the most abundant and plastic family of regulators. These repressors consist of a single protein that contains both
small molecule sensing and DNA-binding domains. Over 200 000 TetR homologues have
been sequenced
that are representative of a wide range of sensing and DNA binding
specificities. To date, sensing domains have been characterized that
respond to >60 ligands, including antibiotics, metabolites, hormones,
cell–cell signaling molecules, and metals. In the absence of its ligand, TetR forms a dimer that strongly
binds to the TetR operator sequence (). In the
presence of ligand, the dimer is disrupted, TetR dissociates from
the DNA, and gene expression is activated. The DNA-binding domains
of different repressors bind unique 17–30 bp sequences, and
it has been shown that these are highly orthogonal, with few off-target
interactions between noncognate operators. Thus, this family provides a rich resource for mining ligand- and
DNA-binding domains to build synthetic sensors and circuits. The most common method for inducing mammalian gene expression is
based on the TetR repressor, whose ligand is the antibiotic tetracycline. In mammalian cells, TetR can be used as both a repressor, or converted
into an activator by fusing it to the transactivation domain from
virion protein 16 of the  virus (VP16), which recruits RNA polymerase (RNAP). Multiple
copies of  are placed upstream of the minimal
CMV promoter (referred to as a etracycline esponse lement or TRE), and
in this fashion, reporter expression is activated when TetR is bound
to the TRE, and becomes inactivated upon the addition of doxycycline
(this system is referred to as “Tet-Off”). A “Tet-On”
system has also been developed, whereby reporter expression is activated
upon addition of doxycycline; this behavior is mediated by the reverse
TetR transcription factor (rtTA). In
both cases, the VP16 domain recruits RNA polymerase (RNAP) when TetR
is bound to a synthetic, TRE-containing promoter. These switches typically
have low basal expression, exhibit a large dynamic range (from 10
to several thousand-fold induction), and have been shown to function
in a wide range of tissue culture systems, including embryonic stem
cells, CHO, HEK, HeLa, and MCF-7 cells, as well as in living animals. Homologues of TetR have been used to build
synthetic gene switches
for various applications, and switches responding
to other antibiotics, including erythromycin (MphR) and pristinamycin (Pip) have
also been constructed. To expand upon the available inducible systems,
sensors that respond to other small molecules (cumate, CymR) have been developed, including some that can
be delivered to cells in gas form (acetaldehyde, AlcR; 6-hydroxy-nicotine, HdnoR). Quorum sensing systems involved in cell–cell communication
have been ported from  (ScbR and SpbR), (TraR), and  (LuxR). These sensors have largely been developed for research
purposes or in the context of a bioreactor. For clinical uses in patients,
switches have been built that respond to nontoxic molecules, including
amino acids (arginine, ArgR; tryptophan,
TrpR), food additives and metabolites
(vanillic acid, VanR; phlorectin, TtgR), and vitamins (biotin, BirA) . Beyond cell cultures, many
of these switches have been demonstrated to function in living animals,
including mice. In one compelling application,
a uric acid (HucR) sensing circuit was constructed as part of a feedback
mechanism to maintain blood urate homeostasis, the disruption of which
can lead to gout. Furthermore, a sensor
that reacts to the inactivation of antituberculosis compounds (EthR), which serves as an application for drug discovery,
has also been constructed. Of the many synthetic mammalian circuits
that have been built using
TetR and its homologues, several of the
resulting genetic switches and cascades based on these regulators
exhibit ultrasensitivity and bistability. To build more sophisticated functions,
logic operations such as inverters and 2-input Boolean gates have
been layered together to generate feedforward circuits, half adders (and subtractors), 2-input decoders, and a cell
type classifier. Dynamic circuits have
also been constructed, including time delays and oscillators. Furthermore, channels for cell–cell communication
have also been developed where the sender signal (which consists of
a metabolic pathway) produces the signaling molecule and the receiver
acts as the signal sensor. To date, as many as 3 TetR homologues have been incorporated into
a single mammalian circuit (tTA, PIP-KRAB, and E-KRAB), and in one case, up to 3 repressors (TtgR, TetR, and ScbR) were
combined into a single protein. However,
the construction of circuits that can perform more sophisticated signal
processing operations will require a larger set of transcription factors
that are orthogonal to one another, or in other words, that do not
cross react with one another’s DNA operators. TetR and
its homologues are not the only transcriptional regulators
commonly used to construct genetic circuits, and several classes of
transcription factors have modular DNA-binding domains that allow
them to be programmed to target a specific nucleotide sequence. This can be based on a combination of residues
that bind to specific base pairs, as is the case for zinc finger proteins
(ZFPs) and transcription-activator-like
effectors (TALEs). Similarly, the CRISPRi
technique is based on the targeting of a catalytically inactive Cas9
protein to a specific DNA sequence through the use of a guide RNA. All of these systems can be moved into mammalian cells and retooled
to function as activators or repressors by fusing VP16- or KRAB-like
peptides, respectively, or by relying on steric hindrance of Cas9 alone. However, it remains a challenge to add sensing capability
to these DNA-binding domains. A generalizable approach (based on two-hybrid
systems) has been to utilize two proteins whose dimerization is induced
by a stimulus; such an approach has been used to build ZFPs and TALEs
that respond to small molecules (., rapamycin,
hydroxytamoxifen, or RU486), hypoxia, and light. The advantage
of the TetR family is that a compact single protein has both the capability
to sense a wide range of stimuli and transduce this to a DNA-binding
event. Further, TetR and its homologues bind to small operator sequences
with high specificity, which is desirable for promoter design but
also comes at the cost of the inability to target them to arbitrary
sequences. Here, we present a systematic approach to retool
a group of TetR-family
repressors to operate as repressors and activators in mammalian cells.
In previous work, we applied a part mining approach to build a set
of 20 TetR homologues and characterized their orthogonality in . Borrowing a strategy based off of designs
used to convert TALEs into potent mammalian transcription factors, we move 8 new TetR homologues (AmtR, BM3R1,
ButR, IcaR, LmrA, McbR, PhlF, and QacR) into human embryonic kidney
(HEK293) cells, retooled as 15 new activators and repressors. Remarkably,
these transcription factors retain both the orthogonality and fold-change
observed in prokaryotic cells. Ligand
sensing is also preserved, and we use this to build a new inducible
system, which we characterize in both HEK293 and CHO cells. We also
measure their response functions as gates to aide in the construction
of larger circuits. Collectively, this work demonstrates that prokaryotic
part mining is an effective strategy for expanding the regulatory
parts available for mammalian cell engineering. Functional
Characterization of Retooled TetR Homologues in HEK293
Cells Supporting Information Figures 1 and 2 In previous work, we used DNA synthesis to build a
library of 73 TetR homologues, of which
we built responsive promoters for 20 in .
The crosstalk within this subset was quantified by measuring the activity
of 400 combinations of repressors and promoters. From these data,
we selected a subset of 8 that are highly orthogonal to move into
mammalian cells. The mammalian regulators were built using the complete
protein sequence for each TetR homologue, where the corresponding
gene was codon optimized for expression in mammalian cells and resynthesized
(). Both activator (Figure a) and repressor (Figure b) versions were generated. Activators (TF) were built
by adding a destabilization domain, a
Nuclear Export signal (NES), a VP16 activation domain, and a Nuclear Localization signal (NLS). Due
to high levels of activation observed in the absence of inducer, destabilization
domains were added to the activator design. Only an NLS was added
to build repressors (TF), which therefore rely on steric
hindrance to achieve repression. The genes encoding TF and TF were placed under the control of the human elongation
factor 1α promoter (hEF1a) and
inserted into the pZDonor 1-GTW-2 plasmid (). Supporting Information
Figure 3 Synthetic promoters were built for each of the mammalian
transcription
factors (Figure c). To generate activatable
promoters, six copies of the cognate operator (Table ) were inserted upstream of a minimal CMV promoter. A more complex promoter architecture is required in order to generate
the repressible promoters, as the promoter itself must be activated
in the absence of repressor. This behavior was achieved by designing
a Gal4-VP16 activatable promoter. Specifically, each repressible promoter
was designed to contain 5 Gal4 binding sequences upstream of a minimal
CMV promoter, where Gal4-VP16 is constitutively expressed. The resulting promoter is rendered repressible by the inclusion
of operators on either side of the CMV promoter. To measure activity,
the promoters were placed upstream of a yellow fluorescent protein
(YFP) coding sequence (). The transcription factors
and reporters were maintained on separate pZDonor 1-GTW-2 plasmids. Supporting Information Figure 4 Supporting Information Figures 5–8 The two-plasmid system containing the constitutively
expressed
transcription factor and the reporter were transiently transfected
into HEK293 cells, as well as a single-plasmid transfection of the
reporter alone. For the repressible system, a third plasmid was included
from which Gal4-VP16 was expressed, and in all cases, a plasmid containing
the constitutively expressed eBFP transfection control plasmid was
included (). Cells were then trypsinized 48 h post-transfection, and their
fluorescence quantified using flow cytometry (). The induction of the reporter in the presence and absence of the
plasmid containing the constitutively expressed activator or repressor
was then compared (Figure c and d, respectively,
and ). Seven of the activators are highly functional and demonstrate
an average of 225-fold activation (ranging from 33- to 416-fold).
For comparison, an activator based on TetR is able to achieve 75-fold
activation. In addition, six new repressors were obtained with an
average of 172-fold repression (ranging from 18- to 551-fold). These
levels of repression are comparable to the 50-fold repression that
is achieved by TetR. While most of the TetR homologues
could be systematically converted into both repressors and activators,
for some only a single variant was found to be both functional and
robust (BM3R1, ButR, and IcaR). Supporting Information Figure 9 Supporting
Information Figure 10 The division of transcription factors and reporters on separate
plasmids facilitates the rapid measurement of crosstalk between noncognate
pairs, and all combinations of reporters and transcription factors
were cotransfected into HEK293 cells. The activators are largely orthogonal,
with the exception of a few cross-reactions (Figure a and ). Notably, LmrA activates pQacR, and LmrA and QacR both activate pMcbR. The
repressors are also highly orthogonal, although there is some activity
of LmrA against pMcbR and pQacR (Figure b and ). Interestingly, the off-target interactions
observed here are not present in the  system. This may be due to changes in the expression
level of the transcription factors, having multiple operators in the
synthetic promoters, and/or the ability of VP16 to recruit the transcriptional
machinery even when delivered to a promoter at low affinity. Supporting Information Figure 5 Supporting Information Figure 6 Supporting Information Figures
7 and 8 Design and characterization of synthetic transcription factors.
(a) Expression of TF is controlled by the constitutive
hEF1a promoter. Operator sequences are shown as boxes. pTF controls expression of the YFP output, which is activated by its
cognate transcription factor. (b) The control system for TF is similar to part a except that Gal4-VP16 is constitutively expressed
from a third plasmid. pTF controls expression of the YFP
output, which is activated by Gal4-VP16 and repressed by its cognate
transcription factor. (c) A detailed positional view of the activated
(pLmrA, top) and repressed (pLmrA, bottom)
LmrA promoters is illustrated. The pLmrA promoter contains
a minimal CMV promoter core with six upstream operators. The pLmrA promoter consists of a minimal CMV promoter that is surrounded
by two LmrA operators and five upstream Gal4 operators. The corresponding
transcriptional start site (TSS) and TATA box are illustrated. (d)
The function of the activators are shown and compared to the TetR
activator (TetR). The fold-activation was calculated by
comparing the average fluorescence in the presence of a plasmid encoding
the activator (P-constitutive TF) with that obtained from
the reporter plasmid (P-pTF reporter) in the absence of
the P-constitutive TF plasmid. Cells were grown for 48
h post-transfection and assayed using flow cytometry (). Representative histograms are shown in . Microscopic
images of cells transfected with the reporter only (−, top
panel) or the cotransfected reporter and activator (+, bottom panel)
are shown. BFP transfection controls are shown in . (e) The function of the repressors
are shown and compared to the TetR repressor (TetR). Fold-repression
is calculated by comparing the average fluorescence in the presence
and absence of the plasmid containing the repressor (P-constitutive
TF). Microscopic images of cells transfected with the
reporter and Gal4-VP16 (−, top panel) or the reporter, Gal4-VP16,
and the repressor (+, bottom panel) are shown. Fluorescence histograms
generated from the FITC-A geometric mean and BFP transfection control
images are shown in , respectively. In both parts d and e, the error bars
were calculated based on the standard deviation of three independent
experiments performed on different days. Cells are visualized using
a YFP filter at 10× magnification, and images were taken 48 h
post-transfection. The scale bars correspond to 400 μm. Gray
boxes indicate that a particular TetR homologue was converted into
only an activator or repressor and the other version was either not
built or is nonfunctional. Supporting
Information Figure 9 Supporting Information Figure 10 Orthogonality
between synthetic transcription factors. (a) Crosstalk
is shown between all combinations of activators and promoters. The
fold-activation is calculated by dividing the average fluorescence
of cells containing both the reporter and activator plasmids by the
average fluorescence of cells only transfected with the reporter plasmid.
Raw data underlying the matrix are shown in , and data correspond to the average FITC-A
geometric mean values from flow cytometry data collected from three
independent transfections carried out on separate days. (b) Crosstalk
is shown between all combinations of repressors and promoters. The
fold-repression is calculated by dividing the average fluorescence
of cells containing the reporter and Gal4-VP16 encoded plasmids by
the fluorescence of cells transfected with plasmids encoding the reporter,
Gal4-VP16, and cognate repressor. Raw data underlying the matrix are
shown in , and data correspond to the average FITC-A geometric mean values
from flow cytometry data collected from three independent transfections
carried out on separate days. Transcription Factor Operators and
Inducer Molecules Construction of a DAPG-Inducible System The TetR homologues
that were selected for this study are associated with different classes
of ligands, including metabolites, natural products, and plant alkaloids
(Table ). Similar to the doxycycline (Dox)
induction of TetR in the Tet-On inducible system (Figure a), the PhlF repressor
responds to 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG), which is a polyketide
antibiotic produced by  that
has activity against plant pathogens (Figure b). DAPG has the potential to be a similarly
useful inducible system, because it freely diffuses through eukaryotic
membranes and can be purchased from chemical suppliers (). Supporting Information Figure 11 and Table 1 The inducibility of PhlF was tested by adding
DAPG
to transfected cells and measuring the response from the pPhlF reporter (Figure c; ). For cells supplemented
with DAPG at the time of transfection, a drastic decrease in transfection
efficiency was observed. To alleviate this decrease in transfection
efficiency, the inducer was instead added 6 h post transfection, and
cells were incubated for 42 h (). After
induction, YFP expression was measured using flow cytometry. In HEK293
cells, the response yields a robust 54-fold induction with a notably
ultrasensitive transition ( = 4.7 when fit to a
Hill function), with a threshold (half-maximum) of 1 μM DAPG.
This response is similar to what has been observed for the Tet-On
inducible system, which has a similar dynamic range (70-fold) but
a less cooperative transition ( = 1.4). However,
greater leakiness is associated with the DAPG-inducible system (240
versus 18 au), and because of this, the response curve is shifted
higher. We also tested the PhlF system in CHO cells, due
to their importance in the manufacturing of biologics. This yielded
a strong response, albeit with a lower dynamic range (15-fold) and
less cooperative behavior ( = 1.0). The threshold
of the switch is nearly identical among the two cell lines (5 μM
DAPG in CHO cells), and the leakiness is also greater. These
discrepancies between the Dox- and DAPG-inducible systems
can likely be attributed to their variable mechanisms used to control
expression. For instance, our PhlF system is based on
dual and opposing activities (activation by Gal4-VP16 and repression
by PhlF). Such an architecture has been shown to result in ultrasensitivity. In contrast, the Tet-On system relies on a more
direct mechanism, whereby Dox induces rtTA3 binding to the promoter
and subsequent activation of gene expression. Because of the large
dynamic range associated with varying their inducer concentrations,
both systems can be used to examine input-output relationships. Supporting
Information Figure 11 Characterization of the DAPG-inducible PhlF system.
(a) The structure of doxycycline and the Tet-On inducible system,
comprised of the rtTA3 regulator, are shown. In this system, rtTA3 is constitutively expressed from the phEF1a
constitutive promoter and activates expression of its cognate promoter
which contains 6 copies of the TetR operator sequence situated upstream
of the minimal CMV promoter (referred to as pTRE-tight). The rtTA3
regulator binds to and activates expression from the pTRE-tight promoter
in the presence of doxycycline. (b) The structure of DAPG and the
PhlF inducible system are shown. In this system, PhlF is
constitutively expressed from the phEF1a promoter. The pPhlF output promoter is activated by Gal4-VP16, which is constitutively
expressed by the phEF1a promoter. PhlF binds to and represses
expression from the pPhlF promoter in the absence of DAPG.
(c) Induction of the Dox- and DAPG- inducible systems are compared
and were measured in both HEK293 (Dox and DAPG systems) and CHO cells
(DAPG system only). YFP fluorescence was measured after induction
at [0, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, and 30 μM DAPG] or [0, 0.01, 0.05,
0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20 μM Dox]. The lines were fit to a Hill
equation (), the parameters for which
are shown in . The data shown correspond to the average of three experiments from
different transfections performed on different days, and error bars
correspond to the standard deviation. Representative cytometry histograms
for the three inducible systems are shown in . Measurement of 1-Input Response Functions The response
function of a gate captures how the output changes as a function of
the input; for transcriptional gates, promoter activity serves as
both the input and output. Our new repressors (TFs) were
used to build NOT gates, (which can be further
converted into NOR gates by placing several upstream promoters in
series). To deliver an input to the gate, the TRE-tight
promoter (inducible by Dox) was used to drive expression of each TF (Figure a). The response function
of this inducible system was measured separately in the same genetic
context using a fluorescent reporter, where the output of each gate
corresponds to the fluorescence of the TF-responsive promoter. Supporting Information Figure 12 The response function for five repressors (McbR, PhlF, AmtR, BM3R1, and LmrA) was determined (Figure b and ). The average
fluorescence was calculated by taking the mean YFP fluorescence from
three experiments for each data point in the response curve; from
these values, background fluorescence was subtracted, and the resulting
output fluorescence values were converted into units of output promoter
activity (this is done by separately measuring the activity of the
various input promoters as a function of inducer). These values were
used to generate a response function for each gate, where data were
fit to a hill equation:where  is the activity of
the output promoter,  is the minimum
output,  is the maximum output,  is the Hill coefficient, and  is the
threshold level of input where the output is half-maximal (Table ). The output from the ON state (Dox = 1 nM) differs
between each gate because it depends on the activity of the TF-responsive promoter, which vary based on operator sequence.
When maximally induced (Dox = 20 μM), all of the response functions
converge on the same OFF state. The dynamic range is defined as the
ON state divided by the OFF state, and this varies from 23- to 78-fold.
All of the switches are noncooperative with a Hill coefficient approaching
unity ( ≈ 1), which is expected because the
promoters contain two noninteracting operators. Supporting Information Figure 13 Buffer gates were also built based on the activators,
which turn
ON in response to induction from their input promoter. The response
functions of the activators were measured either using the Dox-inducible
pTRE-tight promoter, as above, or the DAPG-inducible pPhlF promoter from this study (Figure c). Using
this approach, the response function of two activators (AmtR and QacR) was determined following the same approach
used for the NOT gates (Figure d and ). The data for
each switch were fit using the following hill equation:where the variables correspond to those used
in equation  (parameters listed in Table ). Supporting Information Figure
15 When characterizing gates, it is
useful to report the input and
output promoters in the same units, which would allow the predictable connection of gates
to form larger circuits (although this can be complicated by context
effects). Yet the main challenge in doing so is
that gates are typically measured using inducible systems and reported
in terms of the concentration of the chemical inducer. When characterizing
prokaryotic gates, we have separately measured the response of promoter
output of the inducible system, and this information is used to build
a response function that has the same units for the inputs and outputs. Similarly, we could characterize the Dox- and
DAPG-inducible systems and use this to renormalize the transfer functions
of the NOT gates () and the switches (inset, Figure d). The hill coefficients for the inverters change after renormalization
but are consistent with respect to one another. This variation can
be attributed to the limited resolution in input promoter activity
in our measurements that increases regression error. The characterized
switches illustrated above act individually upon a promoter, yet composite
promoters that respond to multiple transcription factors can also
be constructed to provide tunable output control. Supporting Information Figure 12 Supporting Information Figure 13 Supporting Information Figures 15
and 16 Gate and
circuit response functions. (a) The Dox inducible system
is used to characterize NOT gates. Symbols are as described in Figure . Expression of TF is controlled by
the TRE-tight promoter, which is activated by the TetR activator (rtTA3)
in the presence of Dox. Expression of the rtTA3 gene is controlled
by the constitutive hEF1a promoter. (b) The response of each NOT gate
is shown: McbR (blue inverted triangles), PhlF (red squares), AmtR
(green circles), BM3R1 (purple triangles), and LmrA (light blue diamonds).
The expression of the fluorescent reporter from the output promoter
(pTF) with respect to the induction of the input promoter
(pTRE-tight) via Dox is shown. The average and standard deviation
are plotted from three replicates from transfections performed on
different days. Cytometry distributions corresponding to the FITC-A
geometric mean of the 0, 0.5, and 5 μM induction points are
shown in  and fit parameters for each curve are listed in Table . (c) Two inducible systems (Dox or DAPG via pPhlF) are used to measure the response function of the buffer gates based
on transcriptional activators (TF). (d) The response functions
of the buffer gates are shown. The Dox-inducible system is used to
characterize the AmtR gate (circles) and the DAPG-inducible
system is used to characterize the QacR gate (squares).
The inset shows the response as a function of input promoter activity
(pTRE-tight or pPhlF), rather than inducer concentration
(). Cytometry distributions corresponding
to data for several induction points are shown in  and fit parameters for each
curve are listed in Table . (e) A schematic
of the circuit that behaves as an enhancer is shown. The pAmtR-QacR promoter contains three upstream operators
for each TF. (f) Enhancer fold activation of the output promoter (pAmtR-QacR) is shown as a function of the two inducers,
where inducer concentrations vary from 0 to 20 μM doxycyline
and 0–30 μM DAPG. Activation is indicated in blue, and
data correspond to average fluorescence values from three replicates
collected on different days. Cytometry distributions and error bars
are shown in , respectively. NOT Gate Response Function Parameters The threshold at
which the NOT gate
is at the half-maximum output, in μM doxycycline. The maximum and minimum levels of
expression, in arbitrary units of YFP fluorescence. The fold-change is calculated by
dividing the maximum average fluorescence (20 μM Dox) by the
fluorescence of cells containing no inducer. Activator Response
Function Parameters The threshold at which the buffer
gate is at the half-maximum output, in μM doxycyline (for AmtR) or μM DAPG (for QacR). The maximum and minimum levels of
expression, in arbitrary units of YFP fluorescence. The fold-change is calculated by
dividing the maximum average fluorescence (20 μM Dox or 30 μM
DAPG) by the fluorescence of cells containing no inducer. Signal Integration:
Construction of an “Enhancer”
Promoter That Responds to Two Activators To generate a promoter
capable of responding to combinations of input signals, operators
for different transcription factors are typically combined into a
single synthetic promoter. Similar approaches have been applied to
build several classes of 2-input gates based on modified TetR homologues. These circuits consist of a single activator
(., ScbR modified with VP16) and up to two repressors
(., Pip modified with KRAB). For example, a NOT
IF gate was built by constructing a promoter that contains 8 upstream  operators, followed by 3  operators
in between and a minimum promoter motif. The resulting promoter is
ON only in the presence of ScbR and in the absence of Pip. Here, we
sought to determine whether our promoter architecture could integrate
multiple positive regulators to converge on a single output. To construct a hybrid promoter that is responsive to multiple transcription
factors, we modified our initial architecture used to build synthetic
promoters containing six upstream operators. We postulated that this architecture could be altered to integrate
signals from multiple TFs whose corresponding operators are present
in different locations within the promoter. The full output of the
promoter would not be achievable without induction of all of the TFs;
thus, they would collectively enhance the activity of the promoter.
The resulting circuit is not expected to function as an “AND
gate” because each input increases activity toward the maximum.
However, it does have features similar to fuzzy logic and analog adder circuitry. Supporting Information Figures 15 and 16 The integrating promoter was constructed by combining the
operators
for AmtR (3 downstream) and QacR (3 upstream,
Figure e). Specifically, AmtR expression
is controlled by the Dox-inducible Tet-ON system, while QacR expression is controlled by the DAPG-inducible PhlF system
(which also requires Gal4-VP16). Thus, the resulting circuit requires
the control of 5 transcription factors carried on 7 distinct plasmids.
All of the plasmids were cotransfected and the resulting YFP fluorescence
measured using flow cytometry (). The
output was measured across varying concentrations of the two inducers
(Dox and DAPG), and the resulting 25 data points were used to build
a two-dimensional response function (Figure f and ). As expected, each inducible system is able to turn on the promoter
independently, and the Dox-inducible system alone is able to induce
the system 4.5-fold, while the DAPG-inducible system independently
activates the system 8.5-fold. When both systems are maximally induced,
the promoter is activated 19-fold. Thus, there is a near-perfect multiplicative
effect between the induction of the two systems in isolation, compared
to their collective impact on the promoter. Supporting
Information Figure 17 To gain insight
into how transfection efficiency affects circuit
performance, the fluorescence of the BFP-transfection control plasmid
(a plasmid that constitutively expresses eBFP under the control of
the hEF1a promoter) was used as a proxy for “copy number.”
Since all plasmids are transfected in equal concentrations, it is
expected that transfected cells contain the same relative amount of
individual plasmids. Therefore, cells
with a higher “copy number” will have higher levels
of eBFP expression, and a larger quantity of each plasmid. To assess
the effect of “copy number” on circuit performance,
cells were separated into 360 logarithmically spaced bins based on
their BFP fluorescence, and the maximally inducing and noninducing
conditions were compared for each bin (). The “fuzzy” AND gate
is quite robust, as it exhibits a consistent fold activation over
a wide range of “copy numbers”. Expanding the Mammalian
Parts Toolbox and Beyond The
“fuzzy” AND gate demonstrated here, as well as the increased
number of both sensors and circuits illustrated throughout, significantly
expands upon the tools available for use in mammalian cells. We also
systematically verify that these components exhibit minimal crosstalk
and robust levels of fold change similar to their bacterial predecessors. Furthermore, we demonstrate their functionality
across a variety of cell types including HEK293 and CHO cells. Finally,
we reveal that these components can be combined in a single cell to
coordinately fine-tune the expression of an individual output. To obtain variable and specific output levels, we utilized a hybrid
promoter architecture whereby two distinct TFs converge on a single
promoter, through the inclusion of multiple copies of each TFs operator
sequence. In mammalian cells, variable output levels are typically
achieved through adjusting the number of transcriptional enhancer
elements. Enhancers integrate multiple
signals , and act in  to
regulate transcriptional activity. Not
only the spacing but also the content of -regulatory
elements have been shown to have a dramatic effect on biological processes
(such as development) in eukaryotes. While enhancer elements alone can lack discernible activity, in
concert with other elements they typically evoke robust expression
patterns upon associated genes. Recent
efforts have been dedicated to identifying mammalian enhancer elements,
where naturally occurring sequences were assessed in parallel to identify
the essential elements of transcriptional networks. Although much work has been done to characterize the behavior
and
identity of naturally occurring enhancers, and to develop synthetic
tools to control mammalian gene expression, issues persist in the
implementation of such components toward broader applications. For
example, the development of systems via transient transfection of
tissue culture cells, and nonsite-specific integration make measurements
difficult, and systems developed in this manner are not suited for
clinical applications. Furthermore, it
is known that enhancers exhibit negligible activity when transiently
transfected but far more robust activity upon genomic integration. For these and other reasons, a safe harbor for genetic insertions
should be developed, either through artificial chromosomes or designed
integration sites. Based on these findings,
future efforts should focus upon rigorously characterizing the behavior
of these and other components upon genomic integration. Delineating
the contribution of integration site and copy number should be at
the forefront of these efforts, as well as the engineering of epigenetic
tools to ensure active expression of integrated circuitry. Breakthroughs
in these areas will aide in the implementation of the tools presented
here toward real world applications that span from living therapeutics
to the production of complex pharmaceuticals. Cell Culture,
Strains, and Media Φ80lacZΔM15ΔlacX74
recA1 endA1 araΔ139 Δ(ara, leu)7697 galU galK λ-rpsL
(StrR) nupG Φ80lacZΔM15 ΔlacX74 recA1 araΔ139
Δ strain DH10B
[F() ] was used for cloning and to propagate DNA, except
in the case where the propagated plasmids were used for Gateway cloning.
In such cases, the ccdB Survival 2 T1R strain (Life Technologies,
[() () () ])
was used. The HEK293 (293FT) cell line was purchased from Invitrogen
(product number R700-07), and CHO cells were obtained from ATCC (strain
number CCL-61). HEK293 and CHO cells were cultured in high-glucose
DMEM complete media (Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM), 4.5 g/L glucose, 0.045 units/mL of penicillin and 0.045 g/mL
streptomycin and 10% FBS (Sigma)) at 37 °C, 100% humidity, and
5% CO. Doxycycline was purchased from Clontech (product
number 631311), and 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG) was purchased
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (product number 206518). Supporting
Information Figures 1–4 contains all of the part sequences used
in this study. Plasmid maps are provided in . Prokaryotic repressor coding
sequences were optimized for production in mammalian cells using multiparameter
gene optimization methods and synthesized by Geneart. The constitutive mammalian promoter (human
elongation factor 1 alpha promoter, phEF1a) was from pLEIGW, a gift
from Ihor R. Lemischka. The rtTA3 coding sequence and the pTRE-tight
promoter (containing the CMV minimal promoter) were amplified from
pTRIPZ (GE Healthcare, product number RHS4743). Constitutively expressed
BFP (phEF1a-eBFP2) was used as a transfection control and was purchased
from Addgene (plasmid 14891). The rb glob PA terminator was amplified
from Addgene vector AAV-CAGGS-EGFP (plasmid 22212). In all cases,
the reporter used corresponds to the Yellow Fluorescent Protein (eYFP), and the DD-tag was purchased from Clonetech
(product number 632172). Plasmids were constructed using a combination
of GeneArt gene synthesis, Gateway cloning, and/or inverse PCR. Specifically, transcription factor coding sequences
and their cognate promoters were synthesized into basic cloning vectors
and were subcloned into expression or reporter vectors, respectively,
via Gateway cloning. Hybrid promoters were constructed using inverse
PCR to insert operator sequences upstream of the CMV minimal promoter
within the reporter vector. In the case where inverse PCR was used
to construct reporter vectors, whole plasmids were PCR amplified using
Phusion DNA polymerase (NEB) along with multiple operator containing
oligonucleotides. The resulting product was run on an agarose gel,
extracted, and digested with DpnI. The blunted-ended, DpnI-digested
product was phosphorylated (T4 Polynucleotide Kinase) and ligated
(T4 DNA ligase) in a single reaction at room temperature, transformed
into chemically competent DH10B cells, and plated on selective LB
medium. Transfection, Growth, and Processing of Cells HEK293
FT and CHO cells were transfected using the Attractene transfection
reagent (Qiagen) as described in the manual with several modifications.
Specifically, 100 ng of each plasmid was combined into the appropriate
combinations in a total volume of 7 μL or less, and 60 μL
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) was added. To this
mixture, 1.5 μL Attractene was added, and each sample was mixed
by vortexing. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 10
min and then added to ∼8 × 10 cells in 0.5
mL DMEM that had been supplemented with penicillin, streptomycin,
and amino acids (referred to as media complete) in a 24-well culture
plate (Corning, product number 3473). For cells transfected with plasmids
containing the pTRE-tight promoter, doxycycline was supplemented at
the time of transfection. For cells containing plasmids harboring
the DAPG-inducible system, DAPG was added 6 h post-transfection. Transfections
were supplemented with 0.5 mL media complete 24 h post-transfection
and doxycycline where appropriate. Cells were trypsinized 48 h post-transfection
and subjected to flow cytometry (see below). Specifically, cells were
trypsinized by aspirating the growth medium and applying 0.5 mL 0.25%
trypsin-EDTA (Corning, product number 25-053) to adherent cells. Once
cells were liberated from the plate, 2 mL media complete was added
to each sample to halt trypsinization. Trypsinized cells were then
spun down at 950 rpm for 10 min at 25 °C, the supernatant removed,
and resuspended in 300 μL 1× phosphate buffered saline
(PBS). From here, the trypsinized, PBS suspended cells were subjected
to flow cytometry. Cells were analyzed
by flow cytometry
using a BD Biosciences LSRII flow cytometer. eBFP2 was measured using
a 405 nm laser and a 450/50 filter, and eYFP with a 488 nm laser and
a 530/30 filter. Cells were analyzed using FlowJo (TreeStar Inc.,
Ashland, OR), and populations were selected by gating out the background
BFP signal of untransfected cells. Specifically, a gate was applied
to encompass those cells that did not correspond to background (or
where no signal was present on a BFP histogram of untransfected cells).
The resulting gate was applied to all samples, to ensure that only
cells expressing the eBFP2 transfection control were included in the
analysis. Gated populations of >25 000 cells were used to
calculate
the geometric mean of the FITC-A fluorescence. When used to assay
a promoter, this is referred to as the “Promoter Activity.” Fold Change and Circuit Copy Number Calculations All
circuit plasmids were cotransfected with the transfection control
marker, P-constitutive-eBFP. BFP-positive cells were separated into
360 logarithmically spaced bins based on raw fluorescence, referred
to as the “Transfection Marker”. Fold-activation was
calculated by dividing FITC-A fluorescence values from fully induced
cells (20 μM DOX and 30 μM DAPG) by uninduced cells within
each bin. Response curves parameters
for all activators and repressors were calculated by fitting to their
respective Hill equations (equations  and ). For each input, average fluorescence values from
biological triplicates (collected on different days) were fit to the
appropriate form of the Hill equation. Nonlinear least-squares regression
was used to determine values for the Hill coefficient () and dissociation constant (), and to minimize
the error between the fitted and actual values. The fold-change was determined
by dividing the background subtracted YFP fluorescence values for
cells containing the reporter plasmid alone (P-pTF-reporter)
by that of cells containing both the reporter and the transcription
factor (either P-constitutive TF, P-TRE-tight/TF, or P-PhlF/TF) encoding plasmids, in the
case of the repressors (where both transfections contained plasmids
P-constitutive-Gal4-VP16 and P-constitutive-eBFP). For the activators,
fold-change was calculated by taking the inverse of the equation used
to calculate the fold-change for the repressors (where both transfections
contained the P-constitutive-eBFP plasmid). Images were taken using an EVOS
Digital inverted microscope (containing a 3MP color digital camera
and LCD display). The excitation and emission wavelengths to obtain
fluorescent images were as follows: 357 nm excitation 447 nm emission
for eBFP, and 500 nm excitation 542 nm emission for eYFP. Images were
taken at a 10× objective..