Synthetic biology includes a
concerted effort to formalize an engineering discipline suitable for
the design and implementation of novel biological systems. Analogies to well-established fields such as mechanical or electrical
engineering are often drawn, but it has also been noted that biology presents a number of particular
challenges for engineering applications: the biological environment
is noisy, our understanding of cellular dynamics is imperfect, and
our tools for creating and manipulating biological systems are limited
and still under active development. Engineering in a cell is currently,
and perhaps in some ways fundamentally, more difficult than engineering
in steel or silicon. One advantage offered by the advanced state
of development in other
branches of engineering is the ability to tune the way individual
components respond to their inputs. Let us introduce the generic idea
of a process: a system that accepts an input (mechanical force, electrical
current, or biomolecular concentration) and responds dynamically by
changing its output (bending, current flow, or concentration of another
biomolecule) at some predictable rate. We will refer to the relationship
between the input to a process and the rate at which the process changes
its output as a response curve: a mapping from input levels to output
rates of change. Mechanical and electrical engineering projects have
an extensive ability to tune these response curves: a girder can flex
at a desired rate or resonate at a desired frequency; a circuit element
can slew its current or voltage output rapidly or gradually. This
tunability allows engineers the powerful abilities to design individual
components with desired behaviors and to integrate multiple components
by ensuring that inputs and outputs match across different processes. Synthetic biology will require these same tuning capabilities,
for the same reasons: if we are to build complex systems in biology,
we must be able to tune both the internal dynamics of individual systems
and to match the output/input levels of connected systems. A growing
library of experimental work has demonstrated the ability to tune
biological response curves, and here we will review a number of approaches
that have been implemented  in a variety of
biological contexts. After an introduction to the mathematical description
of response curves, we will group our discussion into sections on
transcriptional, post-transcriptional, and post-translational levels
of regulation. It is a positive sign for the future progress of synthetic
biology that there are now so many publications on this topic, but
it also means that we cannot claim that this review is exhaustive. Response
Curves: Models and Mechanisms We begin by establishing a
mathematical notation to be used throughout
the remainder of the review. Because tuning can take many forms, we
want our description to be as broadly applicable as possible. We confine
ourselves to population-averaged quantities, without addressing the
range of single-cell distributions that can generate a given population-level
response. Average rates of response in a biochemical system can often
be represented by curves that rise steadily from a minimum rate to
asymptotically approach some maximum rate as the input is increased
(for activating inputs), or fall steadily from a maximum to a minimum
rate (for repressing inputs) (see Figure A).
Nonlinear, monotonically increasing curves of this general type can
describe Michaelis-Menten kinetics for enzyme-catalyzed reactions,
the rate of transcription from a promoter as a function of an activating
or repressing transcription factor protein, and a variety of other
examples. The frequent appearance of these saturating response curves
in biology arises because many  biochemical
reactions are rate-limited by the concentration of some conserved
macromolecule (such as DNA or an enzyme). The specific shapes of these
curves are governed by the details of individual systems, and parameter
changes lead to a range of alterations (see Figures B–G). We will focus on biological processes whose
response curves can
be described (or well approximated) by a single first order differential
equation of the formwhere  and  are the input and output of the process, respectively,
and () defines the response curve.
Strictly speaking, such equations arise only from elementary chemical
reactions or from multistep reaction systems where a strong separation
of time-scales yields a single rate-limiting step. In many situations,
however, it is possible to approximate more complex systems with simplified
first-order systems, often informed by empirical observations of the
system in question; this approach finds common use, and we will adopt
it here. The Hill function provides a
semiempirical approach
capable of capturing the class of response curves of interest. The
function describes the average fraction of binding sites (of some
biomacromolecule, say) occupied by an input ligand, as a function
of unbound ligand concentration, :with the parameters  and  described below. It has a sigmoidal shape,
ranging between
0 and 1 as  increases; the approach to 1 represents
saturation, where binding sites are nearly fully occupied at all times. The  parameter (the Hill constant) is related
to the dissociation constant between the ligand and the macromolecule:
it is equal to the ligand concentration for which half of all the
possible binding sites become occupied. It therefore also serves as
a rough indicator of the level of ligand concentrations needed to
induce saturation ( ≫ ). In some cases, if a macromolecule is already bound by a ligand,
the binding affinity of subsequent ligands to that macromolecule becomes
enhanced or reduced; this is known as cooperative binding, quantified
in the Hill function by  (the Hill coefficient).  = 1 indicates a noncooperative reaction;  > 1 indicates cooperativity, where affinity increases in the
presence
of previously bound ligands; and 0 <  < 1
indicates negative cooperativity, where affinity is reduced. The larger
the value of , the steeper the slope of the Hill
function. Synthetic biologists often take advantage of time-scale
separations
or leverage longer time-scales of interest to model multistep processes
as single-step events using an empirically parametrized Hill function.
The modeling of gene expression that is transcriptionally or translationally
activated or repressed by an input signal (see Figure ) commonly follows this practice, since the shape of the Hill
function has been shown to agree well with experimental evidence. In such cases, the rate of change of protein
concentration may be described by combining basal (unregulated) gene
production with a Hill function term used to describe the up- or down-regulation
of gene expression by a regulatory species. For activation, the expression
rate increases by an additional amount proportional to θ (where  is the concentration of the regulatory species), such
that the rate of new protein production may be described bywhere  is
the concentration of the protein being expressed, ′ is the basal rate of production,  is the
maximum additional production rate arising from up-regulation, and
the bracketed term is an increasing sigmoidal Hill function. Repression,
on the other hand, may be modeled by replacing the regulated production
term with (1 – θ) such thatHere, ′
+  is the basal (unregulated) expression rate, ′ accounts for the fact that complete repression
may not be possible, and the bracketed term is a decreasing sigmoidal
Hill function. This type of description greatly
abstracts the realities of biological
processes: in addition to combining multistep processes such as gene
expression into a single step, it neglects fluctuations, assuming
instead that a population-averaged view will be sufficient for at
least any initial design work. In cases where these realities cannot
be neglected, these simplifications will need to be reconsidered. Rates of change tend to be difficult to measure experimentally.
Consequently, reports of steady-state input-output (or “dose-response”)
functions are seen in literature far more often than the rate response
curves we describe above. Fortunately, it is possible to interconvert
the two if the ancillary processes contributing to steady state are
well-known. Consider a biochemical process described by eq , where the output  represents
the concentration of a protein whose production rate is given by the
response curve (). The total intracellular
protein concentration, , depends both
on the protein’s rate of production and its rate of removal;
in the simplest case, this can be represented by a linear degradation
term in the rate equation for :where  is a
first-order rate constant. Setting eq  to zero,
we can easily extract the steady-state relationship for total intracellular  as a function of constant-valued :  = ()/ (the ss subscript denotes
steady-state). This is simply the original process’s rate function
scaled by , implying that both the production
rate and steady-state response curves share the same characteristic
shape governed by the same biological parameters. More generally,
the degradation rate can be nonlinear, but it remains possible to
extract the () rate response curve. There are several motivations for tuning response curves in synthetic
biology design work. When creating an analog control system, the nature of the response curve is critical in determining the
feedback properties of the controller. More generally, the intersections
and slopes of response curves determine the locations and stability
properties of steady states, and controlling steady-state positions
is required for virtually any multicomponent engineered system; this
includes digital logic systems, where steady states determine the
values and degree of separation of the digital ON and OFF states. Basic ways in which to transform the shape of sigmoidal response
curves. Dark curves are reference curves; light curves are altered
curves. Also shown is a Hill function representation for each of the
curves; parameters responsible for each of the transformations are
bolded. Note that these transformations are not linearly independent.
In order to affect only the leakage level in panel E, ′ and  must be tuned in opposite directions
such that their sum remains constant. Experimental methods for achieving
these transformations are discussed in the main text. Simplified view of the biochemical mechanisms behind regulated
transcription and their relation to tuning the rate response curve
for gene expression. The input and output signals are the molecular
concentrations of a transcription factor protein (TF) and an expressed
protein, respectively. RNAP = RNA polymerase, O = operator site (TF
binding sequence), TATA = RNAP binding sequence (TATA box in eukaryotes
and archaea, −10 and −35 consensus sequences in bacteria),
RBS = ribosome binding site. (Top) Transcriptional activation where
the promoter-bound TFs promote the recruitment of RNAPs, increasing
the probability per unit time that a RNAP will bind. Tuning parameters
are in reference to eq . (Bottom) Transcriptional
repression  steric inhibition, wherein one or
more TFs physically block RNAP binding to the promoter or impede its
progress along the template DNA strand (the latter case is illustrated
here). Tuning parameters are in reference to eq . In general, mechanisms for both activation and repression vary and can involve more complex actions including
altering DNA secondary structure and recruiting additional coregulator
proteins; in eukaryotes, RNAP binding is mediated by a suite of accessory
proteins. Let us examine how each of the transformation
types depicted in Figure  relates in principle
to the Hill function description and to underlying biomolecular interactions.
To make the discussion more concrete, we will continue to use transcriptionally
regulated gene expression (Figure ) as a running
example; any tuning mechanisms mentioned in this context will be further
expanded upon in the next section. Recall that for this particular
process, the input and output signals are molecular concentrations
of the transcription factor (TF) protein and the expressed protein,
respectively. In Figure B, the response curves are scaled vertically, amounting to multiplication
of the function () (, equal scaling of ′ and  in our Hill function representation). Most directly, this is done
by creating multiple replicates of the entire process. For the gene
expression example, this is analogous to changing the promoter-gene
copy number. Alternatively, altering translational efficiency by modifying
the RBS strength or through codon optimization would also vertically
scale the response curve. Figure C
shows the response curve shifting vertically, corresponding to a change
in ′ alone. This could be achieved by introducing
or tuning a constitutive source of  output (, one that is not regulated by the input signal ). In the gene expression example, such an output source
would amount to gene transcription from a constitutive promoter, supplementing
transcription from the -regulated promoter. Figure D
shows a transformation type that we have termed vertical extension,
where the curve is scaled vertically but with the low end level fixed.
Such a transformation would result from changing  alone. If gene expression were up-regulated by an activating TF,
presumably one whose binding helped to recruit RNA polymerase (RNAP),
then this could be achieved by tuning the activation potency of each
bound TF protein, , changing the probability
per unit time that an RNAP will bind per bound TF. For down-regulated
expression, we are not aware of any single-step method of transforming
the response curve in this manner without also affecting the final
leakage level; such tuning would likely require combining other transformations.
For example, in the special case where ′
= 0, vertical extension becomes identical to vertical scaling, and
a supplementary vertical shift could be used to adjust the baseline
level to a nonzero value. We refer to the low-end
level of the response
curves as the output leakage level. It represents the portion of the
process that is always activated in the up-regulating case, and the
portion that cannot be repressed in the down-regulating case. Tuning
this level without affecting the high-end saturation level (Figure E) is equivalent to tuning both ′ and , while keeping their sum ′ +  constant. For down-regulated
gene expression, this would amount to varying the repression strength
of each bound TF protein. In the up-regulated case, we are not aware
of a direct method to produce such tuning; achieving the effect would
likely require combining other transformations. Horizontal scaling, illustrated
in Figure F, results from tuning of the Hill
constant  (increasing  scales
the curve to the right), which is related to the effective binding
affinity of the input signal to the process. For transcriptionally
regulated gene expression, this corresponds to tuning the binding
affinity of the TF to the promoter. Changes
in curve steepness are shown in Figure G and
result from tuning the Hill coefficient  (increasing  leading to increasing steepness).
Having a steep or switch-like steady-state response curve is often
referred to as having ultrasensitivity in a biochemical process. Biochemically, changing steepness requires adjusting the effective
binding cooperativity. For transcriptionally regulated gene expression,
this implies the cooperative binding of multiple TFs to the same promoter
(or another biochemical process that mimics this effect). Often times, published experimental results
report only values at the extremes of a biological response curve
(uninduced and fully saturated induction) or in some instances just
the ratios of the saturated levels in the form of “fold increases”.
In such cases, the precise nature of the tuning can be ambiguous.
Where possible, we speculate on plausible tuning effects for the full
response curve; however, if this is not possible, we simply refer
to the observed tuning as a change in the response curve’s “dynamic
range”, which in reality can be achieved in many ways, particularly
through vertical scaling, vertical extension, leakage tuning, or combinations
thereof. Note that all of the above descriptions assume that
the output is not subject to biological limitations beyond those imposed
by the input signal itself, but if this is not the case, it could
change the nature of the apparent tuning. As an example, the output
of an activated process could hit an absolute maximum rate for the
cell, perhaps because of limitations in the availability of a substrate
(, nucleotides or amino acids) or a facilitating
enzyme shared among other processes (, polymerases
or ribosomes). In this case, changes that would normally result in
vertical shifting could manifest instead as leakage, as the high end
of the curve ran into the upper limit of attainable rates while the
low end continued to shift up and down. We assume in what follows
that such global saturation is not at work in the systems discussed,
but the possibility should be recognized. We now survey some specific examples of response
curve tuning from
the experimental literature, grouped by the biological levels at which
they operate: at the transcriptional level, through post-transcriptional
effects, or at the post-translational level. All input and output
values will refer to molecular concentrations and rates of concentration
change, respectively, unless otherwise noted. Note that while the
curves in Figure  provide a useful framework
for discussing types of tuning, experimental results are of course
rarely so clean. Beyond the inevitable experimental noise, it is often
the case that secondary biochemical effects lead to secondary tuning
effects. The stability of DNA, the wide array
of molecular biology techniques available for its manipulation, and
the generally modular structure of an operon have combined to make
transcriptional regulation a natural first target in the development
of synthetic biology. Methods for controlling and tuning gene expression  transcription act predominantly through mutations to
operons and transcription factors (TFs); most often, process inputs
in this section will be TF concentrations. Consider an operon consisting
of a gene under the control of a TF-regulated promoter. The expression
response curve for the gene could be  upward by introducing additional copies of the gene under the control
of a constitutive (unregulated) promoter, as this would contribute
a flat baseline expression rate. On the other hand, increasing the
copy number of the full operon would act as a multiplier for the rate
at which mRNA is produced and therefore translated, leading to  of the original expression response curve.
This can be accomplished by inserting multiple repeats of an operon
into the genome or by carrying the operon
on plasmids, where copy number is variable. Plasmid copy number is
typically controlled by changing the plasmid’s origin of replication,
although Chen () showed that the copy number of widely used 2-μm-based plasmids
inserted into yeast can be increased by decreasing the output and
stability of a selective marker gene produced by that plasmid. A library
of plasmids combining these two effects exhibited up to a 3-fold increase
of a constitutively expressed reporter gene from the same plasmid,
indicating an increase in copy number. A recent study by Block () has demonstrated that
the proximity of the output protein operon or the TF expressing operon
to the origin of replication of a bacterial chromosome can  or affect the  level, respectively,
of the corresponding expression response curve; see Figure A. In a related study, Bikard () shuffled the order of genes in a polycistronic
operon encoding tryptophan production to increase the  between saturated expression levels as high as 11-fold
over the native arrangement. These efforts demonstrate that tuning
is possible solely by controlling genetic context. Examples of experimental
tuning curves for transcriptional regulation.
(A) Vertical scaling (left) and leakage tuning (right) on log-scale
plots, both achieved by varying the position of a promoter relative
to a bacterial genome’s origin of replication. The gray and green curves represent operons nearest and
furthest from the origin of replication, respectively. Image used
by permission of Oxford University Press. (B) Tuning of steepness
and leakage, by varying the position of operator sites relative to
the TATA box. Copyright 2007 National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. Regulating
gene expression by
controlling the promoter region of an operon dominated early work
in genetic control and remains a primary technique today. Promoters
are modular genetic units that often function across entire kingdoms,
and the wide range of well-known native and synthetically designed
promoters across a variety of species offers choices for expression
ranges; the Registry of Standard Biological Parts () provides a convenient catalog of available and pretested options.
Promoters are increasingly being characterized under similar genetic
conditions for comparisons of strength. While earlier
studies developed our understanding of the nucleotide architecture
of promoters and the correlated mechanisms by which promoters function
(reviewed in refs () and ()), many recent
investigations have focused on the tunable nature of this relationship.
Particular targets for tuning have been the binding strengths of communal
proteins that make up the general transcriptional machinery (, RNAP and sigma factors), which we focus on first,
and the binding strengths and activities of TFs, which we cover in
the subsequent section on operator site modification. The binding
sites for the RNAPs, the TATA box for eukaryotes, and
the −10 and −35 hexameric upstream regions in prokaryotes,
are a set of consensus sequences that vary across the kingdoms in
which they are found. An example of the sequence dependence of the
binding strength was demonstrated by Eandwar , who showed that mutations of the binding
region of the T7 promoter, targeted by the T7 RNAP (originally from
T7 bacteriophage but used widely as a heterologous RNAP in bacteria
and eukaryotes), reduced the binding affinity 2- to 3-fold. In principle,
this would  outward the T7 RNAP vs
expression response curve and  downward
any TF vs expression response curve. The precision with which this
is possible has been aided by more recent efforts to create libraries
of TATA box and hexameric sequence mutations. Since the discovery of the consensus sequences,
mutations in the
surrounding regions have also been known to influence the output of
gene expression, with  of the expression response curve over as much as 3–4 orders
of magnitude. Upstream sequence
(UP-element) interactions with the C-terminal
domains of the RNAP have also become a target for controlling gene
expression. A recent study by Rhodius () determined the upstream
contributions to promoter strength using a library of 60 mutated promoters.
This library included mutations distal to the −35 hexamer,
as far as −65 bp upstream. Different mutations of the UP-elements
led to , achieving 2-fold increases and
4-fold decreases in gene expression. These findings were then modeled
along with mutations in the core promoter regions to include all the
DNA elements that contribute to promoter strength. In a study of over
2,800 constructs in yeast, Gertz () assembled a library of enhancers with random
combinations of operator sites upstream from a promoter, offering
a finely tuned range of basal expression. Modifying the sequence,
number, or position of operator sites within a promoter are common
tuning techniques in synthetic biology. Since sequence modification
will likely affect TF-promoter binding affinity,  of the TF vs expression response curve can be expected.
Adding multiple copies of an operator site will permit multiple TFs
to bind to a single promoter and may therefore increase maximal activation
or repression levels, leading to upward  or less , respectively. It should also result
in outward , since the number of potential
TF binding locations is greater, thereby requiring a higher TF concentration
to reach binding saturation. Furthermore, if TF binding to adjacent
operator sites is cooperative, then response curve  would also be affected. Finally, we would expect operator site location
to affect the ability of a TF to recruit or hinder the binding of
RNAPs, therefore leading to changes in  or , respectively. In practice, however, tuning
results are rarely so straightforward. Moving operator site position,
for example, could lead to significant changes in the secondary structure
of the DNA, TF binding notwithstanding, and therefore lead to additional  effects. Murphy () (and an early study by Heins () that did not report
full response curves) used operator site modification in , varying the number of operator sites binding
the TF repressor TetR, and their proximity to the TATA box, to obtain
a variety of expression response curves with differences in , , and most prominently,  levels (ranging from approximately 0.2% to 35% of
the unrepressed output). A sampling of these observed curves is shown
in Figure B. The experimental response was
measured as a function of the chemical inducer anhydrotetracycline
(aTc), which acts to reduce the binding of constitutively expressed
TetR to the operator site(s), and the curves thus show activation
as a function of increasing aTc; if measurements were taken while
varying the concentration of TetR directly, we would expect a decreasing
response curve representing repression. With regards to TF effectiveness,
many operator sites show optimal
proximities from the RNAP binding sites. For repressors, the mechanism by which the TF prevents the binding
of the polymerase to the DNA likely determines the influence of operator
position. A recent study by Garcia () has suggested that the mechanism of repression
by the Lac repressor is different for operator positions centered
at −60 vs +11, resulting in differences in . Libraries of operator site and TF mutants are also increasing
in
number. These typically target the binding affinities of the operator-TF
pairs and are similar in their goals and methods to promoter libraries. Milk () combined a library of mutations in the Lac repressor at
three residues known to interact with the operator, with a library
of symmetric mutations in the Lac operator at bases 5 to 7, to produce
a range of repression options spanning a 35-fold difference in . Maity () found that single-nucleotide changes to  O, the primary operator of the  TF repressor LacI, led to changes of up to 6- and 12-fold in repressed
and nonrepressed expression levels, respectively, indicating a  at work. While the tuning approaches discussed
thus far focus on regulating transcription initiation (RNAP binding),
progress has also been made concerning the regulation of promoter
escape: the ability of the transcriptional complex to dissociate itself
from the promoter and allow elongation of the full transcript, the
failure of which leads to abortive transcripts. The 20-nucleotide
sequence directly downstream of the transcription start site can have
a dramatic influence on the efficiency of promoter escape. Kammerer () showed that the bacteriophage
T5 N25 promoter and its derivative, the N25 antipromoter, exhibit
very different rates of promoter escape (roughly 1.7 and 0.6 min, respectively) and ratios of abortive to productive
transcripts (40 and 300, respectively), despite differing only in
the initial portion of their transcribed sequences (+3 to +20). Chander () demonstrated finer tuning
using individual mutations to the 20-nucleotide sequence. These changes
should in principle introduce a  of the
expression response curve. Using a library of 43 variants and
a highly abortive promoter, Hsu () demonstrated a 25-fold range of promoter escape
efficiency , resulting in an mRNA increase
ranging from 5% to 150% above the native level, and  of the rate of gene expression. Manipulation of promoter
escape efficiency has since been demonstrated  in , suggesting
a key gene expression tuning approach for operons where promoter escape
is rate limiting. Modular Transcription Factor Domains Typical eukaryotic
TFs have a modular structure comprising two to three domains: a DNA binding domain (DBD), a -activating or -silencing domain (TAD, TSD),
and an optional signal-sensing domain (SSD) that affects TF activity
primarily by modulating the DBD binding affinity for its cognate DNA
operator sequence in a signal-dependent manner. Modularity is conferred
by the fact that these domains typically function independently, allowing
for the creation of chimeric TFs through domain mixing with tuning implications that vary with the domains involved (see
below). Signal-sensor domains (SSDs)
that respond to exogenous stimuli (, small molecules,
light, ) permit externally inducible control
over effective TF-promoter binding affinity. In principle, this leads
to  of the expression response curve
that corresponds to TF concentration as the process input (and not
the exogenous signal). To date, a wide variety of eukaryotic TFs have
been created by co-opting inducible DNA binding proteins from bacteria
(see ref () for many
examples) and inserting their cognate operator sites into minimal
promoters. -Activator
and -Silencer
Domains For an activating TF, functionality can also be adjusted
by varying the type and/or number of -activator
domains (TADs). Since TADs recruit transcriptional machinery through
direct binding interactions with coactivator proteins, varying these
domains changes the activation potential of each individual TF, thereby
in principle achieving  (adjusting
the high-end saturation limit of the activation response curve). Although
the potent  VP16 TAD is most commonly used, graded regulation has been demonstrated by
fusing tandem repeats of VP16-derived minimal domains (, the quad-repeating VP64 TAD) and other TADs such as human NF-κB-derived
p65 and human-derived E2F4. If cognate operator sites are
cloned downstream of a constitutive promoter, a DBD alone can function
as a transcriptional repressor through steric RNAP hindrance, although
the repression potential can often be increased by fusing a -silencer domain (TSD) such as yeast-derived Ume6 or
human -derived KRAB. TSDs typically recruit corepressor and subsequently histone proteins
that alter DNA accessibility. In principle, the use and variation
of TSDs would vary the  level in the expression
response curve. While
importing heterologous
TFs into a system of interest has been a productive strategy, there
are limits to both how many such TFs are currently available and the
degree of orthogonality achievable between them. These limitations
have inspired the creation of synthetic TFs, constructed by fusing
together TADs with protein domains engineered to bind particular DNA
sequences with high specificity. These synthetic TFs have introduced
the ability to activate gene expression in eukaryotes without the
need for either native or heterologous promoter-TF pairs. Transcription
activator-like effectors (TALEs), first discovered in the  genus, have recently become an important focus
of the synthetic TF field. TALEs comprise tandem repeats of small
33–35 amino acid domains, each of which recognizes and binds
a single nucleotide. Covalent linkage of these domains into engineered
arrays allows for the highly specific recognition and targeting of
longer, user-specified nucleotide sequences. In a recent study targeting regions in a DNase I hypersensitive
site in human HEK293T cells, Maeder () created TALEs with varying numbers of domain
repeats, allowing them to incrementally tune the  of expression between 5.3- to 114-fold. In addition, fusion to two
distinct TADs, p65 and VP64, were compared. The VP64 construct yielded
consistently higher expression, which we speculate is a result of  the response curve. In another
study, Perez-Pinera () engineered several TALEs (using the VP64 TAD)
to target various upstream regions within four endogenous gene promoters
(distributed within 600 bp of the transcription start site) in human
HEK293T cells. They observed modest transcriptional activation when
using individual TALEs, but considerable synergistic activation effects
for three of the four genes when expressing certain combinations of
TALEs, with increases in mRNA abundance spanning a striking 4 orders
of magnitude. By systematically varying these combinations, output
gene expression levels were tunable over a 500-fold range (here TALEs
were constitutively expressed from a common promoter, and therefore
full TALE vs expression response curves were not reported since TALE
concentrations were not titrated). Similar in concept to TALEs,
eukaryotic zinc fingers (ZFs) are
small (∼30 amino acid) modular domains that bind to 3 bp DNA
regions with engineerable sequence specificity and can be linked into
multifinger arrays that recognize longer sequences. In recent work, Khalil () used the OPEN platform to construct an artificial library of specific and orthogonal ZF
array-promoter pairs, in particular, three-finger arrays that bind
to cognate 9-bp operators. They then fused the arrays to a minimal
VP16 TAD to create a library of synthetic TFs (ZF-TFs) that activated
expression with  ranging from 1.3- to 6-fold
and then showed that key TF properties could be rationally and independently
adjusted to further tune transcriptional output. First, they multimerized
ZF-binding operator sites in order to recruit greater numbers of ZF-TFs.
For promoters harboring one, two, and eight tandem operators, corresponding
increases in maximal expression were observed (indicating a possible
increase in , although full response
curves were not presented); interestingly, a less-obvious decrease
in  was also seen. They then performed structure-guided
mutation of the ZF array backbone (, outside
the DNA recognition helices) to decrease its DNA-binding affinity,
presumably implying outward  of the
expression response curve. Decreased expression levels were indeed
seen as the number of mutated residues increased from one to four.
Finally, they tested configurations in which two different ZF-TFs
could dimerize  the addition of modular PDZ protein–protein
interaction domains from metazoan cells. In this case, expression
from a single promoter containing the two corresponding operator sites
was shown to be synergistic in nature when both ZF-TF types were present,
with increased  due to the interaction. In a recent study, Lohmueller () fused various leucine zipper (LZ) homodimerization
domains to ZF-TFs and found that these added domains improved activation
and repression up to 2.5- and 7.5-fold, respectively, using a human
c-Jun LZ (dimerization  = 448 μM)
and up to 10-fold and 8-fold, respectively, using a stronger homodimerizing
yeast GCN4 LZ ( = 8 nM). This corresponds
to  tuning in the activating case and  tuning in the repressive case. RNAPs that are orthogonal
to native promoters offer an alternative to activating TFs. Orthogonality
permits varied concentrations within a cell without compromising native
cell function and therefore varied rates of transcription exclusively
from cognate (RNAP-specific) promoters. Temme () developed a set of four orthogonal
variants of the heterologous T7 RNAP along with cognate polymerase-specific
promoters for use in . Similar to swapping
TF-promoter pairs, these T7 RNAP variants could be interchanged to
alter the expression response curve, albeit coarsely and unsystematically
(published results show varying output levels at saturating T7 RNAP
concentrations, corresponding to varying  or , but omit full response curves); some
finer tuning, however, was achieved  mutagenesis
to a 5-bp strength-determining region of the promoter. Nuclear
Localization and Export Sequences In eukaryotic
cells, genetic material and transcriptional machinery is contained
in the nucleus, segregated from translational and metabolic machinery
in the cytoplasm. The bidirectional translocation of TFs through the
nuclear envelope ( nuclear pore complexes) facilitates
another layer of transcriptional regulation, as transfer rates vary
among different proteins and in some cases for the same protein depending
on its state of post-translational modification (, phosphorylation state). While macromolecules smaller than ∼40
kDa can passively diffuse through these pores, most proteins with
intranuclear function undergo active but selective transport mediated
by nuclear import and export receptors that recognize and bind to
certain short amino acid nuclear localization sequences (NLSs) and
nuclear export sequences (NESs), respectively. Sequence variation generates different binding affinities, which
correlate to protein import and export rates and therefore nuclear
concentration. By fusing different NLSs
and (in some cases) NESs to the termini of proteins, researchers have
shown the ability to adjust the ratio of  steady-state
nuclear to cytoplasmic accumulation over a wide range in different
eukaryotic cells including yeast. Furthermore, variants
of so-called classical NLSs have been generated with quantified binding
affinities to Importin (the import receptor protein) ranging over
several orders of magnitude. Within our Hill function
representation of gene expression, increasing the ratio of nuclear
to cytoplasmic TF by some factor would be equivalent to decreasing
the Hill constant, , by the same factor (where the
input  remains representative of total nuclear-plus-cytoplasmic
TF concentration), thereby  the expression
response curve. Nuclesome-Disfavoring Sequences Recently, the use of
nuclesome-disfavoring sequences has emerged as a promising tuning
technique in eukaryotes. TF-promoter binding is regulated by nucleosomes,
segments of DNA wrapped around histone proteins that are the fundamental
repeating unit of chromatin structure, that restrict access to potential
operator sites. In a recent study, Raveh-Sadka () tuned transcription activation in yeast
by targeting local nucleosome organization, accomplished by the insertion
of poly(dA:dT) tracts (homopolymeric stretches of deoxyadenosine nucleotides,
highly prevalent in natural eukaryotic promoters and known to disfavor
nucleosome formation) into a specific promoter. Rational fine-tuning
was demonstrated by systematically varying the length, composition
(, purity), and relative distance from the activating
TF operator site of the inserted poly(dA:dT) tract. Manipulating these
tracts affects TF access to its cognate operator site, which in principle
results in modulation of the average TF to DNA binding affinity and,
therefore,  of the expression response
curve. There are two standout benefits of this technique: First, it
offers much finer control over gene expression than possible even
with singular point mutations to the TF operator site. Second, it
works around the problem of limited orthogonal TFs; for example, poly(dA:dT)
tracts can generate a multiplicity of responses from different promoters
using the same common TF. Expression control at the translational
level represents a promising alternative to the control of transcription
initiation. mRNA transcripts are often targeted by RNA-based regulators
on the basis of Watson-Crick base pairing. This has enabled researchers
to design and tune novel regulators using model-based techniques,
permitting a systematic engineering approach not yet available for
the protein effectors used in transcriptional control. In this section,
we present methods to tune constitutive translation rates (modifying
ribosome binding sites (RBSs), codons, and mRNA degradation rates)
and translation rates that are inducible by noncoding RNA or other
small molecule effectors (riboregulators, aptamers, and RNA interference
(RNAi)). For a general review of natural RNA-based regulatory devices,
see ref (); the engineering
and current diversity of synthetic devices are reviewed in refs () and (), respectively. Ribosome
Binding Site Modifications Modifying the RBS
on an mRNA transcript alters the efficiency of translation initiation,
thereby in principle  the overall expression
response curve. Currently, the RBS is one of the most attractive options
for tuning because its strength can be, in large part, forward-engineered
using model-based design. Citing the previous work of others as their
foundation, Salis () developed a predictive method for designing synthetic RBSs for any
gene of interest based on statistical thermodynamic modeling. Experimental
validation of over 100 predictions in  showed
the method’s predictive accuracy to be within a factor of 2.3
over an impressive 5 orders of magnitude of translational efficiency. In addition to modifying the RBS,
the ribosome itself can be modified such that it becomes orthogonal
to wild-type translation, recognizing instead synthetic RBSs. By modifying internal segments of the orthogonal ribosome’s
rRNA,  of translation can be achieved. Through a combination of computational design
and experimental measurement, Chubiz and Rao demonstrated that orthogonal ribosomes could display apparent  by varying the sequence of the 16S rRNA.
They further demonstrated tuning of dose-responses to inducers of
either rRNA or cognate orthogonal ribosome mRNA, achieving  and  tuning. While AUG
is the most commonly
used start codon in most species, translation can also be initiated
from alternative start codons that differ in efficacy and differ between
species. In , for example, varying start codon
usage can  an expression response curve,
both up and down relative to the standard AUG start codon. Similar possibilities exist in eukaryotes wherein
start condons seem to be especially sensitive to genetic context.
For example, the presence and length of flanking polyU or polyA sequences
can induce translation initiation from yeast non-AUG codons such as
UUG, ACU, and ACG that otherwise exhibit almost no translational activity. Context sensitivity is also a property of prokaryote
start codons, where  can arise from flanking
polyA/U sequences, nearby stem-loops, and variations in the proximity
and strength of the RBS. In synonymous codon optimization,
the triplet RNA sequences coding for amino acids are replaced with
alternative triplets coding for the same residue. Organisms display
kinetic preference for certain codons sequences, and codon replacements
can significantly affect the efficiency of translation elongation,
thereby altering translation rates and total gene expression levels. Welch () devised a partial least-squares based model
to correlate synonymous codon choices for a particular gene with its
observed expression level in . (Interestingly,
the codon choices that maximized expression were not necessarily those
most commonly found in native  transcripts.)
Combining this model with a genetic algorithm allowed for the generation
of synthetic transcript sequences that produced precalculated expression
levels. In principle, codon optimization allows for  of a gene expression response curve, under the assumption
that codon mutations do not interact with other control elements. A riboregulator is an RNA sequence that
responds to the Watson-Crick (sense-antisense) base pairing of a signaling
nucleic acid molecule, commonly for the purpose of regulating translation.
Isaacs () introduced
a short DNA sequence complementary to and directly upstream from the
RBS, such that the 5′ UTR of resulting mRNA transcripts, referred
to as -repressed mRNA (crRNA), folded naturally
to form a stem-loop structure that sequestered the RBS and inhibited
translation initiation with extremely low  levels
(down to 2% in ). Activation was then achieved
by independently transcribing noncoding RNA, referred to as -activating RNA (taRNA), designed to target and hybridize
to the crRNA, unfold the stem-loop structure, and expose the RBS.
Tweaking sequence complementarities provided limited coarse-tuning
of the taRNA vs expression rate response curve: alterations to the
stem of the crRNA stem-loop structure resulted in modest variations
in  levels, while taRNA truncation and alterations
to the taRNA-crRNA hybridization sequence influenced activation levels,
possibly at least in part a result of  of the response curve, since variations to taRNA-crRNA binding affinity
were observed. Practically speaking, the easiest way to obtain
differing responses using riboregulators is to simply choose from
a set of precharacterized heterogeneous riboregulators; if these riboregulators
are functionally orthogonal, they can be used simultaneously and effectively
within the same cell. Isaacs () produced two orthogonal crRNA-trRNA riboregulator pairs
for  that exhibited 8- and 19-fold repression-to-activation , and this set was later expanded by Callura () to include two additional
orthogonal pairs with ∼70- and ∼200-fold dynamic ranges.
Recently, Mutalik () used a model-guided design approach, involving hybridization free
energy calculations and data clustering algorithms, to forward engineer
new families of five and six mutually orthogonal -repressed riboregulators for  with consistent
and predictable  levels. In the process, riboregulators
with leakage levels ranging from 10% to 95% of the nonrepressed expression
level were isolated. A post-transcriptional
aptamer is a sequence
of nucleotides designed, typically through an  selection process, to bind strongly and specifically to a ligand
of interest. Such sequences are playing
an increasingly prominent role in post-transcriptional control devices:
by serving as allosteric sites built into mRNA transcripts, they enable
coupling between exogenous ligand concentrations and translation rates. Aptamers are normally sourced synthetically:
given a particular ligand of interest, the space of possible nucleotide
sequences is methodically searched  a directed-evolution
procedure known as SELEX (Systematic Evolution of Ligands by EXponential
enrichment). By coupling aptamer technology to -acting
RNA molecules, Bayer and Smolke were
able to engineer several ligand-controlled riboregulator systems,
called antiswitches due to the fact that a ligand-induced conformational
change exposes an antisense sequence (otherwise sequestered by a proximate
complementary sequence) that binds a target mRNA transcript and blocks
its translation. Tuning was demonstrated in  by varying the conformational equilibrium of the -acting RNA itself: lengthening the sequestering sequence or introducing
mismatches between it and the antisense domain increased or decreased,
respectively, the amount of effector ligand required to repress target
mRNA repression. This resulted in  and
changes to the  of the ligand vs expression
response curve; the latter reflecting changes to the fraction of the -acting RNA molecules with their antisense domains
exposed in the absence of ligands. Carothers () created a set of tunable RNA-based
devices capable of delivering
a wide range of gene expression outputs. One set of RNA structures
took the form of ribozymes: RNA structures able to catalyze reactions.
These ribozymes catalyzed 5′ UTR cleavage in target mRNA, leading
to increased mRNA half-life and thus to greater gene expression. A
second set of RNA structures, classified as aptazymes, exhibited similar
UTR-cleavage activity but were also augmented with aptamer sequences
allowing for ligand-sensitive cleavage rates. A sophisticated modeling
approach was used to guide the design process, combining a biochemical
kinetic model with RNA folding simulations. Twenty-eight distinct
RNA systems were constructed and characterized experimentally, with
widely varying gene expression levels suggesting ligand vs expression
response curves with various . Importantly,
the model was successful at predicting the observed experimental results,
and analysis of the model offered direct guidance in the design process
by identifying important steps in the biochemical kinetics and predicting
sequence mutations likely to affect those steps. This highlights the
strong potential for tuning ribozyme/aptazyme devices through systematic,
model-guided design. In antisense
RNA-mediated
transcriptional attenuation, the binding of an antisense RNA to an
“attenuator sequence” in the 5′ UTR of a nascent
mRNA transcript causes it to fold into a configuration that exposes
an intrinsic transcriptional terminator hairpin, resulting in premature
transcription termination. Lucks () designed three such
antisense RNA sequences to function orthogonally in . In a method mirroring the repetition of operator sites in a promoter,
series insertion of an additional identical attenuator sequence into
the 5′ UTR of the target transcript  and
reduced the  level of the antisense vs expression
response curve in a manner agreeing remarkably well with the multiplication
of single attenuator Hill functions (when normalized to 1); see Figure A. This suggests that attenuators in series function
independently, as in the case for engineered tandem ribozyme devices. http://www.nature.com/msb/index.html Examples of experimental tuning curves for post-transcriptional
regulation. (A) Dose-response curves for IPTG-inducible pT181 transcriptional
attenuators. Curves are shown for wild-type (left) and mutant (right)
attenuators designed to function orthogonally. Repression curves for
a single repeat of the attenuator (circles) and for two attenuators
in tandem (squares) are shown; addition of the second attenuator leads
to a decrease in leakage and an increase in steepness. Image from
ref (). Copyright
2011 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
(B) Tuning of horizontal scaling and leakage of shRNA switches  modulation of the 3′ length (left) and 5′
length (right) of the region of complementarity between the competing
strand and the shRNA stem sequence of a hairpin transcript. On each
plot, results are shown for multiple sequence lengths. Image from
ref (). Reprinted
by permission from : , Beisel, , , 224, copyright
2008. The previously mentioned post-transcriptional
strategies affect translation efficiency per mRNA transcript. An alternative
approach to tuning translational rates involves controlling the transcript
concentrations themselves; this would lead to  of the gene expression response. To this end, researchers have developed
targeted methods for manipulating the rate of mRNA degradation. Early work examined factors involved in controlling mRNA stability,
most notably the effect of hairpin secondary structures in the 5′
UTR of the transcript (reviewed in ref ()). By introducing rationally designed hairpins
into  mRNA, Carrier and Keasling were able to influence half-lives over an order-of-magnitude
range. More recently, Babiskin and Smolke developed an RNA device in  enabling
aptamer-mediated transcript cleavage. This was done by inserting into
the 3′ UTR of the transcript of interest a hairpin-shaped formation
amenable to cleavage by the ribonuclease Rnt1p and containing an aptamer
sequence that leads to inhibited cleavage activity when ligand-bound;
in the absence of ligand, Rnt1p cleavage proceeds normally and the
transcript, with its polyA tail removed, is quickly degraded. Babiskin and Smolke employed three
different strategies to tune the monotonically increasing ligand vs
gene expression response curve. Changes to a key region of the hairpin
sequence controlling cleavage efficiency yielded various combinations
of  and  tuning,
typically with only slight . Changes
to another key region of the hairpin controlling ribonuclease binding
affinity and containing the aptamer sequence resulted in more notable , as was expected; in addition, changes
in  and  levels
were again observed, likely resulting from nucleotide modifications
to the hairpin stem that were required for variable aptamer integration.
Finally, positioning multiple hairpin copies (up to three) within
the 3′ UTR resulted in outward  and reduced  levels due to the increase in potential
cleavage targets for Rnt1p. In particular, the expression response
curve’s Hill constant, , increased nearly
additively with hairpin copy number, while the leakage level decrease
was approximately multiplicative (47%, 20%, and 10% for one to three
copies). RNA interference
is the process whereby
small double stranded RNAs (dsRNAs) down-regulate protein expression  either steric hindrance of the ribosome or induced endonuclease
cleavage of the target mRNA. Both of these processes are mediated
by the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), which comprises a number
of interacting proteins, and the single strand from the dsRNA complementary
to the target site. The development of RNA interference as a
therapeutic tool to silence gene expression has spurred the search
for novel and improved pharmaceutical properties for medicinal purposes
(reviewed by Rettig and Behlke). The
potential to introduce synthetic small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) into
cells and tissues has led to a wide-ranging examination of siRNA properties,
particularly their stability under hostile conditions (such as in
blood) and their silencing strength. The search has largely involved
screening based on sequence and target sites and on chemical modifications. Efforts have typically
focused on identifying the strongest and most robustly silencing siRNAs,
but for tuning purposes the range of characteristics across an entire
library is of interest: choosing siRNAs with varying binding affinities
potentially allows one to achieve  of
an siRNA vs gene expression response curve, while choosing those with
varying silencing strengths has the potential to influence . Thus far, a strong focus on finding the strongest silencers has
meant that other library candidates have rarely been characterized;
collecting data on the full range of silencing strengths obtained
from a library would provide valuable tuning information for future
applications. One potential method of delivering siRNAs to human
cells is through
the bloodstream, in which case their serum stability is critical.
Hong () demonstrated
that a large proportion of native siRNAs are serum stable and that
RNA duplexes in serum are cleaved preferentially at two sequence-dependent
dinucleotide sites, which can be avoided during design in order to
improve stability. For siRNAs containing these dinucleotide sites,
even single modifications to the sugar backbone within the sites were
sufficient to significantly increase stability. Varying siRNA serum
stability led to  of the silencing
response to a given dose of siRNA. A study by Patel () compared the potency
across sets of standard siRNA constructs used
to target various sites on single genes essential for cell growth.
Although the general trend was that longer, chemically modified siRNAs
yielded more effective silencing, the specific target sequence also
played a substantial role, leading the authors to suggest that the
length, chemical modification state, and target site sequence should
all be considered as factors in an siRNA’s level of silencing.
Carrying out short-term growth assays showed  over an order of magnitude of siRNA concentrations. Using
an  method for controlling siRNA
concentration, Beisel () described the use of small hairpin RNA (shRNA)-based switches
that respond to chemical induction through an aptameric distal loop
embedded in the hairpin sequence. The hairpin exists in equilibrium
between two conformations, one that is efficiently processed by the
RNAi machinery and another that is not. In the latter, the aptamer
is exposed and binding of a ligand stabilizes this conformation, effectively
preventing the hairpin from forming its active siRNA state. Thus,
higher intracellular ligand concentrations reduce silencing of the
shRNA’s target protein. Aptamers responsive to hypoxanthine,
tetracycline, and theophylline ligands were successfully tested in
human HEK293T cells. Guided by a semiempirical thermodynamic model,
the lengths of the complementary RNA regions in the aptamer-stabilized
shRNA conformations were varied, yielding systematic changes to the
expression response curve, primarily in  and ; see Figure B. In a follow-up study, Beisel () inserted RNA aptamers into the basal stems
of shRNAs, rather than the distal loops. In this system, the shRNA
sequence itself was inserted into the 3′ UTR of a fluorescent
reporter, allowing for direct monitoring of shRNA levels. Interestingly,
the physical size of a mismatched basal bulge was found to correlate
directly with the degree of repression of the shRNA against its target,
suggesting that it provides a steric cue for processing of the hairpin.
This allowed for  tuning through modulation of
the basal bulge size, though the choice of size was limited by the
requirement of efficient aptamer-ligand binding.  was achieved by adding more copies of the shRNA in tandem onto the
3′ UTR of the reporter gene; up to four copies were added,
separated by spacer sequences. Each added copy reduced both uninduced
and fully induced expression levels, consistent with a vertical scaling
effect. Different spacer sequence lengths were also tested, separating
two copies of the shRNA in the 3′ UTR. Increasing the spacer
length was found to decrease  without appreciably
affecting the maximal activity level in this case. Pfleger () describe a method for tuning the relative
expression of multiple genes within an operon using tunable intergenic
regions (TIGRs): intergene nucleotide sequences containing control
elements that include mRNA secondary structures, RNase cleavage sites,
and RBS sequestering sequences. TIGRs are designed for placement between
two genes in a polycistronic operon so that upon transcription, the
RNase cleavage site is cut and two distinct transcripts emerge, each
containing a residual portion of the TIGR sequence (at the 3′
and 5′ ends, respectively) that modulates transcript stability
and translational efficiency. Moreover, large secondary structures
in the TIGR can lead to premature transcription termination, heavily
affecting the transcriptional efficiency of the second gene in the
operon. By assembling and screening large libraries of TIGRs, Pfleger () demonstrated that TIGRs
could vary the relative expression levels of two bicistronic genes
over a 100-fold range (offering in principle  of an expression response curve). Furthermore, they simultaneously
tuned the expression of three genes within an operon encoding a heterologous
mevalonate biosynthetic pathway in  in order
to optimize its output flux. Another recent development is
the use of protein-based systems to implement control at the post-transcriptional
level. Stapleton () described such a system, built around the regulatory protein L7Ae,
that enabled tunable translational repression. Provided that the recognition
sequence for L7Ae (or a variant thereof) is present upstream of the
coding region of interest, the L7Ae protein will sterically block
translation of the downstream sequences. The repression is entirely
translational and does not affect the expression of other cistrons
translated from internal ribosome entry sites (IRESs), nor is it expected
to appreciably modulate the degradation rate of the transcript.  tunability was achieved  an
informed trial-and-error process: the wild-type L7Ae binding sequence
was mutated with the intent of reducing the repressive strength of
the interaction to varying degrees compared to the wild-type interaction.
The authors achieved considerable ,
but the range of experimental results did not make it possible to
determine if they also obtained ; basal
expression remained largely unchanged across all trials. One apparent
advantage of protein-based translational control over RNAi-based strategies
is that the protein-based systems may require relatively less ancillary
machinery thereby reducing the risk of saturating dynamics, whereas
in the case of RNAi, it has been observed that multiple targets or
multiple shRNAs in the same cellular system occasionally saturate
the RNA-induced silencing complex responsible for transcript regulation. Biological devices
that respond by
producing new proteins are forced to operate on long time-scales (minutes
to hours or even days) by the delays inherent in the processes of
transcription and translation. Post-translational systems, involving
protein-protein interactions, can respond much more quickly (fractions
of a second to minutes) to changing inputs. Unfortunately, this increased
speed currently comes at the cost of significantly increased difficulty
in tuning protein function. Transcriptional initiation and much of post-transcriptional processing
are highly modular and accessible through well-established molecular
biology protocols, allowing designers to freely substitute promoters,
coding regions, and untranslated regions while keeping basic functionality
largely unchanged. Proteins, by contrast, function through chemical
interactions that are strongly dependent on their physical structure,
and the complexity of this structure-function relationship makes rational
protein design challenging. These issues mean that there are as yet
fewer examples of tuning available in the post-translational space
than in the previous two levels of regulation. Dose-Responsive Enzymatic
Catalysis Consider a process
describing an enzyme-catalyzed biochemical reaction, where the process
input is the amount of available substrate, and the output response
is the reaction rate. Such a response curve is often described by
well-known Michaelis-Menten kinetics wherein the reaction rate varies
from zero to some saturating value  =  (for effective
enzyme concentration ) as the substrate concentration
increases (see Figure A). In our Hill-function
notation, such a process has ′ = 0,  = , and  = 1. (We offer this function as an example of an enzyme-catalyzed
response curve, but please note that the assumptions underlying the
Michaelis-Menten equation will not apply to all post-translational
systems. Signaling cascades in particular will tend to violate the
assumption that the catalyzing enzyme is present in much lower concentrations
than a target substrate.) Many naturally occurring enzymes change
their catalytic activity as a function of the binding of some intra-
or extracellular ligand. This results in a change in the effective
value of , thereby  the Michaelis-Menten response curve (see the relationship
between Figures A and B). (In this special
case with ′ = 0, this also represents .) Therefore, this can be seen as a form
of response curve tuning, where the tuning strength is dependent on
ligand concentration. Designers needing
to control processes
whose enzyme catalysts do not natively respond to any ligand may benefit
from reengineering of the enzyme itself. Protein switches are enzymes
engineered to have inducible ON and OFF states in terms of their catalytic
activity: the binding of a ligand flips individual proteins between
their active and inactive conformations. This permits the tuning situation
described above, where effective  is
tuned through ligand concentration. In many such systems, the ligand
vs  dose-response curve is also easily
tunable. Additional coverage of protein switches may be found in several
recent reviews. Most strategies for generating protein switches involve fusing
or inserting modular domains into the protein of interest such that
they disrupt or facilitate, either sterically or conformationally,
the activity of the target protein. Examples of inputs for this type
of regulation are small molecules, light, ions, and redox conditions. One important approach is to construct an autoinhibitory
pair of domains that dimerize and inhibit protein activity when no
competitive ligand is present. In the presence of the ligand, the
dimerization is disrupted, allowing the protein to become active (Figure C); we describe two such switches, below. Dueber () controlled
the activity of the actin polymerizing protein N-WASP by fusion of
both an SH3 protein domain and an SH3-binding peptide, such that in
the absence of competing (nonfused) SH3-binding peptides, N-WASP was
autoinhibited and rendered inactive. The dose-response between free
SH3-binding peptides and active N-WASP was showed to be tunable by
controlling modular components such as the number of SH3 domains and
SH3-binding peptides fused to each N-WASP, as well as their binding
affinities. The primary result of doing so was  modulation, as shown in Figure A; however,
steepness was difficult to manipulate independent of secondary changes
to , , and . The autoinhibitory paradigm
was also expanded to include PDZ and GBD interaction domains, which
were subsequently assembled together to regulate N-WASP under the
control of a three-input AND gate operating on fast time-scales. Lu () reported
results on a peptide system in which an autoinhibitory PDZ domain
was fused to a binding domain for SH3 peptides. In the absence of
SH3, the PDZ formed a loop structure, while binding of SH3 to its
domain prevented this autoinhibition, placing the peptide into a loop-free
conformation. The conformation of the system was determined through
fluorescence measurements, with the looped state defined as inactive
and the loop-free state defined as active. Decoy sites, able to bind
SH3 without affecting the activation state of the system, were then
added to the peptide and shown to have an extensive ability to tune
the relationship between the peptide’s activation state and
the level of SH3 present. Use of a single autoinhibitory PDZ pair
resulted in a noncooperative dose-response to free SH3, while varying
the numbers and binding affinities of the decoy domains led to a variety
of dose-responses to SH3, implementing  and  tuning (Figure B). Tuning of enzymatic
reactions. (A) Michaelis-Menten kinetics for
an enzyme-catalyzed reaction: the rate of the reaction → varies with the input concentration of
the substrate, , and with the enzymatic catalyst’s
effective concentration and catalytic efficiency:  = . (B) The relationship between  and
the input ligand can be characterized (and itself tuned): each marked
point, i–iv, on the  vs ligand
concentration curve yields a different response curve shown in panel
A. (C) A protein switch, in which the protein of interest (POI) contains
autoinhibitory domains that bind and inactivate the enzyme’s
catalytic activity, reducing the enzyme’s effective concentration.
The presence of a competitively binding ligand can relieve the inhibition
and restore catalytic activity. http://www.nature.com/nbt/index.html Examples
of experimental tuning curves for post-translational regulation.
(A) Steepness tuning by varying the number and binding affinity of
an autoinhibitory domain in protein switches. Reprinted by permission from : , Dueber , , 660–662, copyright 2007. (B) Steepness
tuning and horizontal scaling by varying the binding affinity of a
decoy domain in a peptide system. Structure rescue is another promising
strategy for tuning enzymatic activity. Allosteric control is engineered
into an enzyme by structurally weakening the enzyme through mutation
to the point that its enzymatic activity is abolished, then identifying
a small molecule able to bind to the mutant protein and restore its
original structure. Average enzymatic activity therefore becomes tunable
through the concentration of the small molecule, providing inducible  of the Michaelis-Menten curve  control over . Deckert () successfully restored β-glycosidase
activity in a W33G mutant by rescue with indole, adopting the approach
that the small molecule inducer should be exactly complementary to
the residue(s) missing in the mutant protein, to achieve structure
rescue. They focused on buried and tightly packed tryptophan residues
that, when mutated to glycine and supplemented with indole, yielded
a protein structure highly similar to the original. The best mutant
was able to fully restore original activity levels in the presence
of sufficient indole and thus was exogenously tunable from effectively
zero activity to its wild-type level. We have focused mainly
on rates of production of biochemical species, but of course one can
also treat degradation as its own process with a response curve (typically
Michaelis-Menten) to be tuned. To this end, a number of techniques
have been developed. One method involves tagging proteins with a short
amino acid recognition sequence to induce degradation by an alternative
set of proteolytic machinery. The ssrA tag, for example, induces degradation
catalyzed by the ClpXP protease system, and control of some combination of the tag sequence variation, the
ClpXP protease level, and the level of SspB (an optional adaptor protein)
has been shown to effectively tune both  () and the Michaelis constant  (). Tunable degradation has also been achieved by adding modular
domains to proteins that promote proteolytic degradation in the presence
(or absence) of a bound ligand. Most such ligands are small molecules,
including Shield ligands, hydrophobic libraries
for Halo-tags, auxin, and trimethoprim (TMP). Proteins, DNA, and RNA have all been used
to construct “scaffolds” that co-localize multiple interacting
molecules by assembling them into a single physical complex, enhancing
interaction rates. In simple cases, this would serve to tune the effective  of a biochemical reaction, providing  for the reaction process. Dueber () built synthetic protein
scaffolds bearing modular SH3, PDZ, and GBD interaction domains that
spatially recruit three metabolic enzymes tagged with cognate peptide
ligands in order to enhance the production of mevalonate and glucaric
acid. Varying the number of interaction domains fused to the scaffold
allowed for optimization of the stoichiometry between the recruited
enzymes, resulting in a 77-fold improvement in mevalonate production,
as well as a 3-fold improvement in glucaric acid production (despite
already high yields). Note that in this study, the relationship between
the scaffold concentration and total product production was nonmonotonic,
rising to a peak at intermediate scaffold concentrations. Although
the variation of the interaction domain stoichiometry resulted in
prominent changes to peak height and location, these response curves
are not captured by the sigmoidal response curves we have focused
on in this review. DNA and RNA molecules can also be used as
scaffolds. For example,
enzymes can be fused to zinc fingers or other programmable DNA-binding
domains and RNA aptamers can be designed to bind
enzymatic partners. Our final sections address topics that diverge from
the issue of
tuning production rates but do bear on the broader problem of systematically
creating biological devices: the use of network structure effects
to tune net steady-state response curves and the creation of consistent,
modular systems. Extending or restructuring
the internal
signaling network of a process can introduce complex and significant
transient dynamics that cannot be accurately described by eq . For example, relatively simple feedforward or feedback
connections can give rise to delayed responses, oscillation, or temporal
adaptation; this implies time-dependent
rate response curves. Although important in many design scenarios,
such behavior is beyond the scope of this review. In this section,
we address only rate response curves for which this behavior is insignificant,
focusing our attention on how network extension has been used to tune
a process’s steady-state response curve. In principle,
network extension is a strategy limited only by the availability of
orthogonal parts that can be tuned into similar ranges of responsiveness;
in terms of a steady-state response, the size of a process’s
internal network structure is irrelevant. Here, however, we review
a few examples where network extension is mainly confined to the addition
of a single component or network node. Linear Cascades: Sensitivity
Tuners A simple example
of network extension is provided in the work of a University of Cambridge
team, who constructed and characterized a set of 15 transcription-based
“sensitivity tuners” in  for
the 2009 iGEM competition. Each tuner
is essentially a phage-derived activating TF-promoter pair designed
to be inserted, in series, between the input and output signals of
a linear transcriptional cascade in order to modify the shape of its
rate response curve. Each tuner was characterized in an otherwise
consistent construct described by  →  → , where → denotes promoter
up-regulation, and , , and  represent chemical inducer, phage activator, and reporter
protein levels, respectively (see Figure A).
Describing the rate response curve as in eq , they found that, across the set of 15 tuners,  varied by an order of magnitude, ′ was
fairly consistent,  depended to a large extent on
the tuner’s activator type (and less on the promoter choice),
and  shifted between values of around 2.25 to 4
(experimental resolution was too small to characterize  with much confidence), leading to , , and , respectively. Another early study by Hooshangi , investigating synthetic transcriptional
cascades comprising one, two, and three repression stages in  (see Figure B), demonstrated
that as cascade length increases the overall steady-state response
curve  (increasing ). http://www.nature.com/msb/index.html Schematics
describing the general biochemical network designs reviewed
in the Network Extension section. (A) A two-promoter construct containing
an interchangeable sensitivity tuner, which comprises the gene for
a transcriptional activator protein and its cognate promoter. Our
schematic has been drawn based on the description provided in ref (). (B) From ref (). Transcriptional cascade
comprising one, two, and three repression stages. Hooshangi , , , 3581–3586. Copyright 2005 National Academy of
Sciences, U.S.A. (C) From ref (). An internal feedback loop is engineered into the yeast
mating MAPK pathway  the downstream expression
of a pathway modulator protein that binds to the Ste5 scaffold protein
through a leucine zipper interaction. Feedback polarity is determined
by the choice of either a positive or negative modulator, which up-
or down-regulates the MAPK cascade, respectively; feedback gain is
tuned by varying promoter strength or varying the leucine zipper domains
to affect binding affinity. From Bashor, , , 2008, , 1539. Adapted with
permission from AAAS. (D) From ref (). Two coupled positive feedback loops are engineered
into a two-component signaling system  downstream
expression of both the transmembrane receptor and intracellular TF
proteins. Adapted by permission from : , Palani , , 7, copyright 2011. (E) From ref (). Two parallel pathways
constitutively repress the expression of an output protein. One pathway
uses a TF repressor to repress transcription, while the other pathway
represses translation using an shRNA to induce RNAi-mediated mRNA
degradation. In the bottom schematic, a single input signal down-regulates
TF and shRNA production thereby up-regulating expression of the output
protein. Adapted from , Deans  A tunable genetic switch based on RNAi and repressor
proteins for regulating gene expression in mammalian cells, 363–372.
Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier. Feedback Loops: Engineered Scaffold Interactions Bashor () engineered feedback
into the yeast mating MAP kinase pathway, a post-translational signal
transduction cascade mediated by the Ste5 scaffold protein, which
co-localizes signaling molecules by assembling them into a single
physical complex, thereby promoting correct pathway connectivity.
An internal feedback loop was generated by expressing a pathway modulator
protein as a downstream product of the signaling pathway and recruiting
it back to the upstream pathway  an artificial
binding site on Ste5 created by fusing cognate leucine zipper interaction
(heterodimerization) modules to the scaffold and modulator proteins
(see Figure C). The system was then
tuned by adjusting the polarity and strength of the feedback signal:
the former by using either a positive or negative modulator protein
and the latter by changing the strength of either the leucine zipper
interaction (using zipper pairs with varying ) or the promoter controlling modulator expression (both to
the same effect). Positive feedback was shown to  (upward) and  (from ∼0.12 to 2.42) the overall network’s steady-state response
curve while negative feedback resulted in  (downward). Furthermore, by having the feedback positive modulator
displace a constitutively expressed negative modulator, response curve  was further increased to ∼2.84. Through the addition of
a pair of coupled positive feedback loops, Palani and Sarkar were able to engineer bistability into a two-component
signaling system (a transmembrane receptor that signals an intracellular
TF  phosphorylation). The switching between stable
fixed points allowed for steady-state response curves with very high ; in some cases, apparent Hill coefficients of  > 20 were achieved. In this network, shown in Figure D, extracellular ligand binding to the transmembrane
receptor activates the intracellular TF; the activated TF then activates
receptor expression (the first positive feedback loop) as well as
its own expression (the second positive feedback loop). Experimental
implementation in  used the transmembrane
receptor CRE1 from  to bind the cytokinin
ligand isopentenyl adenine (IP), and the yeast TF SKN7 as the intracellular
TF. A variety of responses curves to IP induction were obtained by
varying the number of SKN7 operator site repeats in the corresponding
promoters, thus effectively varying the positive feedback strength.
Across five variants of the network,  tuning
with Hill coefficients ranging from ∼2 to
20 was observed accompanied by changes in . Parallel Pathways: Reducing Leakage In cases where
tighter repression of gene expression is desired, synthetic biologists
have had success employing multiple repression mechanisms in parallel.
This has typically involved supplementing TF repression with a post-transcriptional
mechanism such as RNAi-mediated mRNA degradation. Deans , for example, used short-hairpin
RNAs (shRNAs) to induce RNAi mediated degradation and controlled both
shRNA and TF repressor production using the same input signal, as
shown in Figure E. Since both the TF and the
shRNA are constitutively produced in the absence of the input signal,
the presence of the shRNA pathway reduces steady-state expression . Rinauldo () and Xie () employed similar techniques using small-interfering RNA (siRNA)
and microRNA (miRNA), respectively. Sophisticated tuning of
one component in a biological system is of little use if the component’s
behavior is easily disrupted when its cellular context is changed.
It is an ongoing challenge in synthetic biology to create systems
that are  (able to display the same behavior
repeatedly, and in the face of global background variations such as
differing cell strains) and  (maintaining
their behavior when linked with other engineered systems). A variety of phenomena wherein one transcriptional process
suppresses a second transcriptional process are collected under the
label of transcriptional interference. This includes physically proximate promoters competing directly
for RNAP access, RNAPs initiating transcription from one promoter
colliding with other RNAPs or blocking them from transcribing from
a downstream promoter, and post-transcriptional interactions such
as RNAP inactivation or RNA interference leading one transcriptional
process to reduce the effective transcriptional or translational rates
of another. Insulated Promoter-Gene Cassettes Miller () created a set of promoter-reporter
cassettes in which they placed a transcriptional termination sequence
from  upstream of the promoter regions. This
made use of the established ability of such termination sequences
to reduce transcription initiated from promoters other than the target. Using one or two copies of the termination
sequence, they reduced such external transcription by 94% and 97%
respectively. In Davis , transcriptional interference was minimized by providing
insulated cassettes: promoters flanked by controlled sequences both
upstream and downstream of the transcriptional initiation site (−105
to +55), thereby providing the promoter a consistent functional neighborhood.
Inserting a 24-nucleotide sequence known to activate transcription
in some promoters showed a wide range of resulting changes in activity
in promoters lacking the flanking insulating sequences, but the promoter
outputs were very consistent when the insulating sequences were included. Promoter Position Relative to ORI As discussed in the
transcriptional regulation section, Block () studied the effect of promoter location relative
to the genomic origin of replication (ORI) on gene expression levels,
finding that promoters closer to the ORI expressed at higher levels.
This suggests a mechanism for tuning response curves, but also provides
a cautionary note in terms of consistency: if a promoter-gene pair
is inserted into the genome at random, its behavior may vary significantly
with distance from the ORI. Consistent performance will require control
of that positioning, though Block () found that expression levels were robust to
two other forms of alteration: the orientation of the genes and the
distance between genes and their TFs. Similar considerations also
apply to promoters on plasmid vectors: promoter position relative
to the plasmid ORI will also cause variation in effective copy number
of the promoter and thus alter gene expression levels. Transcription-replication
interference was observed by Mirkin and Mirkin who found that promoters could, if oriented such that they
transcribed genes in the opposite direction to that in which DNA replication
proceeded, cause significant interference with plasmid replication.
Such interference would lower the plasmid copy number and reduce gene
expression levels. An alternative method
of ensuring transcriptional
consistency focuses on removing unwanted elements from the mRNA transcript
itself, after transcription but before translation. Qi () made use of the bacterial
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)
system to protect the expression of target genes from upstream effects.
Screening a randomly generated library of 30-nucleotide 5′
UTRs upstream of the RBS and gene coding sequence of a fluorescent
reporter gene, they measured gene expression of the reporter in , and observed a wide range of expression levels
across the library, suggesting variable levels of transcriptional
interference induced by the UTRs. Inserting a CRISPR cleavage site
targeted by the Csy4 protein reduced the observed relative standard
deviations of reporter expression by nearly 3-fold in the presence
of the Csy4 protein, suggesting that the designed system acts to insulate
the mRNA from upstream effects; by cleaving at the inserted cleavage
site, Csy4 produces processed mRNA strands that are more independent
of their upstream genetic context and thus yield more consistent protein
levels when translated. A
study by Lou () used sequences designed
for ribozyme cleavage as a mechanism for buffering transcripts from
their upstream context. The mechanisms employed in this and the work
by Qi () are conceptually
similar, both based on cleaving away the 5′ UTRs to prevent
their having an impact on gene expression levels. Lou () constructed a logical NOT gate circuit based on transcriptional
regulation, and tested several different promoters to drive expression
of the first gene in the circuit. They observed that the NOT gate’s
transfer function, in this case, the mapping between this promoter’s
activity and the downstream expression level of the circuit’s
output protein, varied substantially as a function of the promoter
chosen. Screening a library of prospective insulator parts identified
the cleavage sequence RiboJ as the best insulator, and placing the
RiboJ sequence between the circuit driving promoter and its gene served
to effectively eliminate the transfer function discrepancies. Transfer
functions collapsed quite strikingly onto a single curve independent
of the promoter being used, illustrating the insulating effect of
removing inconsistent untranslated regions from the start of the resulting
mRNA strands. A pervasive issue working
against consistent
behavior in biological systems is the noise inherent in biochemical
reactions operating in regimes where fluctuations are not averaged
away. The topic of noise in biological systems is beyond the scope
of this review but has been extensively reviewed elsewhere. Clearly there are many
challenges to be addressed before tuning
in synthetic biology achieves the status it enjoys in traditional
engineering disciplines. Noise effects, while increasingly well understood
theoretically, can be significant or design-breaking in experimental
implementations. Coupling multiple systems in a biological context
often has unexpected effects, despite design efforts to achieve true
modularity. Biology inherently operates in a more interconnected context
than mechanical or electronic systems, making perfect functional compartmentalization
correspondingly more challenging and raising the question of how difficult
it will be to combine multiple types of tuning to affect a target
process. Biology also comes with substantial context-dependence, making
it difficult to craft portable designs that can be implemented across
organisms or indeed across genomic variants of a single species, without
significant risk of their operation being disrupted by the local context. For all of these challenges, synthetic biology is on a promising
path, with the library of parts, methods, and approaches growing rapidly,
year by year; the already extensive list of tuning options available
to designers in synthetic biology seems certain to continue to grow.
A combination of awareness of tuning applications and improved experimental
methods may lead experimentalists to report full tuning curves more
consistently and to characterize their systems in terms of rates of
change in addition to steady-state values. Our hope is that evaluating
the tuning potential of a new method or system will come to be a standard
part of the process of characterizing it and that libraries of components
will be augmented with collections of tuning methods, increasing the
range and sophistication of solutions available for synthetic biology
design problems..