(syn. ) is a well-known host
for recombinant protein production and
for metabolic engineering endeavors. Metabolic
engineering approaches require flexible promoter systems to fine-tune
the transcription of the desired target genes. For  a high number of methanol inducible promoters with different expression
strengths are available, and by a combinatorial
fine-tuning of the carotenoid pathway β-carotene yields can
vary up to 10-fold. An efficient
plasmid generation system GoldenCS and different CRISPR/Cas9 pipelines are available
for  genetic engineering
experiments. Nuclease deficient Cas9 (dCas9) can be linked to regulatory domains capable of activation or repression
and thus can be used to regulate gene expression by linking the activation
domain to the dCas9 protein. Further
improvements have been made by using RNA scaffolds connecting the
activator domain with the dCas9. An advantage
of this strategy is that the proteins (activators/repressors) can
be fused to dCas9  a scaffold guide RNA (scgRNA),
which can be more easily exchanged and enable a modular cloning strategy. Here, we present a system to engineer transcriptional regulation
using dCas9 and RNA scaffolds in  First, it was tested if a repressed promoter (pTHI11) can be activated
by this approach overruling the strong repression by thiamine. Second, with , a metabolic
engineering target was chosen to demonstrate the impact on riboflavin
production. In this case, the scgRNA/dCas9 system is compared to a
classic overexpression approach of  For both
experiments both a glucose and a methanol compatible system was evaluated. The experimental design for a scgRNA/dCas9
assisted transcription
regulation system in  is outlined
in (A). RNA
scaffolds are used to link dCas9 with a regulatory activator domain
by adopting a system reported for  and HEK293T cells for . The system to enable transcriptional regulation of a target gene
consists of 4 parts: the target DNA with a PAM sequence (protospacer
adjacent motif), dCas9, a MS2 coat protein fused to VP64 (further
referred as MS2-VP64) in case of gene activation ((A)) or the MS2 coat protein
alone as control further referred as no-activation control (NAC) ((B)) and a scgRNA
(scaffold guide RNA) involving 20 nucleotides complementary to the
target sequence at its 5′ end and a MS2 stem loop fused to
its 3′ end, which is bound by the MS2 coat fusion protein. To test the system a cassette expressing eGFP
under the control of the  promoter (pTHI11)
was used as a target. pTHI11 is a  specific promoter system, which can be used for recombinant protein
production, is efficiently repressed by thiamine, and shows a constitutive
expression in thiamine-free medium. Using the
scgRNA/dCas9 transcriptional regulation system it was tested to which
extent pTHI11 mediated transcription can be influenced both under
repressing (presence of thiamine) or de-repressing conditions (absence
of thiamine). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00214/suppl_file/sb0c00214_si_001.pdf Five target sequences for scgRNA
were selected in the pTHI11 ranging
from −14 to −317 bp in respect to the transcription
start site (TSS) of () ((C)). In
addition, a scgRNA was designed, which has no binding sequence within
the genome of the CBS 7435 wild type strain and serves as a no-targeting
control (NTC) in the subsequent experiments. All genetic constructs
were assembled using a Golden Gate system established for the use
in () and
have been submitted to Addgene (). The expression of dCas9 and the MS2 coat protein constructs
was
placed under control of the constitutive promoters pTEF and pPOR1,
respectively is frequently cultivated
on different carbon sources and the system shall work both under methanol/glucose
limited or glucose surplus conditions. Thus, for gRNA expression,
a weak MeOH inducible promoter, pALD4 ((D) I and II), and a strong constitutive,
pGAP ((D) III
and IV), were selected based on previously reported promoter strengths. Every gRNA promoter combination was tested with
the MS2-VP64 fusion protein and the non-fused MS2 coat protein (NAC). Strains containing the activation domain (MS2-VP64) ((A,B)) were compared against
the NACs ((C,D)).
Both were cultivated in the presence or absence of 100 μM thiamine
in a methanol and glucose limited medium. Under derepressing conditions
(in the absence of thiamine), a strong decrease of eGFP production
was observed when sequences T1 and T2 were targeted by the scgRNA/dCas9.
About 9 to 10 times less fluorescence was measured for these two targets
compared to the NTC. The effect was independent from the presence
of the activation domain, as the NAC strains showed a comparable behavior.
Strains expressing scgRNA with the other target sequences (T3, T4,
and T5) showed a fluorescence comparable to the NTC under derepressing
conditions ((A)). Without the activation domain (NAC strains), scgRNA/dCas9 targeting
T3 and T4 resulted in reduced fluorescence, while no change was observed
for T5 targeting ((C)). Under repressing conditions, scgRNA
targeting T1, T2, and T5 showed
comparable eGFP fluorescence as the NTC, but significantly increased
fluorescence was observed for the target sequences T3 (10-fold) and
T4 (2-fold) ((B)). For all target sequences in the NAC control strains a comparable
low fluorescence compared to the NTC was detected under repressing
conditions ((D)). These results confirm that the dCas9 fusion protein that is
functionally linked to the transactivator domain VP64, effectively
activates expression of eGFP under repressing conditions. However,
the effect is dependent on the targeted sequence. The highest activation
(about 7.5-fold) was seen for scgRNA targeting T3, with a binding
site 70 bp upstream of TSS. A closer position to the TSS (target sequences
T1 and T2) led to no activation under repressing conditions and even
a significant repression under derepressing conditions. A CRISPRi
effect was observed, when the scgRNA/dCas9 is targeted to T1 to T4
((C)), which
gets less pronounced when the target is more distant from the TSS. In accordance with previous results for VP64
based systems in () the activation effect is dependent on genomic localization
of the target. Different scgRNA expression levels were created
by using the pGAP
promoter under methanol/glucose limiting or glucose surplus conditions.
The pGAP promoter is commonly known for its strong constitutive expression
but shows nearly 4-fold lower expression under methanol/glucose limited
conditions compared to glucose surplus conditions. By applying this setup, the impact of scgRNA expression
levels on the performance of the scgRNA/dCas9 system was evaluated.
Comparing the levels of eGFP fluorescence between (A–C) and (A–C), a similar performance
of both systems can be observed showing that the scgRNA expression
is sufficient when using either pALD4 or pGAP as promoters for scgRNA
expression. However, slightly higher activation levels were observed
for the pGAP constructs at T3 and T4 both under  inducing ((A)) and repressing conditions ((B)). The success of a scgRNA/dCas9 assisted transcription regulation
seems to be dependent on the position of the target sequence. For
targets T1 and T2 the repression power of dCas9 was higher as the
activation power of the VP64 domain. Both target sequences are located
close to the TSS and dCas9 binding probably interferes with the core
promoter, which typically occupies a region of ±50 bp around
the TSS in eukaryotic cells. Such repression
effects of scgRNA binding sites close to the TSS are in accordance
with previous experiments done in () and . The repression strength of target
sequences typically decreases with increased distance to the TSS and
to the core promoter. For the  promoter, repression
effects targeting up to 160 bp upstream of the TSS were observed. With scgRNA/dCas9 assisted transcription regulation it is possible
to activate pTHI11 in a repressed state. With increased scgRNA expression
levels (glucose surplus conditions) the activation strength was slightly
increased ((D,E)), which can be explained by the effect that the  promoter yields lower expression levels on glucose surplus conditions
than on glucose limited/methanol conditions. When the  promoter is activated by the scgRNA/dCas9
system a comparable expression level was reached as for the glucose
limited/methanol condition (data not shown). In summary the level
of activation depends on the status of the promoter. In case the promoter
is repressed, the scgRNA/dCas9 system can lead to a re-activation
establishing the expression levels of the induced state. For the induced  system (depleted thiamine) no further induction above
its natural level was observed. This shows that this regulation approach
is applicable if a fine-tuning of a gene expression system is required. The pTHI11 system showed how a repressed promoter can be derepressed
with the scgRNA/dCas9 system. In the second part a gene shall be directly
induced, and therefore, the riboflavin biosynthesis pathway was targeted.
The gene  (PP7435_Chr2-0540), encoding for a
GTP-cyclohydrolase II, the first enzyme of the riboflavin biosynthesis
pathway, was previously reported to yield an increased riboflavin
production when overexpressed. Four target
sequences (R1–R4) positioned in the range of −9 to −156
bp in respect to the TSS were tested ((A)) using the pGAP cgRNA
design ((D)
III and IV). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00214/suppl_file/sb0c00214_si_001.pdf The selected target sequences were tested both in glucose surplus
and methanol/glucose limiting conditions. As a positive control a
previously described  overexpression strain (X-33
PRC ) was used.
Riboflavin productivities are presented after 23 and 53 h for MS2-VP64
strains ((B))
and NAC strains ((C)). The wildtype resulted only in a low signal, whereas, as expected,
the  overexpression strain showed a significantly
increased riboflavin production. In the presence of the activation
domain targets R1, R2, and R3 showed an increased riboflavin production
compared to the wildtype control. Productivities of R1, R2, and R3
were on the same level as the positive control and remaining quite
stable throughout the cultivation period. With 6 mg/L riboflavin R1
even outperformed the positive control ((A)). R4 showed no increase in riboflavin concentration compared
to the wild type strain. Without the activation domain all target
sequences behaved similarly as the wildtype. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00214/suppl_file/sb0c00214_si_001.pdf To evaluate the
robustness of this system, the same target sequences
were tested using methanol/glucose limiting conditions. Strains targeting
R2 to R4 performed comparably as under the glucose surplus condition:
R2/R3 showed an increased riboflavin production whereas R4 had no
improvement compared to the wildtype strain. Interestingly, the strain
using target sequence R1 reached an unexpected high increase in riboflavin
concentration, which was even three times higher compared to the positive
control ((E)
and (C)). Without the activation
domain, R1 resulted in a decreased riboflavin production of about
50% whereas all the other targets behaved similar compared to the
wildtype ((F)). To verify scgRNA/dCas9-mediated expression fine-tuning on transcript
level, mRNA was isolated and the transcript levels of the  gene were determined for the methanol/glucose limiting
conditions ((D)). Interestingly, the  overexpression control
strain showed the highest  upregulation compared
to the wildtype followed with some distance by the strain with the
scgRNA/dCas9 construct targeting R1 with activation domain. As expected,
the strains with the constructs targeting R2, R3 showed only slightly
increased transcript levels, and for R4 showed no significant change
at all compared to the wildtype. A strain without the activation domain
for the R1 construct (NAC) showed the highest reduction in transcript
level of about 20% of the wildtype, followed by less pronounced transcript
level reductions for NAC constructs targeting R2, R3, and R4. Taken
together, the transcript data do not explain why condition R1 showed
such a significant increase in riboflavin concentrations. However,
it might be that a rather moderate upregulation of the  gene by the scgRNA/dCas9 system with the target sequence R1 yields
a more optimal transcript level of  and thereby
provides an optimal flux through the riboflavin biosynthesis pathway. scgRNA/dCas9 assisted transcription regulation can be used to impact
metabolite production, in this case, to increase riboflavin levels
when targeting the  gene. And the strains even
outperformed a previously reported strong riboflavin production strain. The efficiency of the system was shown to be
very much dependent on the relative position of the targeted sequences
to the TSS. Targets close or even overlapping with the TSS resulted
in a repression effect that was not compensated by the presence of
an activation domain. These results are in accordance with CRISPRi
experiments. However, differences in the promoter
architecture preclude to specify a universal rule, for which distance
from the TSS still promotes a repression effect. Target sequences
further upstream (−30 to −150 bp) can lead to activation
when VP64 is bound  a scaffold structure to dCas9.
Applying this system to the riboflavin biosynthesis pathway shows
that fine-tuning of gene expression can have a surprising and significant
impact on the productivity of microbial cell factories. In conclusion,
the presented scgRNA/dCas9 system is a promising
tool for fast and reliable fine tuning of transcript levels in . Two different versions of the system are
available, optimized for the frequently applied carbon sources, glucose
or methanol. It can be used for gene activation and is even capable
to overcome a tightly repressed promoter. In the case of  engineering, it outcompetes a classic overexpression experiment.
However, without an activation domain the scgRNA/dCas9 tool can be
also used for gene repression and is thus a flexible and versatile
tool for metabolic engineering approaches. Experimental design for a scgRNA/dCas9 assisted transcription
regulation
in . (A) dCas9 based transcription
regulation is mediated by a target specific gRNA fused to a MS2 loop
(M) further referred to as scaffold gRNA (scgRNA) which directs dCAS9
to the desired target and recruits an MS2-VP64 fusion protein responsible
for gene activation. (B) The same setup without the activation domain
is used to evaluate the effect of the activation domain (no activation
(NAC) control). (C) Overview of the tested target sequences (T1–T5)
on the THI11 promoter to influence eGFP expression. Arrowheads indicate
the positions of the PAM sequences and the positions of the last nucleotide
of the PAM sequences in respect of the transcription start site are
indicated. (D) Vectors used for scgRNA/dCas9 assisted transcription,
linearized and integrated into the RGI2 locus. All constructs contained
a dCAS9 gene fused to a nuclear localization signal (NLS) under the
control of the constitutive TEF promoter, an MS2 coat protein gene
under the control of the POR1 promoter fused to an NLS and in case
of gene activation purposes (I and III) fused to the VP64 activation
domain. As a control the MS2 coat protein expressed without the VP64
activation domain (II and IV) was created (no activation control-NAC).
The gRNA is fused to 2 self-splicing ribozymes (hammerhead (HH) at
the 5′ end and HDV at the 3′ end) and the MS2 loop and
is expressed under the control of either the methanol inducible ALD4
promoter (I and II) or the strong constitutive GAP promoter (III and
IV). Targeting a pTHI11:: reporter system
with
the dCas9 system expressing scgRNAs that target T1–T5 under
the control of the methanol inducible pALD4 promoter. Log fold changes (fc) of eGFP fluorescence compared to the NTC. (A)
Strains containing the activation domain VP64 fused to MS2 in the
absence of thiamine, (B) the same strains as in A cultivated in the
presence of 100 μM thiamine, (C) strains without the activation
domain (NAC) in the absence of thiamine, and (D) the same strains
as in C cultivated in the presence of 100 μM thiamine. Error
bars indicate the sum of squared errors of the respective target sequence
compared to the NTC. The number of clones is indicated above each
bar chart. Targeting a pTHI11:: reporter system with
the scgRNA/dCas9 system expressing the scgRNA under the control of
the strong constitutive pGAP promoter. Log fold changes
of eGFP fluorescence compared to the NTC. (A) Strains containing the
activation domain VP64 fused to MS2 in the absence of thiamine, (B)
the same strains as in A cultivated in the presence of 100 μM
thiamine, (C) strains without the activation domain (NAC) in the absence
of thiamine. (D–F) the same strains as in (A–C) but
cultivated under glucose surplus conditions. Error bars indicate the
sum of squared errors of the respective target sequence and the related
negative control. Number of clones is indicated on top. Targeting the  gene with the scgRNA/dCas9
system. (A) Overview of the tested target sequences (R1–R4).
Arrowheads indicate the position of the PAM sequence and the positions
of the last nucleotide of the PAM sequences in respect to the TSS.
Riboflavin productivities after 23 and 53 h of (B) MS2 VP64 and (C)
NAC strains cultivated using glucose surplus conditions. (D) Log fold changes of relative transcript levels of the  gene compared to the wt measured after 23 h of cultivation
using MeOH conditions. Riboflavin productivities measured after 23
and 53 h of (E) MS2 VP64 and (F) NAC strains cultivated using MeOH
conditions. The number of biological replicates is indicated on top
of each bar. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the biological
replicates for B, C, E, and F and the sum of squared errors of the
Ct values of the target gene and the housekeeping gene of all technical
replicates (4 per biological replicate) for D. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00214/suppl_file/sb0c00214_si_001.pdf Plasmids were created using GoldenCS as described previously and transformed
into chemically competent  DH10B (Invitrogen) and are made available
at Addgene (). Plasmids were linearized using I, cleaned up
and transformed into electrocompetent cells, and cassettes were genomically integrated into
the  locus. All constructs containing  target sequences were transformed into the CBS 2612
strain carrying an  expression cassette under
the control of the  promoter integrated into
the  terminator. All constructs containing  target sequences
were transformed into CBS7435 wildtype strain. Transformations were
plated on YPD plates with the appropriate selection marker (zeocin
50 mg L, nourseothricin 100 mg L) Screening in 24 Deep Well Plates For the evaluation
of the different target sequences clones were cultivated in 24 deep
well plates on a rotary shaker at 280 rpm at 25°C. These screenings
were performed in minimal media (per liter: 6.3 g (NH)HPO, 0.8 g (NH)SO, 0.49 g MgSO·7HO, 2.64 g KCl,
0.0535 g CaCl·2HO, 22g Citric acid monohydrate, 1.47
mL PTM1 (without biotin), 20 mL NHOH (25%), 0.0004 g biotin
and the pH was adjusted to 6.4 using KOH) under glucose limiting conditions
using an enzyme based glucose release system with methanol shots.
A preculture was performed in selective YPD media for 24 h. A main
culture with an OD of 2 was started in 2 mL minimal
media with the addition of 30 g L EnPump 200 polysaccharide
and 0.23% Reagent A enzyme solution (both from Enpresso, Germany).
The main cultures were fed with 1% MeOH after 3 and 15 h and cultures
were analyzed for eGFP production after 24 h. For screenings in 2%
glucose, cells were inoculated with an OD of 2 in minimal media supplemented
with 2% glucose and analyzed for eGFP production after 24 h. GFP production
was normalized to the parental strain cultivated on the same plate.
The analyzed strains had a comparable growth rate and thus no normalization
for OD was done. Strains
were tested for riboflavin
production using shake flask cultures incubated at 180 rpm and 25
°C. From a preculture (YPD media) shake flask cultures were inoculated
with an OD of 1 in minimal media (see above). For cultivations
using glucose surplus conditions, the minimal media was supplemented
with 2% glucose and cultures were fed with 1.5% glucose after 23,
31, and 47 h. For cultivations using glucose limiting conditions with
MeOH the minimal media was prepared as mentioned above, and the cultures
were fed with MeOH after 3 (0.5 %), 6 (0.5%), 23 (1%), 31 (1%), and
47 (1 %) h. eGFP expression was
determined using
flow cytometry. Cultures were diluted with PBS to a final OD of 0.4 and analyzed using a CytoFLEX machine (Beckmann Coulter).
The 488 nm laser and the optical filter of 525/40 BP (referred as
FL1) were used. For each sample 1 × 10 events were
recorded, and cell debris was excluded by setting appropriate gates.
Geometric mean of height of FL1 and FSC were used for evaluation of
the samples. Calculations of the specific fluorescence levels related
to cell sizes were performed by dividing the FL1 signal by the forward-scatter
taken to the power of 1.5. Quantification
of Riboflavin Using Fluorescence Measurements 200 μL
of 1:4 diluted culture supernatants were quantified
using riboflavin standards with the following concentrations: 8, 6,
4, 2, 1, 0.75, 0.5, and 0.25 mg·L. Measurements
were performed on an Infinite M200 (Tecan) using 488 nm as excitation
wavelength and 530 nm as detection wavelength. Quantification was
done by using quadratic regression. Riboflavin productivities were
calculated by dividing the concentrations by the OD values. RNA Extraction and Transcript Level Determination 1
mL of the shake flask cultures were taken after 23 h and total RNA
was isolated as described previously. Integrity of the RNA was checked by gel electrophoresis. cDNA synthesis
was performed using the Biozym cDNA synthesis kit using the oligo
d(T)23 VN primer (NEB). Transcript levels were determined by quantitative
PCR using the Biozym Blue ŚGreen qPCR kit and a Rotor-Gene
Q machine (Qiagen). Quantification was performed using the ΔΔCT
method and  (PP7435_Chr3–0993)
as the housekeeping gene. – were created
using the python package matplotlib v.3.1.3. The TOC graphic was created using ACD/ChemSketch, version 2020.1.2,
Advanced Chemistry Development, Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada, , 2020..