Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea Violacein and deoxyviolacein
belong to bisindol pigments with deep
purple color, which are derived from the tryptophan biosynthetic pathway
and naturally produced by a number of marine bacteria, such as ,, and . Clinical trials and biomedical studies
indicate both compounds possess strong antibacterial, anticancer, antiviral, trypanocidal, and antiprotozoal properties. These characteristics make violacein
a superior chemical scaffold and drug candidate for the development
of clinically active antimicrobial, antiviral, and chemotherapeutic
agents. The violacein biosynthetic pathway was first discovered
by Pemberton
et al. in 1991 and was fully characterized
by Balibar et al. and Sanchez et al. in 2006. Branched from the -tryptophan
pathway, the violacein biosynthetic pathway involves five steps, encoded
by A, B, C, D, and E, which were organized in an operon form containing all five
genes. Two molecules of -tryptophan are oxidatively condensed
by A and B to form indole-3-pyruvic
acid (IPA). Then, IPA is decarboxylated to form protodeoxyviolaceinic
acid via E. Subsequently, protodeoxyviolaceinate
is oxidized to violacein by D and C (). Without
involving the first reduction step of D, deoxyviolacein
is formed as the major byproduct. At present, most of the reported violacein-producing
hosts are
Gram-negative bacteria with human pathogenicity. For example, both (−) and (,) have
been related with serious skin infection in immune-compromised people,
and both strains have been classified as biosafety level II bacteria.
Although the native hosts demonstrate some advantage to produce violacein,
their pathogenicity significantly limited their industrial application.  has been considered to be nonpathogenic
and has been classified as ‘generally regarded as safe’
(GRAS) by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Both  and  were isolated from the marine environment with high GC content (up
to 65% in the coding sequence). We argue that  might be engineered as a novel platform for violacein production
due to its GRAS status. Different from ,  lacks Crabtree effects and does
not produce ethanol when carbohydrates are oversupplied in the media. has been reported
to grow on a wide range of inexpensive raw materials, including glucose, glycerol, xylose, volatile fatty acids, alcohols, and wax alkanes. Over the past few years, multiple DNA
modular assembly platforms
have been developed. Among them, Golden Gate assembly,
which adopts the type IIs restriction enzymes that cut outside of
their recognition sequence and generate 4-bp sticky ends, has been
considered as one of the most promising methods. It avoids some tedious procedures of traditional cloning
such as primer design, PCR amplification, and gel purification. Different
from the Gibson assembly method, it does not need overlapping sequences,
and only needs type IIs restriction enzyme sites and the four base
pair linkages. Designing these 4-bp sticky end
bases allows for directional and seamless assembly of multiple fragments
at one time, and is critical to the successful and efficient assembly
of large biosynthetic gene clusters. Golden
Gate cloning also allows for combinatorial assembly of multiple functional
bioparts, including promoters, ribosomal binding sites, protein coding
sequences and terminators, and so on. One can easily shuffle the order
of the operon structure and permutate the coding sequence to explore
a wide range of gene expression space if multiple regulatory elements
are used. Recently, Golden Gate based cloning has been used to express
glycerol kinase for conversion of glycerol to erythritol and citric
acid in ; a set of modular Golden Gate cloning vectors were also built for
rapid construction of the carotenoids pathway and a 3-step xylose utilization pathway in . However, none of the mentioned work
has demonstrated the construction of multiple-gene pathway libraries
as well as tuning gene expression with varying promoter strengths
in . In this work, three different
endogenous promoters of , with high, medium, and low transcriptional activity,
were used to control the transcriptional strength of the five genes
encoding the violacein pathway, aiming to fine-tune the gene expression
and improve the pathway efficiency. To enable rapid and efficient
assembly, the Golden Gate assembly method was used for library construction.
We have optimized the 4-bp overhangs linkers to improve the assembly
efficiency. Upon characterizing the strains from a representative
collection of library, we found that the optimal violacein production
in  requires strong expression for all
the five genes. Thus, we reconstructed the violacein pathway by placing
the strongest TEF promoter upstream of all the five genes in the violacein
pathway, generating strain  OV1 that
yielded 38.68 mg/L violacein and 4.02 mg/L deoxyviolacein in shake
flasks. Furthermore, we optimized the yeast cultivation conditions,
including carbon to nitrogen ratio (C/N) and pH conditions. The maximum
violacein and deoxyviolacein production reached 70.04 mg/L and 5.28
mg/L in shake flasks, respectively, with a C/N molar ratio at 60 and
the addition of 10 g/L CaCO to control the medium pH.
Taken together, the development of the Golden Gate-based library construction
method and the optimization of culture conditions set a baseline for
engineering violacein production in . The reported work provides a basis for us to engineer efficient
and scalable violacein production from the novel host oleaginous yeast
species. Biosynthetic pathway
of violacein: VioA, -tryptophan
oxidase; VioB, -[2-(carboxylatoamino)-1,2-bis(1-indol-3-yl)ethyl]carbamate synthase; VioC, violacein synthase;
VioD, protoviolaceinate synthase; VioE, protodeoxyviolaceinate synthase. Preparing Modular Parts for Golden Gate Assembly Balancing
gene expression within a predefined biosynthetic gene cluster is a
common practice to maximize the catalytic efficiency, minimize the
metabolic burden, and improve the production and yield. However, when the number of genes and regulatory
elements such as promoters or RBSs are large, this method usually
represents tedious and time-consuming steps to build the library and
screen the best performing strains. In terms of rapid library construction,
Golden Gate assembly, first discovered in 1996, is considered as one
of the most promising methods because digestion and ligation can be
done in a one-pot 30 min reaction. To build a
violacein-producing library with  as
host, the expression of the five genes, including A, B, C, D, and E (from ), were placed under the control of three promoters with varying
transcriptional strength. We have selected three endogenous promoters
from , namely, the TEF promoter, the
ICL1 promoter, and the ZWF1 promoter, with high, medium, and low transcriptional
activity, according to our previous studies. Site-Directed Mutation and Plasmid Construction To successfully assemble the five genes and three promoters
through the Golden Gate assembly method, we first modified our YaliBrick
vectors by removing the internal BI restriction
enzyme site on the vector backbone, yielding our Golden Gate vector
pYaliGG. Next, the internal BsmBI site within the gene D underwent silence mutation to generate a new vector pYaliA1-Dmut following protocols as described in the section
“”. Subsequently, the five genes from the violacein pathway
were individually assembled into vector backbones containing promoters
TEF, ICL1, and ZWF1 YaliBrick cloning protocol, generating plasmids pYaliA1-A, pYaliA1-B, pYaliA1-C, pYaliA1-Dmut, pYaliA1-E, pYaliH1-A, pYaliH1-B, pYaliH1-C,
pYaliH1-Dmut, pYaliH1-E, pYaliK1-A, pYaliK1-B, pYaliK1-C, pYaliK1-Dmut, and pYaliK1-E, respectively (A). Then 15 open reading frames (ORFs) consisting of three
promoters, five protein coding sequences, and the XPR2 terminators
were PCR amplified (linker used will be discussed later). The resulting
fragments (pTEF-A#, pTEF-B#,
pTEF-C#, pTEF-Dmut#, pTEF-E#, pICL1-A#, pICL1-B#, pICL1-C#, pICL1-Dmut#,
pICL1-E#, pZWF1-A#, pZWF1-B#, pZWF1-C#, pZWF1-Dmut#, and pZWF1-E#) will be used as modular
parts in the subsequent Golden Gate assembly (B). Illustration of engineering strategies with
Golden Gate assembly:
(A) 15 plasmids that used as modular parts in Golden Gate assembly;
(B) overall workflow of Golden Gate assembly used in this work. Exonuclease-based
homology recombination
methods, such as Gibson assembly, require a 20–40 bp overlapping
sequence at the terminus of the DNA fragments to specify the assembly
order. One limitation is that DNA fragments
with sequence homology at the ends cannot be assembled using this
method. This limitation can be easily resolved through ePathBrick or Golden Gate assembly. Unlike BioBrick-based
cloning, Golden Gate assembly, relying on the type IIs restriction
enzymes, has a number of advantages over the traditional restriction
endonuclease cloning and BioBrick methods. These type IIs enzymes cut outside of their recognition sequence,
forming 4-bp sticky overhangs that can be easily customized to guide
the assembly order of any synthetic DNA fragments. If designed properly, these type IIs recognition sites will not
be retained in the final construct, which allows for efficient and
combinatorial cloning without the presence of digestion scars. Therefore,
the selection of the 4-bp linkers or adapters in the Golden Gate method
is critical to the accuracy and efficiency of the assembly. Since all the five modular parts in the violacein pathway are complete
ORFs, the linkers that are placed upstream of the promoters or downstream
of the terminators will have minimal effect on the ORF transcription
and translation. Therefore, the only constraints to design and select
the linkers are unique and nonpalindromic to ensure effective cloning.
Theoretically, the 4-bp linker may have 4 (256) different
combinations, here we only need to choose six unique linkers that
direct the assembly of the five gene fragments and the vector backbone. In this work, we chose two sets of end linkers, the first group
is TATC, GTTA, AATG, TGAG, CTAG, ATGT and the second group is TGGC,
TCAG, GTGC, TCGG, GCTG, TGCT that are recommended from HamediRad’s
list (). Five fragments (pTEF-vioA#, pTEF-vioB#,
pTEF-vioC#, pTEF-vioDmut#, and pTEF-vioE#) and the vector pYaliGG
were used to test the efficiency of these linkers. These two reactions
were performed in parallel under the same reaction conditions. For
example, we kept the Golden Gate assembly steps and the concentration
of each Golden Gate modular parts exactly the same. After ligation,
1 μL of the assembly reaction from each tube was used for electroporation
into  NEB5α, respectively, and 1 μL
of outgrowth was spread onto selective LB agar plates containing ampicillin.
As shown in B, the number of colonies on plate 2 (using group 2 linker) was significantly
higher than the number of colonies on plate 1 (using group 1 linker).
As such, the group 2 linker was selected for subsequent library construction. Two groups
of linkers used in Golden Gate assembly (A). Transformation
efficiency as an indicator of pathway assembly efficiency (B). Library Construction and Screening http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00469/suppl_file/sb0c00469_si_001.pdf For a five-gene
biosynthetic pathway with three varying promoter strengths, we could
construct a violacein pathway library containing 243 (3) variants with the 15 Golden Gate modular parts that were prepared
by using our optimal linkers. The plasmid pYaliGG, which was derived
from pYaliXP free of the BsmBI digestion site (), was used as the vector backbone to direct all
the modular parts to assemble in the right order. After Golden Gate
assembly, the reaction was transformed into  DH5α. Then the  recombinant strains
were cultivated, and the mixture of plasmids containing all the assembled
pathways was prepared and transformed into  Po1g (Leu−). The recombinant yeast colonies were screened
on the agar plates with CSM-Leu minimal media. Since the violacein
pathway may generate a number of distinct pigments, after 3 days incubation at 30 °C, the single colonies
on the plate may contain three colorful pigments: violacein (purple),
deoxyviolacein (pink), and proviolacein (green). Through the spectrophotometric
reading of the extracted solution in the liquid culture, we were able
to roughly quantify the production of violacein and deoxyviolacein
from each colony (). The quantification of proviolacien (green product) is not
possible in this study, due to the lack of the proviolacein standards. The initial screening of 20 colonies (8.2% of the library
coverage)
revealed a significant difference in violacein titer, which demonstrated
the importance of accurately regulating the transcriptional strength
of each gene in the violacein pathway (). The highest violacein yield obtained from
our library reaches 34.77 mg/L, which is 51 times higher than the
yield of the lowest-yielding producer (0.68 mg/L). All the plasmids
in the pathway library were then sequenced to determine the sequence
of the promoter used for each gene in the pathway. After analyzing
the sequencing data, we concluded that the highest violacein titers
were obtained when all the five genes were controlled by the strongest
TEF promoter (). On the other hand, the highest deoxyviolacien titer was obtained
when the B, D, and E genes were controlled by the weakest ZWF1 promoter
(). It is likely
that the expression of D gene controls the production
of the byproduct deoxyvioalcein. Violacein production was generally
decreased as the transcriptional strength of the promoters were shifted
from strong to weak activity (). Because of the bifunctional enzyme C, deoxyviolacein
is produced as the major byproduct of the violacein pathway in the
wild strains. Deoxyviolacein is structurally identical to that of
violacein, except for the missing oxygen atom at the six position
of the indole ring (). Violacein produced by the wild strains was usually mixed
with up to 10% deoxyviolacein, but when the expression
of D was regulated by the weakest promoter ZWF1,
the production ratio of violacein and deoxyviolacein was significantly
reversed. For example, the proportion of deoxyviolacein in the total
products reaches up to 91.34% (the promoter sequence for the five
genes ABCDE is TEF-ZWF1-TEF-ZWF1-ZWF1) (). This result is
consistent with that of previous work, that the expression strength
of D will significantly affect the production
of deoxyviolacein. When the D gene is completely
missing or knocked out, even pure deoxyviolacein can be obtained. We believe that the relative promoter
strength of VioA and VioE
determines the amount of deoxyviolacein produced in this system. When
VioE was under the control of the medium strength ICL promoter (strain
#2 in ), the
strain produces more byproduct, deoxyviolacein, than the case when
VioE was under the control of the weak promoter ZWF1 (strain #1 in ). On the other hand,
strain #1 (VioA on weak promoter) produced more violacein than strain
#2 (VioA on strong promoter), indicating that the relative promoter
strength of VioA did not play a significant role in determining the
final violacein titer. If we checked across the violacein and deoxyviolacein
titer in our strain library (), we can conclude that strong expression of VioC benefits
both violacein and deoxyviolacein production, and strong expression
of VioB and VioD also benefits violacein production. However, high
deoxyviolacein production was only associated with the weak expression
of VioD ().
These data reveal the complicated metabolic activity of the branched
metabolic pathway when the same biosynthetic gene (VioC) was shared
between the byproduct pathway and the target pathway. Violacein
pathway library transformed into  yields
three colorful compounds: green (proviolacein), purple (violacein),
and deoxyviolacein (pink). The intensity of the pinkness indicates
the percentage of the deoxyviolacein in the culture. Screening of violacein production (mg/L) from randomized
promoter
library. Mutants tested in this study cover about 8.5% of the total
library size (20/243). Sequence analysis of the library is shown below
the horizontal axis. The three endogenous promoters of  were assigned numbers and colors from strong to
weak promoter strength as interpreted as TEF promoter, 1, orange;
ICL1 promoter, 2, green; ZWF1 promoter, 3, blue. Pathway and
Fermentation Conditions Optimization for Increased
Violacein Production Since genes regulated by strong TEF
promoters are advantageous to violacein production, to further increase
the yield, we constructed the strain so that all five genes were regulated
by a TEF promoter, generating the strain  OV1. This strain produced 38.68 mg/L violacein, and the proportion
of deoxyviolacein is also within a reasonable range (9.41% of the
total violacein, ), demonstrating that strong gene expression for all five genes is
indeed critical to improve the violacein production in . The carbon to nitrogen ratio plays a major
role in regulating the metabolic activity of lipogenic pathways in . To understand
whether the C/N ratio affects vaiolacein production, we tested the
violacein production of the top producing strain  OV1 cultivated in CSM-Leu with a C/N ratio of 60, 80, 100, and 120,
respectively. Since the maximum absorption wavelength of violacein
(570 nm) is close to the detection wavelength of the OD, to avoid optical interference, dry cell weight instead of OD was used to quantify cell growth. As shown in , the dry cell weight
increased substantially as we increased the C/N ratio. However, violacein
production remained nearly constant from 38 mg/L to 41 mg/L, and the
same trend was observed in the production of deoxyviolacein, regardless
of the C/N variations (). Since the yield is slightly increased under the condition
of a C/N ratio of 60, the subsequent experiment will be carried out
under the condition of a C/N ratio of 60. pH has played a critical role
in regulating cell physiology and
metabolic activity. Low pH has been routinely observed in  culture due to the accumulation of organic
acids. To evaluate the effects of pH
on cell growth and violacein production, the cultivation pH was adjusted
by adding 10 g/L CaCO, or by buffering with NaHPO and NaHPO to pH 6.0, 6.5,
7.0, and 7.5, with initial unbuffered media as control (pH 4.5). As
shown in ,
media pH strongly influences cell growth (data of samples adding 10
g/L CaCO was not shown, due to insoluble CaCO crystals interfering with dry cell weight). Surprisingly, the yeast
grew better under mild acidic or alkaline conditions. For example,
when the initial pH is 7.5 or 4.5, the cell growth rate is the fastest,
and the dry cell weight reaches 11.13 g/L and 9.54 g/L at 120 h, respectively.
However, when the media pH was maintained at 6.0, 6.5, and 7.0, the
cell growth noticeably slowed down, and the dry cell weight was only
7.73, 4.07, and 4.50 g/L, respectively. Despite the fact that cell growth was rapid under pH 7.5, violacein
production did not increase accordingly (). As the media pH was buffered from 6.0
to 7.0, violacein production decreased gradually (), possibly due to the acidophilic
nature of the violacein pathway. Most strikingly, CaCO was found to be a superior supplement to buffer media pH. The carbonate
group (CO) will effectively neutralize
the organic acids accumulated during the fermentation. At the end
of the fermentation, 70.04 mg/L violacein and 5.28 mg/L deoxyviolacein
were produced from the yeast culture supplemented with CaCO. Because of the inexpensive nature of CaCO, this result
also indicated that CaCO was the preferred buffer to adjust
media pH for yeast fermentation. Cell growth (A) and violacein
and deoxyviolacein yield (B) in shake
flask fermentation by strain  OV1 with
different C/N ratios, cultivated in CSM-leu medium at 30 °C.
Violacein and deoxyviolacein were quantified by HPLC, with triplicate
samples. Cell growth (A) and violacein
and deoxyviolacein yield (B) in shake
flask fermentation by strain  OV1 with
pH 6.0, 6.5, 7.0, 7.5, CaCO and the control (pH 4.5),
cultivated in CSM-leu medium at 30 °C. Violacein and deoxyviolacein
were quantified by HPLC, with triplicate samples. In
this work, the optimization of 4-bp linkers of the Golden Gate
assembly allows us to quickly build violacein biosynthetic pathway
libraries with varying promoter strengths in  and access three colorful compounds (green, purple, and pink). After
optimizing the cultivation conditions, violacein production was increased
by 84.2%, reaching to 70.04 mg/L when the C/N ratio was controlled
at 60 and the media was buffered with CaCO. This work
provided a hands-on protocol for us to build pathway libraries with
varying promoter strengths that maximize the output of a predefined
biosynthetic pathway. Strains, Plasmids, Primers,
and Culture Conditions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00469/suppl_file/sb0c00469_si_001.pdf The bacterial strains, plasmids, and
primers used in this study are
listed in the Supporting Information, .  NEB5α high efficiency competent
cells were obtained from NEB (New England Biolabs Ipswich, MA). The
auxotrophic  Po1g (Leu−) was
purchased from Yeastern Biotech Company (Taipei, Taiwan).  XP1 harboring the plasmid pYaliA1-vioDCBAE
was stored in our lab. YPD medium contains
20 g/L glucose (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 g/L yeast extract (Sigma-Aldrich),
and 20 g/L peptone (Sigma-Aldrich). YNB medium (C/N = 60, 80, 100,
120) contains 1.7 g/L yeast nitrogen base (without amino acids and
ammonium sulfate) (Difco), 1.1 g/L ammonium sulfate (Sigma-Aldrich),
0.69 g/L CSM-Leu (Sunrise Science Products, Inc.), and 30, 40, 50,
60 g/L glucose, respectively. YNB medium (pH 6.0, 6.5, 7.0, 7.5) contains
1.7 g/L yeast nitrogen base (without amino acids and ammonium sulfate)
(Difco), 1.1 g/L ammonium sulfate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.69 g/L CSM-Leu
(Sunrise Science Products, Inc.), 30 g/L glucose, and was adjusted
to pH 6.0, 6.5, 7.0, 7.5, respectively, through NaHPO and NaHPO. YNB medium with CaCO was made with YNB media supplemented with 10 g/L CaCO. Selective YNB plates were made with YNB media supplemented
with 20 g/L Bacto agar (Difco). Site-Directed Mutation
and Plasmid Construction http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00469/suppl_file/sb0c00469_si_001.pdf All
the primers and plasmids used in this study are listed in . Plasmid extraction, agarose gel electrophoresis,
and other DNA manipulations were carried out by using standard protocols. All the plasmids constructed were verified by
sequencing. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00469/suppl_file/sb0c00469_si_001.pdf The pYaliGG vector was constructed on the basis
of plasmid pYaliXP. Primers GGmut-S1 and GGmut-A1 were used to amplify
fragment GGmut1#, primers GGmut-S2 and GGmut-A2 were used to amplify
fragment GGmut2#. Plasmid pYaliXP was enzyme digested via the I and II site, generating fragment
pYaliXP#. Then these three fragments were mixed and assembled following
the Gibson assembly protocol, generating plasmid pYaliGG. The D site-directed mutation plasmid pYaliA1-Dmut was constructed on the basis of plasmid pYaliA1-D. Primers D1-mut-s1 and D1-mut-a1 were used to amplify fragment
D1mut1#; primers D1-mut-s2 and D1-mut-a2 were used to amplify fragment
D1mut2#. Plasmid pYaliA1-vioD were enzyme digested via the I and 2I site, generating fragment
pYaliA1#. Then these three fragments were mixed and assembled following
the Gibson assembly protocol, generating plasmid pYaliA1-vioDmut (). The coding sequences of A, B, C, Dmut, and E were assembled into pYaliH1
and pYaliK1 vector backbones, respectively,
from plasmid pYaliA1-A, pYaliA1-B, pYaliA1-C, pYaliA1-Dmut,
and pYaliA1-E by restriction enzyme digestion
via the I and I site, resulting
plasmids pYaliH1-A, pYaliH1-B, pYaliH1-C, pYaliH1-Dmut,
pYaliH1-E, pYaliK1-A, pYaliK1-B, pYaliK1-C, pYaliK1-Dmut, and pYaliK1-E, respectively. The  competent cell preparation and
transformation procedures were carried out by using previously reported
procedures. In brief, a single colony
from plates was inoculated into 10 mL of YPD medium in a 50 mL shake
flask. The cells were allowed to grow overnight (16–24 h) with
shaking; 500 μL of cells was harvested from the above culture
and washed twice with 1 mL of ddHO. After that, cells
were resuspended in 100 μL of transformation buffer (including
90 μL of 50% PEG4000, 5 μL of 2 M lithium acetate, and
5 μL of boiled single strand DNA (salmon sperm, denatured) with
5 μL of DNA products (200–500 ng plasmids or DNA fragments).
The transformation mixtures were incubated at 30 °C for 30–45
min and then vortexed for 10 s every 10 min. They then underwent and
additional 10 min heat shock at 39 °C to increase transformation
efficiency and were spread on selected plates with auxotroph. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00469/suppl_file/sb0c00469_si_001.pdf Fragments used in Golden Gate assembly
were PCR amplified. All the primers and plasmids used in this assembly
are listed in . Golden Gate plasmids
were assembled in the presence of 30 U BsmBI (New England Biolabs
Ipswich, MA), 1000 U T4 DNA ligase (New England Biolabs Ipswich, MA),
2 μL of NEBuffer 3.1 (New England Biolabs Ipswich, MA), and
1 mM ATP (New England Biolabs Ipswich, MA). All the fragments to be
assembled were purified and used in equimolar ratios at a final concentration
of 20 pmol, then the volume was increased to 25 μL with ddHO. The assembly was transferred to a thermocycler which was
programed as follows: (5 min at 37 °C, 5 min at 16 °C) ×
30 cycles followed by 5 min at 60 °C, then transformed into  NEB5α or  Po1g
(Leu−). Seed Culture and Fermentation Procedure For preparing
seed inocula, strains were cultivated into 50 mL of CSM-Leu medium
containing 20 g/L glucose, 5 g/L ammonium sulfate (Sigma-Aldrich),
0.69 g/L CSM-Leu (Sunrise Science Products, Inc.), and 1.7 g/L yeast
nitrogen base (without amino acids and ammonium sulfate) (Difco) in
250 mL shake flasks for 24 h with agitation at 250 rpm at 30 °C.
For the C/N ratio and pH optimization in a shake flask, 5% (v/v) of
the seed culture was inoculated to the corresponding medium, with
different C/N ratios, pH values, and CaCO concentrations.
All the strains were cultured at 250 rpm, 30 °C up to 120 h for
violacein production. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00469/suppl_file/sb0c00469_si_001.pdf A violacein standard
was purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich and was dissolved in methanol. The maximum absorption
wavelength of violacein was determined through full wavelength scanning
from 230 to 750 nm by a microplate reader (Synergy H1 Hybrid Multi-Mode
Microplate Reader, BioTek, Winooski, VT) (). A standard curve for violacein was prepared by diluting
the standard (Sigma-Aldrich) with methanol into concentrations of
10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, and 100 mg/L. The analysis of
violacein was performed by high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) (Agilent Technologies 1220 Infinity II LC, USA) using Agilent
Eclipse Plus C18 column (4.6 mm × 100 mm, 3.5 μm, USA),
equipped with UV detector at 570 nm. Mobile phase A was HO with 0.1% acetate acid, and mobile phase B was methanol with 0.1%
acetate acid. A stepwise gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min
was used, following the gradient profiles as follows: ramping from
100% to 20% A in 0∼5 min, maintaining 20% A (80% B) in 5∼8
min, ramping from 20% to 100% A in 8∼12 min, and maintaining100%
A in 12∼15 min. The deoxyviolacein standard was diluted with
methanol into concentrations at 0.6, 1, 1.8, 2.5, 3, 3.5, and 4 mg/L,
and was analyzed by HPLC with the same method of violacein. A spectrophotometer-based
standard curve was also developed through a microplate reader at 570
nm. The violacein standard was diluted with ethanol at the concentrations
of 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 mg/L. The biomass was measured as dry cell
weight. A 500 μL sampling
of yeast cells was harvested and centrifuged in a microcentrifuge
tube at 13 000 rpm for 5 min. The upper broth was discarded,
and the cell pellet was washed twice with ddHO, and then
dried in an oven at 60 °C until the weight did not change. The
difference in the weight of microcentrifuge tube with and without
cells was then calculated..