Since their first description
in the late 1990s, Human Artificial Chromosomes (HACs) carrying a
functional kinetochore have been considered as a promising system
for gene delivery and expression with the potential to overcome several
problems caused by the use of viral-based gene transfer systems. HACs avoid the limited cloning capacity, lack of copy number control,
and insertional mutagenesis during integration into host chromosomes
that have hampered the use of viral vectors. Although it is not as
routine as transfection or infection with a virus, HACs along with
the genetic loci can be transferred from one cell to another in the
laboratory. The ability of HACs to carry entire genomic loci with
all regulatory elements allows them to faithfully mimic the normal
pattern of natural gene expression. Moreover, not only single genes
but also groups of genes encoding complex pathways can be carried
on a single HAC. Both top-down and the bottom-up approaches
have been used to construct
HACs. Top-down approaches are based on telomere-associated chromosome
fragmentation in the homologous recombination-proficient chicken DT40
cell line. Using top-down approaches, linear minichromosomes ranging
in size from 0.5 Mb to 10 Mb have been generated so far. Such derivatives
of natural human chromosomes have been produced from chromosome X, chromosome Y, chromosome 22, chromosome
21, and chromosome 14. These minichromosomes retain a natural centromere and are mitotically
stable in human cells during cell propagation until their size falls below ∼300
Kb. This review focus on the bottom-up
approaches for  HAC construction. More precisely,
we will focus on a  constructed synthetic HAC generated from an alphoid
DNA array assembled from a 348 bp human centromeric repeat, and describe
the multiple applications of this HAC for genome and cancer studies. Bottom up or  Construction
of Human Artificial Chromosomes Construction of Human Artificial
Chromosomes
from Natural Alphoid DNA In the late nineties two groups
independently reconstituted functional artificial human chromosomes.
The Willard and Masumoto laboratories and their respective coauthors
were the first to show that alphoid DNA, the primary DNA satellite
repeats in human centromeres, can “seed” formation of
a functional kinetochore when transfected into the human fibrosarcoma
HT1080 cell line. Subsequently, other groups have
confirmed this observation and reported that natural higher-order
repeat (HOR) arrays composed of 171 bp alpha-satellite monomer units
containing CENP-B boxes, 17 bp binding sites for the kinetochore protein
CENP-B, that are tandemly arranged in
a directional head-to-tail fashion are sufficient for  HAC formation. These HACs ranged in
size from 1 Mb to 10 Mb due to amplification of the input alphoid
DNA during HAC establishment and were stably maintained as single
copy episomes in the nucleus of transfected cells. HACs engineered
by the bottom-up approach can be circular or linear if telomeric sequences
are inserted. The resulting HACs are equally stable as both possess
a functional centromere and therefore can autonomously replicate and
segregate. The first HACs were constructed from 50 to 100 kb alphoid
DNA fragments identified in existing Yeast Artificial Chromosome (YAC)
or Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) libraries. Using ligation-based
reconstruction methods with alphoid DNA repetitive units, several
studies proved that alphoid DNA bearing CENP-B boxes were required
for  HAC formation. However, because the complete DNA sequence
of these fragments was unknown, definitive studies of the structural
requirements for  kinetochore formation were
not feasible. Construction of Human Artificial
Chromosomes
from Alphoid Synthetic Repeats To address this problem, our
group developed a method, RCA-TAR, to construct synthetic alphoid
DNA arrays with the possibility to manipulate alphoid DNA arrays to
introduce precisely defined DNA sequence variation. RCA-TAR involves two steps: rolling circle amplification (RCA) of
alphoid DNA oligomers that may be as small as a dimer (348 bp) and
subsequent assembly of the amplified fragments (1–3 kb) up
to 140 kb by transformation-associated recombination (TAR) in yeast. Because the alphoid DNA repeat sequence can be altered before the
amplification step, it is possible with this approach to introduce
mutations, including defined deletions, insert recognition sites for
DNA-binding proteins, or otherwise vary the alphoid DNA sequence and/or
structure. Using the RCA-TAR method, synthetic alphoid DNA arrays
from 50 kb to 140 kb have been generated from single alphoid repeats
and used for HAC formation. This accomplishment
has made it possible to begin to analyze the genomic and proteomic
requirements for  kinetochore formation and
maintenance. Construction of Synthetic
Human Artificial
Chromosome with a Conditional Centromere A collaborative
effort of three laboratories led to the generation of a circular HAC
with a conditional centromere using the RCA-TAR technology (). This HAC has been
instrumental in resolving the role for various chromatin structures
on kinetochore function. The HAC includes approximately 6000 copies of the
tetracycline operator (tetO) sequence incorporated into a synthetic
monomer synthesized according to the Choo consensus sequence and paired with a natural monomer from chromosome
17 containing a CENP-B box to make the 348 bp dimer unit. Ten copies of this dimer cloned into pBluescript
were amplified by RCA-TAR up to 50 kb and used as input DNA for HAC
formation after transfection into human HT1080 cells. This novel synthetic
HAC was termed the alphoid-HAC, as the synthetic monomers
each contained a tetO sequence in place of the CENP-B box. Because
tetO is bound with high affinity and specificity by the tet repressor
(tetR), the final 1.1 Mb alphoid array containing tetO sequences in
this HAC can be targeted specifically
with tetR-fusion proteins. Importantly,
the structure and functional domains of this HAC remain unchanged
after several rounds of transfer into different host mammalian cells
by microcell-mediated cell fusion. 3D-CLEM
confirmed that this HAC contains typical chromosome compartments (centromere,
kinetochore, scaffold, and periphery). Knowledge of the alphoid-HAC structure allowed us to monitor HAC integrity during different
manipulations or its transfer from one cell line to another. The synthetic HAC allows the targeted
manipulation of chromatin
within a single functional centromere without affecting the endogenous
chromosomes of the host cell. This technology (termed epigenetic engineering)
offers a unique approach to dissect the epigenetic factors that control
centromere and kinetochore assembly and function to allow faithful
chromosome segregation reviewed in refs (,, and ). As described below, a modified
version of the alphoid-HAC with a “landing pad”
for the insertion of genomic copies of genes is also useful as a full-length
gene delivery vector for gene functional analyses. alphoid-HAC formation and detection. (a)  generation of the human artificial chromosome (HAC)
via bottom–up approach using a synthetic alphoid DNA dimer.
The first step includes amplification of the dimer by rolling circle
amplification (RCA) up to 1–3 kb in size fragments. One monomer
of the dimer derived from the chromosome 17 alphoid-type I 16-mer
unit and contains a CENP-B box. The second monomer is a wholly synthetic
sequence derived from alphoid DNA consensus, with sequences corresponding
to the CENP-B box replaced by a 42 bp tetO motif. The second step
includes assembly of the RCA-amplified fragments in yeast cells on
the vector containing alphoid-specific hooks by transformation-associated
recombination (TAR). End-to-end recombination of RCA-generated alphoid
DNA fragments followed by interaction of the recombined fragments
with the vector hooks results in the rescue of approximately a 50
kb synthetic alphoid array as a circular molecule in yeast. At the
third step, HAC was formed in human cells by 50 kb transfected DNA
multimerization up to 1.1 Mb in size. (b) Immunofluorescence on a
metaphase chromosome spread of a cell containing the alphoid-HAC in human HT1080 cells. The HAC was stained with the centromeric
CENP-C protein (red) and tetR-EYFP (green) to detect the HAC. (c)
FISH analysis of the alphoid-HAC in hamster CHO cells.
FISH analysis was performed using the PNA labeled probe for tetO sequences
(green). Human Artificial Chromosome with Regulated Centromere
for Gene Functional Analyses Conversion of Alphoid-HAC into
a Gene Delivery Vector The ability of HACs to carry entire
genomic loci with all regulatory elements should in principle allow
them to faithfully mimic normal patterns of natural gene expression
for inserted genomic loci. Several laboratories have constructed HACs
with a single loxP gene loading site that was used for gene insertion and expression (reviewed
in refs (,, and −)). However, the alphoid-HAC with its conditional kinetochore
allows unique controls for gene function analysis. Since its kinetochore
can be specifically inactivated, this HAC provides the possibility
to compare the phenotypes in target stable human human cell lines
with and without a cloned genetic locus. In cells carrying the HAC,
the consequences of expression or silencing of the cloned locus can
be assessed. Then, by targeting the tetO sequences using chromatin
modifiers that lead to centromere inactivation, populations are “cured”
of the HAC as a result of loss during growth in culture. The return
to the original basal phenotype in the same clone of cells is a rigorous
control against unsuspected effects caused by the presence of the
HAC, and thereby allows more confident interpretation of gene complementation
and function studies. To adopt the existing alphoid-HAC for gene delivery and expression studies, the HAC was transferred
from human HT1080 cells to recipient chicken DT40 cells by two rounds
of Microcell-Mediated Chromosome Transfer (MMCT) using CHO hamster cells as an intermediate host. A Lox-P-5′
HPRT-Hyg-TK cassette was targeted into the HAC by homologous recombination
in DT40 cells. Clones with a single lox-P site were identified and
the retrofitted HAC was transferred back to CHO cells. After all manipulations, the alphoid-HAC with a single loxP site was mitotically stable in CHO cells.
Cassette-associated transgenes,  and , are stably expressed in CHO cells. In those cells, a gene of interest can be easily inserted into the
loxP site of the HAC by Cre-mediated recombination. Because CHO cells
form microcells at high frequency in response to Colcemid, the HAC can be easily moved from donor CHO cells
into different recipient human or mouse cell lines via MMCT for complementation
and function analysis. We also transferred the alphoid-HAC containing an  transgene inserted into the loxP site into mouse ES
cells and assessed whether the presence of this extra chromosome affects
their pluripotent properties. The alphoid-HAC-bearing
ES cells were indistinguishable from their wild-type counterparts:
they retained self-renewal potential and full capacity for multilineage
differentiation during mouse development, and the HAC itself was mitotically
and transcriptionally stable during this process (). Our data provided the first example of a fully synthetic chromosome
behaving like a normal chromosome in cells of living animals, thereby
opening new opportunities for functional genetic studies in laboratory
animals as well as stem cell-based regenerative medicine. Alphoid-HAC detection .
(a) Metaphase spread indicating intact alphoid-HAC
(white arrow) in mouse ES cells. (b) Chimeric mouse embryo showing
expression of the  transgene inserted into the
single loxP gene loading site of the HAC. (C) The adult chimeric mouse
carrying the HAC in the genome. Re-engineering the alphoid-HAC
Vector To Allow a Unique Control for Gene Phenotypes by a Simple Doxycycline
Manipulation As described above, the alphoid-HAC can be easily eliminated from cells by inactivation of the HAC
kinetochore via binding of chromatin modifiers, that induce either
hypertranscription (tTS) or heterochromatinization (tTA) of its centromeric
sequences (see also ). Induction of HAC loss provides the possibility
to control for phenotypes induced by the presence of the HAC in a
cell population and control more rigorously for the effects of genetic
loci loaded onto the HAC. However, such inactivation of the HAC kinetochore
initially required transfection of cells by lipofectamine or retroviral
vectors in order to introduce exogenous DNAs expressing the tTS or
tTA. Such transfections have the potential to cause insertional mutagenesis. We therefore re-engineered the alphoid-HAC vector
to allow centromere inactivation without transfection of exogenous
chromatin modulators. In this modified HAC vector, a cassette expressing
the tTS was inserted into the loxP gene-loading site along with the
genetic locus of interest. In the absence of doxycycline, expression
of the tTS generates a self-regulating fluctuating heterochromatin
state on the alphoid-HAC. When the tTS binds to the
tetO array, it induces heterochromatin formation that both inactivates
the centromere and also inactivates expression of the  gene itself. The net result is a fast and strong silencing of the
genetic locus being tested on the HAC without a significant effect
on HAC segregation (the tTS silences itself before the heterochromatin
is “deep” enough to inactivate the centromere). Silencing
of the test transgene is reversible as its expression can be readily
recovered by adding doxycycline, which blocks binding of the tTS to
the tetO array. However, this system
does not allow us to return cells to their “ground state”
by curing them of the HAC. We therefore designed a second re-engineered
alphoid-HAC vector that allows fast and highly efficient
inactivation of the HAC kinetochore. In this vector, a tTA(VP64) cassette
carrying four tandem repeats of the VP16 domain is inserted into the
single loxP gene-loading site along with the genetic locus of interest
(a). In medium
plus doxycycline, tTA(VP64) binding to the alphoid array
is blocked. Thus, the genetic locus being tested is expressed under
control of its own promoter and the HAC is stable (b). In the absence of doxycycline,
tTA(VP64) binds to the alphoid array inducing a burst
of transcription that leads to rapid disruption of kinetochore function
followed by the HAC loss (c,d). These modified alphoid-HAC-based vectors containing a single copy of the tTS
or tTA(VP64) represent powerful tools for gene function studies because
they allow us to control gene activity or to cure cells of the HAC
by simple addition or removal of doxycycline. (a) The alphoid-HAC carrying a gene of interest
flanked by insulator sequences and tTA was delivered from the donor
hamster CHO cells to the target human gene-deficient cells via the
MMCT procedure. (b) The tTA(VP64) is transiently expressed and inactivated
by doxycycline (Dox). (c) After removal of doxycycline from the media,
tTA(VP64) binds to the tetO sequences of the HAC and shatters centrochromatin.
(d) Inactivation of centrochromatin leads to rapid HAC loss in the
course of cell divisions. Pericentromeric Gamma-Satellite DNA and tDNA
Prevent Heterochromatin Spreading and Protect Gene Expression from
Alphoid-HAC In the alphoid-HAC
vector, insertion of a gene-loading site into the alphoid-array created a domain that is permissive
for transcription. However, the long-term stability of this transcriptionally
active state within centrochromatin was unknown. It is widely known
that transgenes inserted into ectopic sites in human cells tend to
be silenced over time. Because the alphoid expression domain is flanked by heterochromatin, which
has a propensity to spread we wondered
whether chromatin barriers or insulator sequences might be essential
for stable transgene expression in alphoid-HAC centrochromatin. So far, very few elements with such activity have been described
(reviewed in refs ( and )). We therefore set out to screen for insulator sequences that would
protect transgenes from epigenetic silencing in the alphoid-HAC. Pericentromeric regions of mammalian chromosomes contain repetitive
DNA sequences, including gamma-satellite DNA, that exhibit a high
rate of evolutionary change. However, the exact role of these sequences
with respect to kinetochore/heterochromatin structure and function
remains unknown. We developed a system to study the function of gamma-satellite
DNA in maintaining active chromatin domains. The system involved  amplification of a 220 bp gamma-satellite repeat
up to 3 kb, 9 kb, and 24 kb arrays by RCA. These arrays were then integrated into the RL5 locus on chromosome
4 in mouse erythroleukemia cells. Indeed,
the human pericentromeric gamma-satellite DNA sequences promoted a
transcriptionally permissive chromatin conformation in an adjacent
transgene and protected the transgene from epigenetic silencing. In hematopoietic cells, the antisilencing and
heterochromatin-arresting activities of gamma-satellite DNA require
the binding of Ikaros, a protein that regulates hematopoeiesis. The structural conservation of gamma-satellite
in pericentromeric
regions of most chromosomes in humans and nonhuman primates suggests
that gamma-satellite arrays may have a structural and/or functional
role in the centromere, possibly preventing the spreading of pericentric
heterochromatin into chromosomal arms. As such, the gamma-satellite
DNA resembles a barrier element. Together,
these observations suggest that gamma-satellite DNA plays a role in
separating specific domains of chromatin/heterochromatin and might
therefore protect transgenes inserted into the HAC from silencing. In budding and fission yeast, tRNA genes can function as chromatin
barrier elements. However, until recently there
was no experimental evidence that tRNA exhibits barrier activity in
mammals. We therefore investigated whether tRNA genes can function
as chromatin barrier elements. Indeed, we and others showed that functional
copies of tRNA genes function as barrier insulators in mammalian cells. In a follow-up study, we compared the activity of different
chromatin
insulators on the HAC vector. We compared the effects of three chromatin
insulators, cHS4, gamma-satellite DNA, and tDNA on the expression of
an  transgene inserted into the loxP site of
the alphoid-HAC vector. A tDNA insulator consisting
of two functional copies of tRNA genes showed the highest barrier
activity, followed by gamma-satellite DNA and cHS4. These results showed that proximity to centrochromatin
does not protect genes lacking chromatin insulators from epigenetic
silencing. Therefore, strategies for transgenesis using HAC vectors,
including alphoid-HAC, should include barrier elements
such as tDNA and gamma-satellite DNA to prevent gene silencing (). An Improved Microcell-Mediated Chromosome
Transfer (MMCT) Technique for HAC Transfer to Recipient Cells Gene loading into the HAC is most easily performed in CHO cells,
so MMCT transfer of alphoid-HAC carrying a genetic
locus to human gene-deficient cells is a key step for gene complementation
and function analysis. Though the MMCT method was developed more than
40 years ago, two main limitations make
the method tedious. First, the frequency of HAC transfer from donor
CHO cells into recipient cells is very low. Second, MMCT is not applicable
for all types of recipient cells, particularly those whose fusion
with microcells is very inefficient. To minimize these problems, we
have optimized the MMCT protocol. In
the new protocol the following modifications have been made: (i) Colcemid,
a microtubule inhibitor that arrests cells at metaphase, was replaced
with TN-16 + Griseofulvin; (ii) Cytochalasin B, an actin inhibitor
that induces actin cytoskeleton disassembling, was replaced with Latrunculin
B. Such modifications in combination with a collagen/laminin surface
coating, that improves adherence to the culture flask, increases the
efficiency of HAC transfer to recipient cells at least 10 times (). Moreover, the
novel protocol is also less damaging to HAC than the standard MMCT
method. The modified protocol was successfully
applied to alphoid-HAC transfer to several recipient
cell lines, including human mesenchymal stem cells and mouse embryonic
stem cells. Recently another group also
developed a highly efficient chromosome transfer method, called retro-MMCT.
This is based on Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO) expressing envelope
proteins derived from ecotropic or amphotropic murine leukemia viruses.
Using this method, the HAC was transferred to mouse embryonic fibroblasts
with 26.5 times greater efficiency than that obtained using conventional
MMCT. Thus, both modified MMCT methods allow a significant improvement
of HAC transfer to various types of target cell. Scheme showing key modifications
of the original microcell-mediated
chromosome transfer (MMCT) technique (left). The modified MMCT transfer
(right) includes replacement of two key chemicals, Colcemid and Cytochalasin,
by TN16 + Griseofulvin and Latrunculin B, (right). Efficiency of the
new protocol is approximately 10 times higher compared to the original
one (red numbers at the bottom). Expression of a Genomic Copy of Human Genes
from alphoid-HAC The alphoid-HAC has been used to deliver genomic loci carrying two human average-size
cancer-associated genes,  (∼25 kb) and  (∼60 kb), and complement genetic deficiencies
in cell lines derived from the patients with deficiencies in either  or  using the strategy summarized
in . Mutations in the  gene lead
to von Hippel–Lindau syndrome (VHL; MIM 193300). Mutations
in the  gene lead to Nijmegen breakage syndrome
(NBS; MIM 251260). Functional expression of pVHL and pNBS1 in recipient
cells and rescue of the mutant phenotypes was demonstrated. Importantly,
the mutant phenotypes were restored after specific elimination (“curing”)
of the HAC from the cells following targeted inactivation of its kinetochore. In another study, the alphoid-HAC vector was
used
for delivery and expression of a 90 kb genomic copy of the  gene into the gene-deficient human cells. BRCA1 is involved in many disparate cellular
functions, including DNA damage repair, cell-cycle checkpoint activation,
gene transcriptional regulation, DNA replication, centrosome function
and others. However, no unifying mechanistic framework that links
the reported biochemical activity of BRCA1 to its tumor suppressor
function has yet been identified. After insertion of a full-length  gene into the loxP site of the HAC and its transfer
into -deficient human cells, a battery of known functional tests was carried out to
demonstrate functionality of the transgene. Then, specific experiments
were performed to investigate a recently proposed role of BRCA1 in
maintenance of global heterochromatin integrity. We demonstrated that
BRCA1 deficiency results in an elevated level of transcription of
diverged pericentromeric repeats forming constitutive heterochromatin
as well as higher-order alpha-satellite repeats (HORs). Together,
these could contribute to chromosome instability observed in the Brca1-deficient
cells. Our data extended previous observations that BRCA1 may promote
heterochromatin formation in a genomic locus-specific manner and support
the hypothesis that epigenetic alterations of these regions initiated
in the absence of BRCA1 could impact other gene(s) and nuclear structural
interactions, leading to cell transformation. All genes described
above were isolated from the total human genome
by a cloning technique that is based on transformation-associated
recombination (TAR) in the yeast . TAR cloning allows selective recovery of chromosome segments that
are up to 300 kb in length from complex genomes (a,b). A modified CRISPR/TAR
technology improved the efficiency of TAR cloning, with up to 32%
of yeast transformants containing the gene of interest. The alphoid-HAC-based delivery
vector combined with TAR cloning can be widely used to characterize
gene function and genome variation, including mutations and even polymorphic
structural rearrangements in patient genomes. (a) Transformation-associated
recombination (TAR) cloning of a
gene of interest from total genomic DNA with a TAR vector containing
YAC and BAC cassettes and two unique targeting sequences (hook1 and
hook2) (in green) homologous to the 5′ and 3′ ends of
a gene. Genomic DNA and a linearized TAR vector are cotransformed
into the yeast  cells. (b)
Recombination between targeting sequences in the vector and the targeted
sequences in the genomic DNA fragment leads to rescue of a gene as
a circular TAR/YAC/BAC molecule. (c) Transfer of the TAR-isolated
molecules containing a region of interest from yeast cells to bacterial
cells by electroporation with the followed isolation of BAC DNA by
a standard procedure. (d) Loading of a TAR-isolated gene of interest
into the single loxP site of the HAC by Cre-loxP mediated recombination
in hamster cultured cells. (e) The assembled HAC contains the tTA
cassette and a gene of interest flanked by insulator sequences to
protect the gene from epigenetic silencing. Construction
of Alphoid-HAC
with Multi-integration Site To Assemble Large Entire Genomic Loci
and Engineer Synthetic Chromosomes with a Predetermined Set of Genes The assembly of multiple genes or entire loci or transfer of multiple
genes into desired cells using the HAC vector has multiple applications
in functional genomics. A few years ago several laboratories suggested
using artificial chromosomes (AC) to assemble large entire genomic
loci or several genes on the same HAC molecule using a multi-integrase
system. Therefore, construction of an alphoid-HAC containing
a multi-integration site was our next step. To reach this goal, we
designed an iterative integration system (IIS) that utilizes three
recombinases: Cre, ΦC31, and ΦBT1. This IIS-alphoid-HAC system allows assembly of functional genes on the
same HAC DNA molecule () and has several notable advantages
that set it apart from other artificial chromosome-based systems.
These include the assembly of an unlimited number of genomic DNA segments
and the opportunity to remove mis-incorporated DNA segments. As for
other alphoid-HACs, the IIS-alphoid-HAC
can be “cured” from dividing cell populations, allowing
target cells to revert to their pretransformed state. In future studies,
the IIS-alphoid-HAC may have the potential to engineer
synthetic chromosomes with a predetermined set of genes, thereby allowing
investigation of complex biomedical and gene regulation pathways. Scheme
of DNA segment integration by the iterative integration
system (IIS). (a) The starting platform cassette contains the  marker. The cells express a green fluorescence protein
(GFP). Also, they are hygromycin resistant (hph) and Ganciclovir sensitive
(TK). (b) After the first round of recombination between a Type I
carrier vector and a platform cassette by Cre recombinase and ΦC31
integrase, the  marker is replaced by the  marker and the first DNA segment of interest is integrated
into the platform cassette (DNA1). The cells have red fluorescence
(mCherry), Puromycin resistance (Pac), and 5-Fluorocytosin sensitivity
(FcyFur). (c) After recombination between a Type II carrier vector
and a platform cassette by Cre recombinase and ΦBT1 integrase,
the  marker is replaced by the  marker again and the second DNA segment of interest is integrated
into the platform cassette (DNA2). The structure of integration sites
is identical to the stating cassette aside from the integration of
DNA segments of interest, DNA1 and DNA2. (d) The third DNA segment
of interest (DNA3) can be integrated similar to the DNA1 segment by
using a Type I carrier vector. Use of the Alphoid-HAC for Epigenetic
Engineering of Chromatin within a Single Functional Centromere Human Centromeres: What We Know and What We
Do Not Centromeres define the site of the assembly of the
kinetochore, a multiprotein complex that directs chromosome segregation
by binding microtubules. In humans, endogenous centromeres
typically form on chromosome-specific higher-order alphoid DNA arrays,
that are composed of 171 bp alpha-satellite monomer units tandemly
arranged in a directional head-to-tail fashion. The remarkable diversity in sequence composition of centromeres
across species lies in contrast to their common function as a platform
for kinetochore assembly. Indeed, evidence of centromere inactivation
on stable dicentric chromosomes without the loss of the underlying
DNA sequences led to the widespread belief that centromere specification
is regulated by chromatin modifications (epigenetic). This was strongly supported by the discovery of stable
chromosomes containing neocentromeres that completely lack alphoid
DNA. The basis of this epigenetic regulation
is still under investigation, but it was suggested that one key factor
could be binding of the centromere-specific histone H3, CENP-A. Microscopic investigation of stretched kinetochore fibers
revealed that blocks of CENP-A nucleosomes are interspersed with H3
nucleosomes that contain transcription-associated modifications. This special chromatin, which
has been termed “centrochromatin”, is flanked by constitutive heterochromatin and suggests
a functional link between the local chromatin environment and kinetochore
function. These observations raise several questions about the exact
nature of the chromatin that specifies kinetochore assembly and propagation:
(1) For centromeres, aside from CENP-A, what combination of histone
modifications defines the elusive epigenetic state that is centrochromatin?
(2) Can histone modifications be manipulated to turn normal chromatin
into centrochromatin and to reverse—to inactivate—the
established centromeres? (3) What barrier prevents heterochromatin
spreading into centrochromatin? Answering these questions with native
human chromosomes is extremely challenging. Aside from the fact that
the sequence of centromeric DNA arrays remains largely uncharted territory,
the use of RNAi or inhibitors to manipulate the composition of centrochromatin
is fraught with difficulties beyond the usual specificity issues associated
with both of those approaches. Thus, despite their importance
for proper chromosome segregation,
the structure and function of human centromeres remain relatively
poorly understood until now. This is at least in part because of the
highly repetitive nature of centromeric DNA, which has made it difficult
to clone, sequence, and study. Indeed, only the Y chromosome centromere
has been recently sequenced in its entirety. The alphoid-HAC, which contains tetO sequences that
can be specifically targeted with chromatin modifiers fused to the
tetR provides a unique tool for dissecting the chromatin (epigenetic)
requirements for faithful chromosome segregation (reviewed in refs ( and )). Centromere
Chromatin State and Kinetochore
Function are Interconnected Since centromeres lie within
constitutive heterochromatin regions, it was long assumed that centromeres
themselves were a special form of heterochromatin. The first study
using the alphoid HAC to manipulate the epigenetic
state of centromeric chromatin examined the role of heterochromatin
at centromeres. Tethering a heterochromatin-seeding transcription
repressor (tTS) into the alphoid-HAC kinetochore resulted
in a dramatic loss of kinetochore function over the course of several
cell divisions. At a molecular level,
heterochromatin formation caused a loss of CENP-A correlated with
a decrease in H3K4me2 and an increase in H3K9me3 levels paralleled
by recruitment of HP1 and chromosome segregation defects. Subsequent
investigations using the alphoid HAC revealed that
heterochromatin-associated loss of kinetochore structure was a hierarchical
process, with CENP-C and CENP-H being rapidly displaced, and preceding
a more gradual loss of CENP-A (). In this study, HAC
kinetochore function collapsed at a time when CENP-A was still present
at the centromere, confirming that CENP-A alone is not sufficient
for proper kinetochore function in an unfavorable chromatin environment.
Together, these studies provided the first conclusive evidence that
centromere chromatin state and kinetochore function are tightly interconnected. Targeting
of alphoid-HAC by different tetR-fusions.
The scheme illustrates how protein targeting works to study kinetochore
organization. (a) A simplified structure of kinetochore in the alphoid-HAC. (b) A fusion of tet-repressor with the transcriptional
silencer KAP1 binds to the tet-operator sequences in HAC kinetochore
and induces local heterochromatinization. (c) The binding results
in kinetochore disassembly. Centromeric proteins CENP-C, CENP-H, and
Hec1 are missing first from HAC kinetochore. In contrast, the CENP-A
protein remains. It is worth noting that HAC kinetochore function
collapses at a time when CENP-A is still present at the centromere
confirming that CENP-A alone is not sufficient to drive kinetochore
formation in an unfavorable chromatin context. Human Kinetochores Have a Remarkable Plasticity
That Tolerates Profound Changes to Their Chromatin Environment but
Critically Sensitive to the Level of Centromeric Transcription The demonstration that seeding heterochromatin within centrochromatin
is detrimental to kinetochore function fits well with previous observations
linking the centrochromatin domain to transcriptional activity. The
first of these was the discovery of H3K4me2 in centromeres. This modification is typically found at the
5′ region of poised or actively transcribed genes. Subsequent experiments (and references therein)
revealed ongoing transcription at centromeres in various organisms,
including humans and . Remarkably, this transcription occurs during mitosis. The role of the transcripts is still debated. We used the alphoid-HAC system to address specifically
the question of how transcription and transcriptionally permissive
chromatin influence kinetochore maintenance. Tethering a mild transcriptional
activator (the minimal activation domain of NF-κB p65) within
the HAC centromere revealed a remarkable degree of plasticity of kinetochore
toward the underlying chromatin. Despite the induction of local histone
H3K9 hyper-acetylation and elevated RNA polymerase activity (a ∼10-fold
elevation in transcript levels), levels of CENP-A or CENP-C at the
HAC were virtually unaffected. Indeed, these engineered HACs retained
a fully functional kinetochore and were stably propagated through
subsequent cell divisions. In striking
contrast, tethering the more potent transcriptional activator VP16
(herpes virus VP16 activation domain) allowed histone H3K9 hyperacetylation
comparable to that seen after tethering p65 at the HAC, but resulted
in an ∼150-fold elevation in transcripts, approaching the level
of transcription of an endogenous housekeeping gene. VP16 rapidly
inactivated the HAC kinetochore due both to a complete block of CENP-A
loading, and to the specific and rapid stripping of preassembled CENP-A
from the HAC kinetochore. Detailed
analysis confirmed that centrochromatin of the HAC, like
that of endogenous chromosomes, resembles domains found in the body
of some actively transcribed housekeeping genes, containing H3K4me2
and H3K36me2. To study the functional link between this transcription-associated
chromatin environment and kinetochore maintenance, we depleted H3K4me2
specifically from the alphoid-HAC centromere by tethering
the H3K4me2-specific demethylase LSD1. Tethering LSD1 to the alphoid-HAC specifically and
efficiently depleted H3K4me2 from its centromere, leaving other native
centromeres untouched. H3K4me2 depletion caused a drop in transcription
of the centromeric α-satellite DNA accompanied by a loss of
CENP-A. The latter was explained by a failure of the HAC centromere
to efficiently recruit the CENP-A-specific chaperone HJURP. Kinetochores
depleted of H3K4me2 were inactivated over the course of the next few
days, probably because centromeres contain more CENP-A molecules than
are required for kinetochore assembly. Together,
these results provide a functional link between centromeric
chromatin, α-satellite DNA transcription, maintenance of CENP-A
levels, and kinetochore stability. Histone
H3K9 Acetyl/Methyl Balances Regulate
CENP-A Assembly The notion that the balance between heterochromatin
and transcription are important in regulating  CENP-A assembly and kinetochore formation on human centromeric alphoid
DNA arrays was explored in a study inspired by previous experiments
with the alphoid-HAC. This study started with the observation
that HACs could be formed in HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells, but essentially
never in other cell lines, such as HeLa. Careful analysis revealed
that HT1080 appears to be hypomorphic for the H3K9 methyltransferase
Suv39H1. This led to experiments in which it was shown that “open”
chromatin induced by tethering histone acetyltransferases (HATs) to
alphoid DNA arrays could induce assembly of CENP-A and other kinetochore
proteins at ectopic alphoid sites inserted into chromosome
arms. These results confirmed that  CENP-A assembly requires an “open”
chromatin state. Importantly, a brief pulse of histone H3 acetylation
was observed  at the end of mitosis, coincident
with the onset of deposition of new CENP-A molecules at centromeres. Importantly, transfection of alphoid DNA arrays together
with tetR-HAT fusions significantly increased the efficiency of HAC
formation and  stable CENP-A assembly, even
enabling HAC formation in HeLa cell, thereby breaking a barrier to
HAC formation in cells other than HT1080. Centromeric Transcription and H3K9 Acetylation
Keep Heterochromatin from Invading Centrochromatin To ask
whether it was α-satellite transcription , or the chromatin environment generated as a result of transcription
that is important for kinetochore maintenance, we recently designed
a novel  epistasis” assay in
which the specific H3K4me2 demethylase LSD2 plus synthetic modules
with competing activities were simultaneously targeted to the synthetic
alphoid-HAC centromere. As in our previous study, H3K4me2 loss decreases centromeric transcription,
CENP-A assembly, and HAC stability associated with spreading of the
heterochromatin mark H3K9me3 across the HAC centromere (). Surprisingly, cotethering
of LSD2 plus the HAT subunit CENP-28/Eaf6 (which stimulated transcription
associated with H4K12 hyperacetylation), did not rescue the phenotype
observed after tethering LSD2 alone. In contrast, cotethering of LSD2
plus the p65 activation domain (which stimulated transcription associated
with H3K9 hyperacetylation), did rescue kinetochore stability and
function. These results suggest that H3K9 hyperacetylation might form
a barrier to prevent heterochromatin invasion of human centromeres
by blocking formation of H3K9me3 and by allowing proper H3.3 turnover,
which in turn allows proper chromatin remodeling for  CENP-A deposition and long-term kinetochore maintenance. Other recent studies showed that one HAT involved
in centromere licensing for  CENP-A assembly
is KAT7, which acetylates histone H3 specifically at lysine 14. KAT7 recruits the chromatin remodeling factor
RSF1 through chromatin acetylation, and these proteins prevent heterochromatin
spreading by a histone eviction or turnover mechanism (). Therefore, epigenetic engineering
studies using the alphoid HAC allowed detailed analysis
to understand the specific contributions of different histone modifications
and transcription on kinetochore maintenance. Overall, they revealed
that there is a balance between histone modifications and transcription
that promote the proper epigenetic environment for kinetochore maintenance. Model
of the effects observed after engineering the alphoid-HAC by  epistasis assays. (a)
Tethering LSD2 (H3K4 demethylase) and p65 (H3K9 HAT). Chromatin competent
for RNAP II transcription and chromatin remodeling, allowing  CENP-A loading. (b) Tethering LSD2 (H3K4 demethylase)
and CENP-28 (H4K12 HAT). Chromatin competent for RNAP II transcription
but defective histone H3.3 turnover, abolishing new CENP-A loading,
favoring heterochromatin spreading into centrochromatin and ultimately
inactivating the HAC kinetochore. A model of the balance between centrochromatin and heterochromatin.
CENP-C binds to centromchromatin through CENP-A nucleosome and/or
CENP-B. CENP-C, CENP-I, and M18BP1 interact with each other. M18BP1
recruits HJURP through interactions with Mis18α (α) and
Mis18β (β). M18BP1 also interacts with acetyltransferase
KAT7. RSF1 assembled on the acetylated chromatin and prevents heterochromatin
spreading into centrochromatin through a histone eviction or turnover
mechanism. This mechanism may proceed in parallel with new CENP-A
deposition by HJURP. CENP-C and CENP-I Are Key Connecting Factors
for Kinetochore and CENP-A Assembly Although it is generally
accepted that CENP-A is an epigenetic mark that specifies centromere
identity, the pathways leading to the formation and maintenance of
centromere chromatin remain unclear. We previously generated cell
lines bearing the tetO alphoid array at ectopic integration sites
on chromosomal arms—the alphoid integrations, and we have recently used these to examine the
regulation of CENP-A assembly and maintenance at centromeres. The ability of the different factors fused to
tetR to nucleate centrochromatin was assessed by their ability to
assemble CENP-A at the ectopic integration sites. Many kinetochore
structural components can induce  CENP-A assembly
at the ectopic site. These components work by recruiting CENP-C and
subsequently recruiting M18BP1, which then recruits the CENP-A chaperone
HJURP as part of the Mis18 complex. CENP-I can
also recruit M18BP1 and therefore enhances centromeric M18BP1 assembly
downstream of CENP-C (). Thus, we suggest that CENP-C and CENP-I are key factors
connecting the kinetochore itself to new CENP-A assembly. To summarize,
the use of the alphoid arrays (either HAC or chromosomal
integrations) has generated a wide range of data that confirm the
long-standing hypothesis of the “epigenetic” chromatin
environment as integral to centromere identity (reviewed in ref ()). Moreover, the alphoid-HAC offers the potential to further dissect the requirement
of individual histone modifications and cellular processes involved
in kinetochore formation and maintenance. Future
Direction: Next-Generation Human Artificial
Chromosomes Containing Alphoid Arrays with Different Targeted Sequences Although heterochromatin is frequently found in close proximity
to centromeres, its role in chromosome segregation is not yet fully
understood and may vary among species.  may
provide an extreme example with its dependence on heterochromatin
for  deposition of CENP-A and for proper cohesin
dynamics. In plants, heterochromatin and
chromosome segregation appear to be largely unrelated: chromosome
transmission is impaired by mutations that affect cohesion but not
by those that affect heterochromatin formation. The role of pericentromeric heterochromatin in the function
of human kinetochores has been studied extensively but remains poorly
understood despite suggestions that heterochromatin could be involved
in maintaining genomic stability and that defects in heterochromatin
assembly at centromeres are associated with chromosome segregation
defects and tumorogenesis, as reviewed in ref (). One limitation
of the alphoid-HAC is the impossibility of separately
engineering the two centromeric domains (kinetochore and pericentromeric
heterochromatin) and study their functional interactions. Using RCA-TAR
technology, we have therefore constructed a novel synthetic HAC containing
two centromeric domains, based on two different synthetic alphoid
DNA arrays: the alphoid-HAC (). As a basis for the kinetochore, we used
a dimeric repeat based on chromosome 21 HOR DNA with CENP-B boxes
and tet operators in alternating repeats. As a basis for the heterochromatin,
we constructed an array based on 11 monomers from the chromosome 21
monomeric alpha-satellite DNA lacking CENP-B boxes and containing
lac operator (lacO) and yeast transcriptional factor Gal4. The lack
of CENP-B boxes should preclude CENP-A assembly on this array. The two arrays were combined by recombination in the yeast . Transfection of the hybrid array into HT1080
cells resulted in formation of the alphoid-HAC. Such hybrid HACs will allow to simultaneously
target different centromeric compartments independently using different
targeting systems. Next-generation of synthetic human artificial chromosomes.
(a)
Schematic representation of the genetic and epigenetic structure of
the alphoid-HAC. Green and orange arrows represent
the types of high order repeats (HORs) used for synthesizing the HAC.
(b) Oligo-FISH image of a metaphase spread containing the alphoid-HAC. Oligonucleotides recognizing tetO (red) and lacO+gal4
sequences (green) were used. Human Artificial Chromosomes for Measuring Chromosome
Instability (CIN) In Cancer Cells Chromosome
Instability (CIN) as a Driver of
Tumorigenesis Whole chromosomal instability (CIN), manifested
as unequal chromosome distribution during cell division, is a distinguishing
feature of most cancer types. CIN is generally considered
to drive tumorigenesis, but a threshold level exists whereby further
increases in CIN frequency actually hinder tumor growth. Therefore,
CIN can be used as a strategy for cancer therapy. At present, the rate of chromosome mis-segregation is quantified
by time-consuming techniques such as coupling clonal cell analysis
with karyotyping,  micronuclei (MNi) assays
or fluorescence  hybridization (FISH). In
addition, while CIN is appealing for therapeutic exploitation, drugs
that increase CIN beyond the therapeutic threshold are currently few
in number, and the clinical promise of targeting the CIN phenotype
warrants new screening efforts. HAC-Based
“Loss of Signal” Assay
for Measuring Chromosome Instability and Identification of Drugs that
Elevate CIN in Cancer Cells We have developed a new quantitative
and sensitive assay for measuring CIN based on the use of the alphoid-HAC carrying a constitutively expressed  transgene. Cells that inherit the HAC
display green fluorescence, while cells lacking the HAC do not. This
allows the measurement of HAC loss rate by routine flow cytometry.
Using this assay, we have analyzed well-known antimitotic, spindle-targeting
compounds. For each drug, the rate of HAC loss was measured by flow
cytometry as a proportion of nonfluorescent cells in the cell population,
which was confirmed by FISH analysis. On the basis of our estimates,
despite their similar cytotoxicity, the analyzed drugs affect the
rates of HAC mis-segregation during mitotic divisions differently.
The highest rate of HAC mis-segregation was observed for microtubule-stabilizing
drugs such as taxol and peloruside A. Thus, this simple HAC-based
assay allowed a quick and efficient screen for drugs that affect chromosome
mis-segregation. It also allowed us to rank compounds with similar
mechanisms of action based on their effect on the rate of chromosome
loss. We recently used this assay to analyze hundreds of anticancer
drugs used in clinics with respect to their effects on chromosome
transmission fidelity. Drugs with various
mechanisms of action, such as antimicrotubule activity, histone deacetylase
inhibition, mitotic checkpoint inhibition, and targeting of DNA replication
and damage responses, were included in the analysis. Ranking of the
drugs based on their ability to induce HAC loss revealed that paclitaxel,
gemcitabine, dactylolide, LMP400, talazoparib, olaparib, peloruside
A, GW843682, VX-680, and cisplatin were the top 10 drugs inducing
HAC CIN. Identification of currently used compounds that greatly increase
chromosome mis-segregation rates should expedite the development of
new therapeutic strategies to target and leverage the CIN phenotype
in cancer cells. HAC-Based “Gain
of Signal” High-Throughput
Screening Assay for Analysis of Chemical Libraries It is
difficult to use “loss of signal” assays for sensitive
high-throughput screening of chemical libraries using a fluorescence
microtiter plate reader. We therefore developed a novel “gain
of signal” HAC assay for CIN. In this system, the HAC carries
a constitutively expressed shRNA against an  transgene
integrated into the genome of the host cell line. Thus, cells that inherit the HAC do not display green fluorescence,
while cells lacking the HAC do (). We verified the accuracy of this assay
by measuring the level of CIN induced by known antimitotic drugs,
adding to the list of previously ranked CIN inducing compounds, two
newly characterized inhibitors of the centromere-associated protein
CENP-E, PF-2771, and GSK923295 that exhibit the highest effect on
chromosome instability measured to date. This assay was also sensitive
enough to detect increase of CIN after siRNA depletion of known genes
controlling mitotic progression through distinct mechanisms. Hence
this assay can be utilized in experiments to uncover new human  genes, which may expedite the development of new therapeutic
strategies that target cancer cells. Scheme of the high-throughput assay using
a fluorescence microtiter
plate reader to characterize chemical libraries. In a new system,
the alphoid-HAC carries a constitutively expressed
shRNA against the eGFP transgene integrated into the genome of the
human HT1080 cells. Thus, cells that inherit the HAC do not display
green fluorescence, while cells lacking the HAC do. It is expected
that the control population of untreated cells should show uniform
red fluorescence. A cell population that has lost the HAC after drug
treatment should be highly variable in fluorescence. The actual number
and percentage of cells with the HAC-shRNA can be measured by a scanning
microscope. Thus, the drugs, which increase HAC loss and, therefore,
increase spontaneous chromosome missegregation rates, may be identified.
(HiTS stands for High-Throughput Screening.) Natural HAC loss is a
parameter of cells that loose the HAC without drug treatment while
cultured without selective antibiotics. It is usually 2–5%
of cells in population. Human Artificial Chromosome To Identify Conserved
Dosage Chromosome Instability Genes in Human Cancer Somatic
copy number amplification and gene overexpression are common features
of many cancers. To determine the role of gene overexpression on CIN,
the Hieter’s group performed genome-wide screens in the budding
yeast for genes that cause CIN when overexpressed, a phenotype which
was referred as dosage CIN (dCIN), and identified 245  genes. This catalog of genes revealed human orthologs known to be
recurrently overexpressed and/or amplified in tumors. Using the “loss
of signal” HAC-based CIN assay (see ) the Hieter lab in collaboration with our group has shown
that two genes, , a tyrosyl-DNA-phosphdiesterase,
and , an RNA polymerase II TATA-box binding
factor, trigger CIN when overexpressed in human cells. The  genes identified in
this work may reveal genes that cause CIN when overexpressed in cancer,
which can then be leveraged through synthetic dosage lethality (SDL)
to selectively target tumors. The alphoid-HAC has proven to
be a highly versatile
reagent for studies of centromere epigenetics, for the permanent or
temporary introduction of genetic loci (genes including both introns,
exons, and their linked control elements) into wild-type and mutant
cells as well as for screens for drugs and genetic alterations that
induce chromosome instability. Advances in understanding chromatin
determinants required for CENP-A deposition and kinetochore assembly
offer opportunities to develop protocols for more efficient HAC formation
in a wide variety of cell lines. Construction of new HACs containing
different targeting sites in kinetochore chromatin and pericentromeric
heterochromatin will open a unique opportunity to study functional
interactions between these domains. The potential of the alphoid-HAC and its derivatives in synthetic biology for cell
and tissue engineering is only beginning to be explored. In the future,
it will be very interesting to see how the alphoid-HAC
and its derivatives may be used to engineer novel biosynthetic pathways
and novel synthetic chromosomes for potential gene therapy needs..