During embryo development an
initially symmetric multicellular structure undergoes spatiotemporally
controlled morphogenic changes to self-organize into complex tissue
architectures. At early stages, cells not only have the intrinsic
capacity to self-assemble into multicellular structures, but different
types of cells also self-sort into distinct patterns, which is the
prerequisite for the proper formation of subsequent embryo architectures. Even  dissociated cells self-assemble into
multicellular structures due to cell–cell adhesion and mixtures
of cells derived from different tissues possess the remarkable ability
to self-sort themselves into precise structures that resemble the
tissues of origin. In these multicellular
structures cells are able to organize by distinguishing “self”
from “non-self” based on differences in homophilic and
heterophilic cell–cell adhesions. In addition
to the cellular arrangement, interactions between cells also fundamentally
govern cell biology by communicating both biochemical and biophysical
signals. This is the reason why the misregulation
of cell–cell adhesions is associated with diseases such as
cancer, inflammation, and autoimmune diseases. Furthermore,
recent advances in organoid formation from different progenitor cell
types and the self-assembly of embryo
mimetic structures from embryonic and extraembryonic stem cells all demonstrate the enormous potential of multicellular architectures
in regenerative medicine and synthetic biology. Fundamentally, controlling when and where cell–cell adhesions
of different types form is a major driving force in controlling the
organization in multicellular structures and consequently their function. Therefore, the approaches to control different
types of cell–cell interactions independently with high spatiotemporal
control are powerful becaue they comprise the assembly and self-sorting
of cells into desired multicellular architectures from the bottom-up
and understanding principles that govern multicellular architectures. Key prerequisites to achieve the desired
self-assembly and self-sorting
in multicellular structures include the independent control over different
cell–cell adhesions within a mixture of different cell types.
Up to now, both genetic and chemical approaches that alter the cell surface have been developed to regulate
cell–cell adhesions for bottom-up tissue engineering and to
further understand of the role of cell–cell adhesions in cell
biology. It is possible to regulate the adhesiveness between different
cell types by adjusting the expression of different native cell–cell
adhesion receptors, such as cadherins, and cells expressing different types of cadherins, aggregate separately
when shaken in suspension, that is, sort out/self-sort. However, it is not possible to locally alter cell interactions or
reverse them at a desired point in time using this approach and even
less so for multiple cell types. On the other hand, chemical reactive
groups, formerly also used for self-assembly and self-sorting in colloidal
systems, have been introduced onto the cell surfaces such as clickable
groups, single stranded DNA, and supramolecular
interaction partners. All these synthetic
cell–cell interactions provide some spatiotemporal regulation, but suffer from dilution in the long term as
the cells divide and poor reversibility and do not allow us to control
multiple cell types in the same mixture. Consequently, these limitations
neither enable self-sorting in multicellular mixtures, nor specifically
manipulate different cell types in multicellular mixtures. This
study shows how we can regulate the adhesion of two different
types of cells independently using blue or red light. For this purpose,
we developed blue and red light switchable cell–cell interactions
using photoswitchable proteins as artificial adhesion molecules enabling
the assembly of desired multicellular structures by simply turning
on the right color of light. We show how these cell–cell interactions
can be used to independently and reversibly trigger both the self-assembly
of each cell type and the self-sorting in a multicellular mixture.
This study was inspired by a concept established with mixtures of
two types of colloidal polystyrene particles, which could self-sort
into distinct groups (also known as narcissistic or asocial self-sorting
in the colloidal self-assembly community) using different colors of
light. In this study, we extend the concept
of asocial self-sorting established for nonliving colloidal particles
to cells for the assembly of multicellular tissue-like structures
in the context of bottom-up tissue engineering. In this respect, this
study is a demonstration of how well-established concepts of self-assembly
and self-sorting for colloidal particles can be extended to multicellular
systems and the parallels between self-sorting in colloidal mixtures
and sorting-out in multicellular mixtures. Design
of Photoswitchable Homophilic Cell–Cell Adhesions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf In the first step, we focused on engineering two different cell
types that can be triggered with blue or red light independently to
form homophilic cell–cell interactions. Our aim was to control
each cell type using different colors of light as an external trigger
to later address them separately in multicellular mixtures that self-sort.
For this purpose, we expressed different photoswitchable proteins
that homodimerize after exposure to light illumination as new adhesion
receptors on the surfaces of cells. As photoswitchable cell adhesion
receptors, we chose two different proteins that respond to different
wavelengths: the blue light (450 nm) responsive protein LOV domain
VVD from () and the red light (660 nm) responsive protein Cph1 phytochrome-like
protein from . Both of these proteins homodimerize upon light
illumination and reversibly dissociate from each other in the dark
as well as under far-red light (720 nm) for Cph1. Using these two
molecularly orthogonal and independently addressable homophilic cell–cell
interactions, we aimed to control the self-assembly and the self-sorting
of each cell type individually (A,C, Supporting Information, ). We assumed that cells expressing VVD on their surfaces
would only interact with each other under blue light, but not under
red light, and cells expressing Cph1 on their surfaces would only
interact under red light, but not under blue light. Furthermore, we
expected that under coillumination with blue and red light each cell
type would sort itself out to form distinct clusters, analogous to
the self-sorting behavior observed when two cell types expressing
two different types of cadherins are mixed. The photoswitchable proteins
used in this study form head-to-tail homodimers (i.e., the N-terminal
of one protein binds to the C-terminal of the other protein) as shown
by crystalography and can mediate homophilic cell–cell
interactions between neighboring cells that express the protein. Unlike
other examples of artificial cell–cell adhesions, which form
heterophilic cell–cell adhesion (interaction between cells
of different types), here presented cell–cell adhesions
are homophilic. In this respect, the photoswitchable cell–cell
interactions mirror the homophilic interaction mode of cadherin mediated
cell–cell adhesions, but are different in terms of cell signaling
as they do not have an intracellular tail to link to the cell cytoskeleton
like cadherins. In addition, general advantages of photoregulation
are the high spatiotemporal control, tunable dynamics, and high orthogonality
without interference from other cellular processes, as previously
demonstrated in numerous optogenetic studies. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf To generate photoswitchable cell–cell interactions,
we first
expressed the proteins VVD or Cph1 on the surfaces of cells. In our
strategy, the photoswitchable proteins were cloned into the pDisplay
plasmid with an N-terminal murine Ig κ-chain leader sequence,
which directs the protein to the secretory pathway, and a C-terminal
platelet derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) transmembrane domain,
which anchors the protein to the plasma membrane, displaying it on
the extracellular side. Additionally, VVD variants and Cph1 were fused
at their C-termini to the fluorescent tags mCherry and GFP (green
fluorescent protein), respectively (). Two variants of the VVD protein were used, VVD and VVD High, a
mutant of VVD, which is a stronger homodimerizer and reverses slower
in the dark. These constructs were transfected
into the breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231, which was chosen because
it does not express Type I cadherins and therefore does not form strong
native cell–cell adhesions. Stable
monoclonal cell lines, expressing the photoswitchable proteins on
their surfaces (VVD-MDA, VVDHigh-MDA, and Cph1-MDA) were isolated
by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS), and single clones with
a high fluorescent signal were selected for future experiments (). The expression of the photoswitchable
protein on the cell surface was confirmed by antibody staining of
live cells without permeablization using flow cytometry and fluorescent
microscopy (). Moreover,
quantitative flow cytometry showed that 1 × 10 photoswitchable
proteins per cell were expressed on the cell surface and the different
photoswitchable proteins were expressed at similar levels (). Blue
and red light controlled cell–cell adhesions. (A) Cells
expressing VVD or VVDHigh on their surfaces do not interact in the
dark. Upon blue light illumination, the photoswitchable proteins on
neighboring cells homodimerize and result in cell–cell adhesions.
(B) VVD-MDA and VVDHigh-MDA cells grew as single cells in the dark
and in large clusters under blue light 4 h after seeding in 2D culture
at 8600 cells/cm. Green: actin phalloidin stain, blue:
nuclear DAPI stain. (C) Cells expressing Cph1 on their surface do
not interact with each other in the dark. Under red light, Cph1 proteins
on neighboring cells homodimerize and lead to cell–cell adhesions.
(D) Cph1-MDA cells grew as single cells under far-red and in large
clusters under red light 4 h after seeding in 2D culture at 8600 cells/cm. Red, actin phalloidin stain; blue, nuclear DAPI stain. All
scale bars are 200 μm. The nonmodified MDA-MB-231 cells used
as negative control do not cluster independent of illumination. Blue and Red Light-Responsive
Cell–Cell Interactions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf In a first step, we investigated
whether cells expressing the photoswitchable
proteins VVD, VVDHigh, and Cph1 were able to form cell–cell
interactions upon photoactivation under blue and red light, respectively.
For this purpose, the cells were seeded in 2D culture on glass substrates
at subconfluent densities (8600 cells/cm) and were incubated
for 4 h in the dark (or far-red for Cph1-MDA) or under activating
illumination (blue light for VVD- and VVDHigh-MDA, red light for Cph1-MDA).
During this time, cell–cell interactions could form as the
cells settled down and adhered to the glass surface. Subsequently,
the cell nuclei and the actin cytoskeleton were stained to visualize
the cell–cell interactions using the fluorescence microscopy.
In the dark, VVD- and VVDHigh-MDA cells were evenly distributed over
the substrate with few contacts between cells, and their morphology
resembled the nontransfected MDA-MB-231 cells. In contrast, under
blue light these cells grew in clusters and resembled cells, which
form strong cell–cell adhesions (B, ). Similarly, Cph1-MDA distributed as single cells under far-red
light, but formed large groups under red light illumination (D, ). Quantification of the light triggered clustering
of VVD and Cph1 expressing cell lines in 2D further supported these
observations (). In
a control experiment with the parent MDA-MB-231 cell line, no light-dependent
cell clustering was observed (B,D). The results showed that VVD and Cph1 are suitable
as adhesion receptors to form homophilic cell–cell interactions.
Unlike approaches that rely on the chemical modification of cell surfaces
to control cell–cell interactions, the genetically encoded
optogenetic adhesion molecules guarantee stable expression on the
cell surface as the cells were expanded and did not require constant
cell surface modification. Independent Photoactivation of VVD and Cph1
Mediated Cell–Cell
Adhesions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf In multicellular architectures, it is highly desirable
to control different cell types independently. To demonstrate that
the two different cell types that respond to blue and red light can
be triggered without interference, we quantified the aggregation of
cells expressing different photoswitchable proteins under different
illumination conditions in suspension cultures. In suspension, cells
expressing different photoswitchable proteins on their surfaces (5
× 10 cells/mL) were incubated on a 3D orbital shaker
at 30 rpm for 30 min in the dark, or either under far-red, blue, or
red light illumination (). Appropriate
shaking was important to increase the likelihood of cells coming into
proximity, allowing the formation of cell–cell interactions
and preventing sedimentation; however, too high shear forces can also
disrupt the clusters. Microscopy images
of the suspension cultures showed that the blue light responsive VVD-
and VVDHigh-MDA cells remained mostly as single cells in the dark
as well as under red and far-red light illumination, but formed large
aggregates under blue light (A and , tile scan
image of the entire sample over 2.5 cm). On the other
hand, red light responsive Cph1-MDA cells remained scattered in the
dark as well as under far-red and blue light illumination, but assembled
into aggregates under red light (A). To support this qualitative observation
of orthogonal response to blue and red light for VVD and Cph1 expressing
cells, the aggregation was quantified by identifying clusters of cells
(objects with an area >5000 μm, i.e., containing
at least 20 cells) in the sample. This analysis showed that VVD- and
VVDHigh-MDA as well as Cph1-MDA cells formed similarly large clusters
with an average projected area of ca. 23000 μm upon
photoactivation (B, , cluster size distribution).
Yet, for all three cell lines the aggregation in the dark or under
illumination that does not activate the photoswitchable proteins was
comparable to the background levels observed for the parent MDA-MB-231
cell (B, ). Moreover, we also demonstrated that for
VVD- and VVDHigh-MDA cells coillumination with far-red light, which
deactivates Cph1-MDA cells, does not interfere with the blue light
triggered clustering. It should also be noted that the blue and red
light used had no toxic effect on the cells as confirmed by a cell
viability assay (). Overall,
this analysis showed that VVD/VVDHigh-MDA and Cph1-MDA cells formed
cell–cell interactions only upon blue and red light illumination,
respectively, and therefore can be triggered independently from each
other without interference. Independent control over cell–cell interactions
with blue
and red light. (A) Bright field images of cells expressing different
photoswitchable proteins at their surface (5 × 10 cells/mL) incubated for 30 min on a 3D orbital shaker at 30 rpm
in suspension under different illumination conditions. VVD-MDA and
VVDHigh-MDA cells aggregated only under blue light and Cph1-MDA cells
only under red light but not in the dark or illumination with the
other color of light. Scale bars are 200 μm. (B) Quantification
of the cell aggregation in suspension cultures. For each sample an
area of 2.5 cm (64 fields of view) was imaged using a
tile scan and stitched together. All objects >5000 μm (containing at least 20 cells) were identified as clusters.
The
quantification showed that cells aggregation was light specific and
illumination with other wavelengths of light did not lead to significant
clustering beyond the dark control. The background clustering of MDA-MB-231
cells (negative control) was lower than for the transfected cell types.
Each experiment was performed in biological triplicate with two technical
replicates each. Error bars are the standard error of the mean cluster
area,  ≤ 0.05 presented as an asterisk (*)
and  < 0.01 presented as a double asterisk (**). Dynamics and Reversibility of Light Responsive
Cell–Cell
Interactions The reversibility and dynamics of cell–cell
adhesions are important characteristics for their biological function,
allowing cells to reorganize during morphogenesis and even allowing
cells to break free of multicellular structures. Tools that allow for such dynamic and reversible regulation of cell–cell
interactions are therefore extremely valuable when it comes to investigating
the importance of spatiotemporal regulation of cell–cell interactions. For the here presented cell–cell
interactions, we investigated the assembly and disassembly kinetics
as well as the repeated switchability of multicellular structures
formed from blue and red light responsive cells. When cell–cell
interactions were photoactivated VVD-MDA, VVDHigh-MDA, and Cph1-MDA
cells required different lengths of time to form aggregates in suspension
cultures (A).
Under blue light, VVDHigh-MDA cells formed aggregates of maximal size
within the first 30 min. The size of these aggregates then decreased
to a certain extent over the next few hours, presumably due to compacting
of the clusters. In contrast, VVD-MDA cells required 2.5 h under blue
light to assemble into aggregates of a maximum size. Interestingly,
while VVDHigh-MDA cells assembled faster than VVD-MDA cells, the VVD-MDA
cells assembled into larger aggregates than VVDHigh-MDA cells. Cph1-MDA
cells formed much larger multicellular assemblies under red light
over the course of 3 h compared with cells expressing VVD proteins
under blue light (ca. 2.5 fold). In fact, Cph1-MDA cells formed even
larger clusters than MCF7 cells, which like MDA-MB-231 are a breast
cancer cell line but with high E-cadherin expression. On the other
side, cells expressing VVD proteins clustered less than MCF7 cells.
Moreover, the cell clustering under light was faster for all photoswitchable
proteins and already significant after 30 min, while the E-cadherin
based clustering of MCF7 cells was slower and took over 1 h. These
differences in assembly dynamics and final aggregate size could be
explained by factors including the differences in intrinsic properties
of the photoswitchable proteins, such as the thermodynamic and mechanical
stability of the dimerization and the protein–protein interaction
dynamics. An important feature of native cell–cell adhesions is their
reversibility. Likewise, the cell–cell interactions mediated
by the photoswitchable proteins were expected to be reversible due
to the reversibility of the homodimerization of VVD in the dark and
Cph1 under far-red light (B). To confirm this, the different cell types (VVD-MDA,
VVDHigh-MDA, and Cph1-MDA) were first aggregated under illumination
that activated cell–cell adhesions for 30 min and subsequently
placed in the dark for VVD- and VVDHigh-MDA, or under far-red light
for Cph1-MDA cells. The aggregation analysis for all cell types showed
that within 10 min of stopping the photoactivation most of the aggregates
significantly disassembled and within 30 min the aggregation was comparable
to cells that were not photoactivated (kept in the dark for VVD- and
VVDHigh-MDA and under far-red light for Cph1-MDA for the entire duration
of the experiment). Interestingly, the reversion kinetics for the
different cell types were similar despite the different reversion
kinetics of the photoswitchable proteins at the molecular level (VVD
in dark  = 2 h, VVD-High in dark  = 4.7 h, Chp1 under far-red light  = ca. milliseconds). The differences in
reversion time at the molecular level and the cell–cell interactions
show that it is not the reversion at the molecular level but other
steps such as the separation of two cells from each other, the number
of multivalent interactions, and the disassembly of the multicellular
clusters that are the rate-determining steps. It should be noted that
we have observed similar differences in the reversion kinetics at
the molecular and the cell–cell adhesion level using other
heterophilic light responsive protein–protein interactions. The reversibility of the blue and red light-triggered cell–cell
adhesions allowed us to switch them on and off repeatedly. To check
repeated switchability, suspensions of different cell types were alternated
over three cycles between 30 min light activation and 30 min reversion.
Bright field images acquired after each step showed that VVD- and
VVDHigh-MDA cells associated into multicellular clusters every time
they were incubated under blue light and dissociated from each other
every time they were placed in the dark (A,B). Similarly, Cph1-MDA cells associated
and dissociated over multiple cycles when they were alternated between
red and far-red light (C). The quantitative analysis of the aggregation showed that
for all three cell types reversion was complete each time the interactions
were turned off following photoactivation. Further, in VVD-MDA cells
the amount of aggregation decreased in the second and third blue light
activation cycle compared to the first light activation, which indicates
partial fatigue (D). In contrast, VVDHigh-MDA and Cph1-MDA cells aggregated equally
well after each illumination cycle and showed no fatigue, that is,
no change in aggregation over multiple cycles (D,E). Overall, both the blue and red light
switchable cell–cell interactions were reversible and could
be switched on and off repeatedly, which captures important properties
of cell–cell interactions. Light induced cell clustering
and reversion kinetics. (A) Clustering
of VVD-, VVDHigh-, and Cph1-MDA cells (5 × 10 cells/mL
in suspension, 3D orbital shaker at 30 rpm) under photoactivation
over time. MCF7 cells, which have high E-cadherin expression, were
used as a positive control for cell clustering. (B) Reversibility
of the light mediated cell–cell interactions in the dark for
VVD- and VVDHigh-MDA cells, and far-red light for Cph1-MDA cells after
30 min prephotoactivation with appropriate light. The cluster area
at each time point was normalized to the cluster area after 30 min
photoactivation and 30 min in the dark. Error bars are the standard
error of the mean. Each experiment was performed in biological duplicate
with two technical replicates each. Reversibility of the photoswitchable cell–cell
interactions.
Bright field images of (A) VVD-MDA, (B) VVDHigh-MDA, and (C) Cph1-MDA
cells in a suspension (5 × 10 cells/mL) altered between
activating (30 min) and deactivating (30 min) conditions over multiple
cycles. Scale bars are 300 μm. (D) Average cluster size for
VVD-MDA (triangles) and VVDHigh-MDA (circles) over multiple blue light
(blue points) /dark (black points) cycles. Blue and gray shaded backgrounds
indicate 30 min periods where the blue light illumination was turned
on and off, respectively. (E) Average cluster size for Cph1-MDA cells
under altered illumination. Red and violet shaded backgrounds indicate
30 min periods under red (red square) and far-red (violet square)
light, respectively. Cells were kept in the dark (VVD- and VVDHigh-MDA)
or under far-red light (Cph1-MDA) as negative controls for the entire
experiment. Both blue and red light dependent cell–cell interactions
switched on and off over multiple cycles. For each sample an area
of 2.5 cm (64 fields of view) was imaged using a tile
scan and stitched together. Each experiment was performed in biological
triplicates with two technical replicates each. Error bars are the
standard error of the mean. Light Specific Self-Sorting in Multicellular Mixtures http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf Finally,
we explored whether we could control self-sorting in multicellular
mixtures and address different cell types within the mixture independently
after exposure to blue and red light. For this purpose, we mixed equal
numbers of VVD-MDA (labeled with a red fluorescent dye) and Cph1-MDA
(labeled with a green fluorescent dye) cells and observed their assembly
either under blue or red light or coillumination with both colors
of light after 30 min incubation. In the dark, the two cell types
were well dispersed (A) and their self-assembly was inducible for one cell type
at a time using two different wavelengths of light. Under blue light,
VVD-MDA cells assembled into clusters, which were observable as large
red fluorescent aggregates, and Cph1-MDA cells labeled in green remained
dispersed (B). Conversely, under red light, only Cph1-MDA cells self-assembled
into large aggregates, observed as large green fluorescent objects,
whereas VVD-MDA cells remained more scattered (C). Most remarkably, the simultaneous illumination
with blue and red light, resulted in the self-sorting of VVD-MDA and
Cph1-MDA cells into distinct green and red fluorescent cell clusters
with almost no intermixing of the two cell types within the same cluster
(D, ). The sorting out of the two cell types
was also confirmed by 3D confocal microscopy cross sections of the
clusters (). Further,
colocalization analysis of green and red labeled cells showed that
the two cell types separated into individual clusters (). The qualitative observations of light
specific cell-sorting were further supported by quantitative aggregation
analysis in mixed VVD-MDA and Cph1-MDA cultures based on bright field
microscopy images as described above (E). In the 1:1 mixed VVD-MDA and Cph1-MDA
cultures, the aggregation increased both upon blue or red light illumination
when compared to experiments in the dark. Moreover, the amount of
aggregation doubled under coillumination with blue and red light compared
to illumination with just one color of light, as both cell types were
photoactivated. It should be noted that the labeling with the fluorescent
dyes had no effect on the cell aggregation under light activation
(). Blue and red light controlled
self-assembly and self-sorting. Confocal
images of VVD-MDA (red fluorescence channel) and Cph1-MDA (green fluorescence
channel) mixed in a 1:1 ratio (A) in the dark, (B) under blue light,
(C) under red light, and (D) under coillumination with blue and red
light. Scale bars are 200 μm. (E) Average cluster size analysis
of VVD-MDA and Cph1-MDA cells mixed in a 1:1 ratio under different
illumination. For each sample an area of 2.5 cm (64 fields
of view) was imaged using a tile scan and stitched together. Each
experiment was performed in biological triplicate with two technical
replicates each. Error bars are the standard error of the mean,  < 0.01 presented as a double asterisk (**). Overall, these findings show that within
a mixture of two different
cell types, the assembly of multicellular structures can be triggered
independently using blue and red light for VVD-MDA and Cph1-MDA cells,
respectively. Further, the high specificity of the homodimerizations
of VVD and Cph1 provide molecularly orthogonal cell–cell interactions
and make it possible to achieve self-sorting within a multicellular
mixture. Previously, DNA and supramolecular interactions first used
in colloidal assembly were implemented onto cells to
assemble multicellular structures. The parallels between colloidal
and cellular self-assembly are also witnessed by  bead aggregation assays with cadherin coated beads. Transferring the recently reported sorting out behavior
(known as narcissistic or asocial self-sorting in the colloidal self-assembly
community) achieved with mixtures of VVDHigh and Cph1 coated polystyrene
beads to cells shows that not just concepts
in colloidal self-assembly but self-sorting also apply to multicellular
structures. The comparable self-assembly and self-sorting observed
in synthetic colloidal systems and in multicellular mixtures shows
that these photoswitchable proteins provide a transferable framework
to produce higher order architectures and achieve self-sorting of
micrometer sized objects. The possibility of triggering different
cell–cell interactions
within a multicellular assembly using different colors of light offers
many opportunities in the bottom-up assembly of diverse cell types
into tissue-like structures and understanding the principles behind
self-organization during development. The remarkable and innate ability
of cells to self-assemble and sort themselves out into tissue-like
architectures reveal the high potential of bottom-up tissue engineering
and make controlling cell–cell adhesions a very powerful tool
to program synthetic tissues. In this study, we have demonstrated how we can control the assembly
and self-sorting of one cell type independently in the presence of
another cell type relying on orthogonal triggers (i.e., blue and red
light) and orthogonal molecular interactions (VVD and Cph1). These
photoswitchable proteins can be integrated into different types of
cells with diverse genetic backgrounds as they are genetically encodable.
The reversibility of the photoswitchable cell–cell adhesions
makes it possible to bring certain cells in contact for a desired
time and later remove the interactions. On the other hand, depending
on the cell type secondary interactions between cells, endogenous
cell adhesion molecules and extracellular matrix molecules could lead
to the further stabilization of multicellular structures even if illumination
is stopped. In this study, we have only temporally controlled cell–cell
adhesions using different illumination but photoregulation in general
also allows for spatial control through local illumination and tuning
of interactions by altering illumination intensity and frequency.
These features of the photoswitchable cell–cell adhesion open
the door for building more complex and programmable tissues from cellular
building blocks. The photoswitchable cell–cell interactions
further provide
a unique chance of investigating the cell biology related to cell–cell
interactions. Just like the native cadherin of cell–cell adhesions,
the VVD and Cph1 mediated cell–cell adhesions also generate
artificial adhesions between the same types of cells. Initial cell
clustering analysis showed that especially Cph1-MDA cells could form
equally large multicellular aggregates as MCF7 cells, which express
high levels of E-cadherin. This finding suggests that the opto-adhesion
molecules are comparable to native adhesion molecules but an exact
comparison in terms of adhesion strength and dynamics as well as their
compatibility requires further investigation. Moreover, the photoswitchable
cell–cell adhesions like native cell–cell adhesions
are switchable and dynamic, and can potentially be tuned and spatiotemporally
controlled as it is often the case during many biological processes.
Differently from the cadherin-based cell–cell interaction these
photoswitchable cell–cell interactions do not link to the actin
cytoskeleton and the associated signaling pathways. This fact provides
a unique tool to dissect biochemical from biophysical signals transduced
by cell–cell adhesions. More generally, these findings suggest
that it is possible to assemble multicellular structures from cells
and control parts of them with blue and red light switchable cell–cell
interaction pairs. Analogous to the sorting out of cells that express
different cadherins types, cells expressing blue and red light-switchable
surface proteins were able to replicate the same self-sorting behavior.
Future studies that take advantage of the spatiotemporal control that
photoregulation provides will allow the assembly of new multicellular
structures and the study of related questions in cell biology. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf The VVD and the Cph1 gene
were synthesized in the pET-21b(+) plasmid between the NdeI-XhoI and
NdeI-I cutting sites, respectively, by Genscript.
The VVDHigh was derived from VVD by point mutations using Agilent
kit (Site-Directed Mutagenesis kit, Catalog #200523). In a first step,
mCherry and GFP were cloned into the pDisplay mammalian expression
vector (Invitrogen V66020) between the Ig κ-chain leader sequence
and the platelet derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) domain using
Gibson cloning with the primers listed in  to yield mCherry-pDisplay and GFP-pDisplay, respectively.
In a second step, the photoswitchable proteins VVD- and VVDHigh were
cloned into mCherry-pDisplay and Cph1 into GFP-pDisplay between the
Ig κ-chain leader sequence and the fluorescent proteins. The
pDisplay plasmid (Invitrogen) fuses the photoswitchable protein and
the fluorescent protein at the N-terminal to the murine Ig κ-chain
leader sequence, which directs the protein to the secretory pathway
and at the C-terminal to the platelet-derived growth factor receptor
(PDGFR) transmembrane domain, which anchors the proteins on the extracellular
part of the plasma membrane. Moreover, the pDisplay plasmid contains
a myc-epitope on the extracellular part to detect the expression of
surface proteins. All cells were cultured
in DMEM (Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle Medium)/F12 (1:1) (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS
(fetal bovine serum, Gibco) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C
and 5% CO. MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected using lipofectamin
3000 (ThermoFisher, L300001) following the manufacturer’s protocol
for a 6-well plate. After 24 h, the cell culture medium was supplemented
with 1800 μg/mL G418 (Geneticin, Roche), and cells were maintained
with G418 for all further experiments. After culturing the cells for
2 weeks with G418 selection, the transfected cells were sorted at
the core facility of the Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) in Mainz
using BD FACS Aria III Cell sorter into a 96-well plate with one cell
per well. After expanding monoclonal cultures, their fluorescence
was measured again by flow cytometry (Attune NXT Acoustic Focusing
Cytometer, Invitrogen). The clones with the highest fluorescent signal
among all sorted cells were selected for future experiments. Flow Cytometry
Analysis for the Detection of Surface Protein
Expression Cells were washed with phosphate buffer saline
(PBS). Afterward the cells were detached with accutase (Gibco, Catalog
#A1110501) and subsequently washed twice with ice-cold PBS. Subsequently,
1 × 10 cells were resuspended in 100 μL of
10 μg/mL of the primary antibody rabbit anti-c-myc (Invitrogen,
catalog #700648) in PBS and incubated at 4 °C while being gently
mixed for 45 min. Then, the cells were washed three times by adding
900 μL of cold PBS to the cells and thereafter harvested by
centrifugation (400, 4 °C for 5 min). VVD-MDA
and VVDHigh-MDA cells were resuspended in 100 μL of 10 μg/mL
Alexa 488 goat antirabbit IgG (Invitrogen, catalog #A27034) and Cph1-MDA
cells were resuspended in 100 μL of 10 μg/mL of Alexa
594 goat antirabbit IgG (Invitrogen, catalog #A-11037) and incubated
at 4 °C while being gently mixed for 30 min. The cells were washed
three times with 900 μL of cold PBS and finally resuspended
in 500 μL of cold PBS. The cells were analyzed using flow cytometry
(Invitrogen, Attune NxT Flow Cytometer) and each analysis contained
at least 10 000 gated events. Rabbit-IgG (Invitrogen, catalog
#11-4614-80) was used as a primary antibody isotype control to assess
the background signal. Quantification of Protein Expression on the
Cell Surfaces Cells were cultured overnight, 5 × 10 cells per
t25-flask with 5 mL of medium. The next day, all cells (VVD-, VVDHigh-,
Cph1- MDA, and MDA-MB-231) were washed with PBS, detached with accutase
and then washed with ice-cold PBS twice. A million cells from each
cell type were incubated with 10 μg/mL rabbit anti-c-myc (Invitrogen,
catalog #700648) in 100 μL of PBS at 4 °C for 45 min while
gently mixing. Then, the cells were washed three times with 900 μL
of cold PBS and harvested after each step by centrifugation (400, 4 °C for 5 min). The cells were resuspended in 100
μL of 10 μg/mL Alexa 488 goat antirabbit IgG (Invitrogen,
catalog #A27034) and incubated at 4 °C for 45 min while being
gently mixed. The cells were washed three times with 900 μL
of cold PBS and finally resuspended in 200 μL of cold PBS. The
cells were analyzed using flow cytometry (Invitrogen, Attune NxT Flow
Cytometer). The Quantum Alexa Fluor 488 MESF kit (Bang Laboratories,
Inc., 488A) was used for quantification following the manufacture’s
protocol. The median of fluorescence peak from each cell type was
measured and converted into MESF (molecules of equivalent soluble
fluorochrome) based on the calibration curve generated using the QuickCal
v.2.4 software from Bang Laboratories. The MESF of same cell type
(negative control) that was not incubated with antibodies and MESF
for MDA-MB-231 cells incubated with antibodies was subtracted for
final calculation of specific MESF of each cells type. Immunostaining
for the Detection of Surface Protein Expression VVD-MDA,
VVDHigh-MDA, and Cph1-MDA cells were seeded on μ-Slide
4 Well Glass Bottom (ibidi, catalog #80427) at 2 × 10 cell/well and cultured overnight. The cells were washed three times
with PBS and blocked with 1% BSA (bovine serum albumin) in HBSS (Hank’s
Balanced Salt Solution, Gibco, Catalog #14025050) for 20 min. Afterward,
the cells were stained with the primary antibody rabbit anti-c-myc
(Invitrogen, catalog #700648) diluted in HBSS 1:500 and incubated
for overnight at 4 °C. Cells were washed three times with cold
HBSS, fixed with 2% PFA (paraformaldehyde) in HBSS at room temperature
for 10 min and subsequently blocked with 1% BSA for 10 min. The cells
were stained with a fluorescently labeled secondary goat antirabbit
antibody (Alexa488 labeled for VVD-MDA and VVDHigh-MDA and Alexa594
labeled for Cph1-MDA cells), diluted 1:1000 in HBSS then incubated
overnight at 4 °C. The cells were washed four times with HBSS
and the nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 (Invitrogen, catalog
#H3570), diluted to 1:1000, and incubated for 10 min at room temperature.
Confocal images were acquired with a 153.6 μm pinhole in the
Hoechst 33342, Alexa488, and Alexa594 channels on a laser scanning
confocal microscope (Leica SP8) equipped with 405, 488, and 552 nm
laser lines and a 20×/0.95 air objective to detect the nuclei,
the transfected protein using the c-myc epitope, and the protein expression
in the fluorescent protein channel (mCherry-tag for VVD and VVDHigh
and GFP-tag for Cph1). Light-Responsive Cell–Cell Interactions
in 2D http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf All cells were washed with PBS and detached with accutase
for 10
min at room temperature. Thereafter, for 2D culture experiments cells
were seeded at a cell density of approximately 8600 cells/cm on 24 mm × 24 mm cover glass slides. The LED light module V10
with TS-110 Controller (CLF Plant Climatics GmbH) was used in this
experiment, and dark samples were wrapped in aluminum foil (). VVD- and VVDHigh-MDA cells were
cultured in the presence of 0.5 μM FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide)
and cultured either in the dark or under blue light (463 nm, 20.4
μW/cm) for 4 h at 37 °C and 5% CO. Cph1-MDA cells were cultured in the presence of 5 μM of PCB
(phycocynobilin) and cultured either under far-red light (734 nm,
25.2 μW/cm) or under red light (620 nm, 23.2 μW/cm) for 4 h at 37 °C and 5% CO. Moreover, in
clustering experiments MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cells were used as a negative
and positive controls, respectively, and were handled as the transfected
cells. All cells were fixed with 2% PFA in PBS for 15 min at
room temperature, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton-X-100 in PBS for
5 min and the actin cytoskeleton was stained with Phalloidin-iFlour
488 reagent (Abcam, ab176753) for VVD- and VVDHigh-MDA cells, and
Phalloidin-iFlour 594 reagent (Abcam, ab176757) for Cph1-MDA cells
according to manufacture protocol. Subsequently, the cells were mounted
with mowiol containing 1 μg/mL DAPI (4′,6-diamidine-2′-phenylindole
dihydrochloride) for nuclear staining. Fluorescence images were acquired
in the TRITC, FITC, and DAPI channels in a tile scan of an area of
1 cm on an inverted fluorescence microscope (Leica DMi8)
through a 5× air objective. For the cell clustering analysis
2D cultures the number of cells
was quantified based on the DAPI staining and the number of cells
growing in clusters was quantified based on the actin staining using
CellProfiler 2.2.0 and MATLAB. In the
actin channel, objects with an area >300 μm were
classified as cells, objects with an area of 300–3000 μm as single cells, and objects with an area >10000 μm as clusters of cells, as described previously. Light-Dependent Aggregation in Suspension
Cultures http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00150/suppl_file/sb0c00150_si_001.pdf All cell types were detached using accutase, resuspended
at 5 ×
10 cell/mL in DMEM/F-12 without phenol red + glutamine containing 25 mM of HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid), and 1 mL aliquots were added into 1.5 mL LoBind microfuge tubes
(Eppendorf). In addition, the medium was supplemented with 0.5 μM
FAD for VVD- and VVDHigh-MDA cells and 5 μM of PCB for Cph1-MDA
cells. Afterward, cells were illuminated with red (620 nm, 1440 μW/cm), far-red light (734 nm, 1120 μW/cm), blue
light (463 nm, 544 μW/cm) () and in the dark (wrapped in aluminum foil) for 30 min on
the 3D orbital shaker at 30 rpm at room temperature. LED grow light
panels (Albrillo) were used in this experiment, with one and two neutral-density
filter for blue and red light, respectively. The neutral-density filter
was used to minimize the scattered light of the light panel. Each
neutral-density filter reduced 50% of the light intensity. The whole
1 mL suspension of cells was fixed with 500 μL of 4% PFA in
PBS after incubation under light or in the dark and was transferred
to a 12-well plate. Bright field images were acquired for a total
area of 2.5 cm (8 × 8 tile scan images; imaged area,
2.5 cm) using an inverted fluorescence microscope (Leica
DMi8) with a 5× air objective. Images were analyzed with Fiji
1.52d. The bright field of 8 × 8 tile scan images were individually
background corrected for uneven illumination and for dirt/dust on
the lenses by using a pseudo flat field correction with a blurring
stack of five and merged into a single image. The area of individual
cell clusters was determined using a particle analysis tool and clusters
were defined as objects >5000 μm, which corresponds
to a projection area of at least 20 cells (the area for a single cell
is equal to 200–250 μm). For automated image
analysis a macro script was written, which can be found in the . The area of individual
cell clusters and the mean cluster area were calculated using OriginPro2019.
Each experiment was performed in biological triplicate with two technical
replicates ( = 3 × 2). The data are presented
as the mean cluster area ± SE for clusters detected in all experiments.
The Mann–Whitney test was performed to analyze the statistical
difference.  > 0.1 ns,  ≤
0.05 presented as an asterisk (*),  < 0.01 presented
as a double asterisk (**) and  < 0.001 presented
as a triple asterisk (***). Dynamics and Reversibility of Blue and Red
Light-Triggered Cell–Cell
Interactions The assembly and disassembly kinetics as well
as the repeated on/off switching of cell–cell interactions
were evaluated in suspension cultures as described above with variations
in the illumination protocols. For the assembly kinetics, the cells
were placed under illumination (blue light for VVD-MDA and VVDHigh-MDA,
red light for Cph1-MDA) for up to 4 h before fixing the cells. To
access the reversion kinetics, cells were first activated for 30 min
under illumination and subsequently placed in the dark for VVD-MDA
and VVDHigh-MDA, and far-red light for Cph1-MDA cells. For the repeated
on/off switching VVD-MDA and VVDHigh-MDA cells were alternated between
30 min blue light and 30 min in the dark, and Cph1-MDA cells were
alternated between 30 min red light and 30 min far-red light. After
each point in time two samples were fixed with PFA and analyzed as
described above. Self-Sorting in Mixed Cell Populations VVD-MDA and
Cph1-MDA in suspension were stained with CellMask Deep Red Plasma
Membrane (Invitrogen, C10046) and CellTracker Green CMFDA Dye (Invitrogen,
C2925), respectively, using a 1:1000 dilution of each dye and incubating
them at 37 °C for 30 min, while mixing the cells every 10 min.
The cells were covered with aluminum foil to protect them from light.
The cells were then centrifuged at 400 for 5 min,
the medium was discarded, and cell pellets were resuspended in DMEM/F12
medium supplemented with 25 mM HEPES, 0.5 μM FAD, and 5 μM
PCB. The stained VVD-MDA and Cph1-MDA were mixed in a 1:1 ratio in
total 1 × 10 cell/mL density in a total volume of
1 mL in 1.5 mL Lobind tubes, and the cell mixtures were illuminated
with blue light, red light, blue and red light, or kept in the dark
for 30 min on the 3D orbital shaker at 15 rpm at room temperature.
The cells were fixed with 500 μL of 4% PFA and fluorescent images
were acquired on a confocal microscope. The same experiment was repeated
with unstained cells, and after fixation bright field images were
acquired for aggregation analysis. To exclude the effect of staining
on the cell clustering, the cell clustering experiments were performed
with stained and unstained VVD-MDA and Cph1-MDA cells under blue and
red light, respectively. The confocal
images of the
self-sorting were analyzed by using imagJ and the plugin EzColocalization. The images in the red and green fluorescent
channels were loaded into the EzClocalization and the colocalization
of the two fluorescent signals was analyzed using the TOS (threshold
overlap score, linearly rescaled) and PCC (Pearson’s correlation
coefficient) with 10% FT (top percentage of pixels threshold). Both
for TOS and PCC, values of −1 represent complete anticolocalization,
values of 0 represent no colocalization, and values of 1 represent
complete colocalization. VVD-MDA and Cph1-MDA cells were prepared
as for light-dependent aggregation studies at 5 × 10 cells in a total volume of 1 mL media in 1.5 mL Lobind tubes and
incubated under illumination or in the dark for 30 min. Subsequently,
100 μL of medium containing cells was transferred to a 96-well
plate. The viability of the cells was measured using the CellTiter-Glo2.0
Assay (Promega) according to manufacturer’s instructions. All the experiments were performed
with 2 techniques in 3 biological replications. The statistical analyses
were determined using a nonparametric test by the two-independent
samples Mann–Whitney test. All the data are shown as mean ±
SE. In box plots each box is defined as the 25th and 75th percentile
of the data, the line in the box represents the median, the dots the
mean, and whiskers the 10th and 90th percentiles. The significant
level was set at  < 0.01. The groups with “ns”
have no significant differences. OriginPro software version 2019 (OriginLAb,
Corporation, Northampton, MA, USA) was used for all analyses..