Reduced one-carbon
(C1) compounds
are abundant in natural habitats (, methanol
in phyllosphere, the aerial parts of plants) and prevalent as byproducts of industrial processes (, carbon monoxide in the flue gas of the steel industry). As C1 compounds can also be produced abiotically
in an efficient and cost-effective manner—for example, formate
from electrochemical reduction of CO—they
could potentially serve as ideal feedstocks for sustainable microbial
growth and bioproduction, alleviating the problems associated
with sugar feedstocks, the use of which erodes food security and biodiversity. Yet, biological assimilation of C1 compounds
is limited to a small
number of metabolic pathways and specialized microbial lineages. Synthetic biology can prove useful by offering tailor-made solutions
that can surpass natural alternatives. In previous studies, we put forward the reductive glycine pathway
as the most efficient route for aerobic growth on formate. In this pathway, formate is first
attached to tetrahydrofolate (THF)—the universal C1 carrier—and
then reduced to methylene-THF. The glycine cleavage/synthase system
(GCS) then condenses the C1-moiety of methylene-THF with CO and ammonia to give glycine. Glycine can be further metabolized
to biomass and chemical products, , by further
condensation with the C1-moiety of methylene-THF to give serine
that is deaminated to pyruvate. Only a small group of anaerobic purine- and amino-acid-degrading
microbes are thought to produce glycine from one carbon units. In a recently published paper, we demonstrated that the reductive
activities of the THF enzymes and GCS can support the net biosynthesis
of C2 and C3 compounds from formate and CO in . Yet, as  does not harbor an NAD-dependent formate dehydrogenase
(FDH)—which is vital for using formate to supply the cell with
reducing power and energy—it might not be an ideal host. Furthermore,
the activity of the reductive glycine pathway in  was possible only  overexpression of foreign
enzymes (from ). As the
enzymatic components of the reductive glycine pathway are prevalent
throughout the tree of life, we wondered whether the pathway could
be established using only  enzymes of a
model host microbe that also naturally harbors NAD-dependent FDH.
This would support the premise that C1 assimilation  the reductive glycine pathway could be a “latent”
metabolic capability shared by multiple microorganisms, which could
be induced by overexpression of naturally occurring components. We decided to focus on the model yeast  since it endogenously harbors NAD-dependent FDH as well as all the
enzymatic components of the reductive glycine pathway. Furthermore,
the GCS of yeast was previously demonstrated to be reversible, such
that feeding with C-formate resulted in detection of
labeled glycine. However,  production of glycine from formate and CO (A)—as to indicate
the possibility to support growth on C1 compounds—was
never demonstrated in any eukaryotic organism. Here, we show the biosynthesis
of glycine in a eukaryotic host  the reductive glycine pathway upon overexpression of native enzymes.
We further demonstrate that yeast can sustain a constant growth rate
across almost 3 orders of magnitude of formate concentrations, making
it an especially promising host to support the assimilation of this
key C1 compound. Reductive glycine pathway and a selection scheme for its
activity
in yeast. (A) The “metabolic engine” of the reductive
glycine pathway: condensation of C1-moieties into the C2 compound
glycine. Substructure of tetrahydrofolate (THF) is shown in brown.
Lipoic acid attached to the H-protein of the glycine cleavage/synthase
system (GCS) is shown in green. (B) Gene deletions (marked in red)
required for the construction of a glycine auxotroph strain, which
we used to select for glycine biosynthesis from the activity of the
reductive glycine pathway; pathway enzymes are shown in green. We started with a glycine
auxotroph strain—schematically
shown in B—deleted
in the mitochondrial and cytosolic isozymes of serine hydroxymethyltransferase
(ΔSHM1 ΔSHM2), as well as in threonine aldolase (ΔGLY1)
and alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase (ΔAGX1). This metabolic background was used to select
for the biosynthesis of glycine from formate and CO. We
cultivated the strain under high concentrations of formate (100 mM),
CO (10%), and ammonia (100 mM), in order to kinetically
and thermodynamically push the mitochondrial MIS1 enzyme (trifunctional
formyl-THF synthetase, methenyl-THF cyclohydrolase, and methylene-THF
dehydrogenase) and the GCS in the reductive
direction. Still, we were unable to establish growth without adding
glycine to the medium. This indicated that the endogenous activities
of MIS1, the GCS, or both are too low to support the required flux. Next, we used the recently developed AssemblX method to construct plasmids overexpressing the native
MIS1 gene (pJGC1), the genes of the GCS (pJGC2), or both (pJGC3).
As shown in , each gene was regulated by a (different) strong constitutive yeast
promoter to ensure high expression levels. These plasmids were transformed
into the glycine auxotroph strain. The transformed strains were then
cultivated in the presence of formate and high CO. Growth
of the strains harboring pJGC1 or pJGC2 was not observed without glycine
supplement, regardless of the concentrations of formate and CO. However, the strain harboring pJGC3—expressing both
MIS1 and the genes of the GCS—was able to grow with formate
substituting for glycine in the medium. This growth was dependent
on elevated CO concentration (10% CO) that
is needed both thermodynamically, pushing the reversible GCS in the
reductive direction, and kinetically, due to the relatively low affinity
toward inorganic carbon. As shown in A and B, formate concentrations below 1 mM
sufficed to support growth
of the glycine auxotroph strain. Maximal growth rate (or close to
it) was observed with 1 mM formate and remained nearly constant up
to 500 mM formate. At 750 mM formate, growth was severally inhibited,
and at 1000 mM formate, no growth was observed. As formate is added
as sodium salt, inhibition at concentrations above 500 mM might be
attributed to the accumulation of sodium ions. However, while we did
observe growth inhibition with NaCl concentrations above 500 mM, the
growth inhibition associated with >500 mM sodium formate was considerably
more severe. This indicates that at these high concentrations, formate
becomes toxic to yeast. To confirm that glycine is indeed produced solely  the reductive activity of MIS1 and the GCS, we conducted
several
carbon labeling experiments providing (i) C-formate and
unlabeled CO, (ii) C-CO and unlabeled
formate, or (iii) C-formate and C-CO. As shown in , the results match the expected labeling: Threonine was partially labeled when C-CO was used, as it is derived from carbon-fixing anaplerosis.
The structure
of methionine corresponds to that of threonine with the addition of
a carbon that originates from methyl-THF. The difference between the
labeling of methionine and threonine thus represents the labeling
of cytoplasmatic C1 units carried by THF. As shown by the labeling
pattern observed upon feeding a WT strain with C-formate,
this C1 moiety is only partially derived from formate, where the rest
originates from serine cleavage. On the other hand, in the glycine
auxotroph strain, in which serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHM1,
SHM2) is deleted, all cytoplasmic C1 units originate from formate. Upon feeding with C-formate, alomst all glycine
was singly labeled in the glycine auxotroph strain expressing MIS1
and genes of the GCS. This confirms the activity of the reductive
glycine pathway where glycine is derived from formate. When feeding
with C-CO, glycine was only partially labeled,
which can be attributed to the high production rate of unlabeled CO by mitochondrial pyruvate oxidation as well as acetyl-CoA
oxidation  the TCA cycle. Serine was partially
labeled in the WT strain upon feeding with C-formate,
indicating substantial reductive flux of formate toward methylene-THF
and the beta-carbon of serine. This labeling was obviously absent
in the glycine auxotroph strain in which serine hydroxymethyltransferase
is deleted. As a control, we confirmed that alanine was always unlabeled. Three plasmids harboring
genes encoding for different subsets of
the enzymes of the reductive glycine pathway. pJGC1 harbors only the
gene that encodes for MIS1, a trifunctional enzyme that converts formate
to methylene-THF. pJGC2 harbors the genes encoding for the subunits
of the GCS (the gene encoding for dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase,
LPD1, was not overexpressed since we reasoned its native expression
would suffice as it participates in other complexes in the mitochondria, , pyruvate dehydrogenase and 2-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase).
pJGC3 harbors the genes encoding for MIS1 and the enzymes of the GCS.
Each gene was regulated by a different strong, constitutive promoter
as shown in the figure. Each plasmid was based on the pL1A-lc vector
backbone as explained in the  section. Formate-dependent growth. (A) Growth of the
glycine auxotroph strain
harboring the pJGC3 plasmid using different concentrations of formate,
2% glucose and 10% CO. “No OE” refers to
the negative control, , a glycine auxotroph strain
without a plasmid, while “No OE + glycine” refers to
the positive control, , a glycine auxotroph strain
without a plasmid where glycine was added to the medium. Each curve
represents the average of three replicates, which were not different
by more than 10%. Growth curves were cut after reaching stationary
phase. (B) Calculated growth rate as a function of formate concentration.
Growth rate increases with increasing formate concentration up to
1 mM, remains rather stable up to 500 mM, and then sharply decreases
with higher concentrations. . C-labeling
experiments confirm glycine production
from formate. Fraction of labeling of different amino acids in different
strains and labeled feedstocks is shown. “G” corresponds
to glycine, “S” to serine, “A” to alanine,
“M” to methionine, and “T” to threonine.
Complete labeling of glycine in the glycine auxotroph strain harboring
pJGC3 upon feeding with C-formate confirms that glycine
biosynthesis occurs only  the reductive glycine
pathway. Partial labeling of glycine with C-CO is attributed to the high production rate of unlabeled CO in the mitochondria. See main text for a detailed discussion on
the labeling pattern of these amino acids. The results presented here confirm that the “metabolic engine”
of the reductive glycine pathway—net production of the C2 compound
glycine from the C1 moieties formate and CO—can
be established within a model microbe using only native enzymes. While
this activity was made possible only  overexpression
of the necessary endogenous genes (using strong endogenous promoters),
once established, it was able to support formate utilization with
high affinity, as indicated by the fact that 0.125 mM formate sufficed
to support growth. Interestingly, growth rate showed little change
with formate concentration varying between 1 and 500 mM. This suggests
that, beyond the high efficiency of the reductive glycine pathway,
yeast is highly tolerant to formate, a compound that is known to inhibit
the growth of other microorganisms at a much lower concentration. Specifically, many bacteria show severe growth impairment at formate
concentrations higher than 100 mM. Yeast
high tolerance toward formate is in line with previous reports that
formate can serve as an auxiliary substrate enhancing growth by providing
further reducing power  the endogenous activity
of FDH. Since yeast, as well as many other
microorganisms, harbors all
the enzymes of the reductive glycine pathway, it is tempting
to ask why it cannot support net glycine biosynthesis from formate
without the need for gene overexpression. One possible answer is that
formate—while being a metabolic intermediate transferred between
organelles in eukaryotic organisms—is
not a common compound found in the native habitat of this microorganism.
Hence, cells were not adapted to incorporate it efficiently. Another
barrier relates to the high concentration of CO required
to thermodynamically and kinetically support pathway activity—a
condition that might not be frequently met in the relevant natural
environment. Luckily, sustaining high CO concentration
is quite
straightforward within a biotechnological context, as is the case
in multiple fermentation processes, for example, autotrophic cultivation
of acetogens. Moreover, in the ultimate
yeast strain growing on formate, the oxidation of this compound to
CO (to provide the cell with reducing power and energy)
is expected to surpass CO assimilation. Hence, maintaining
high CO concentration within the bioreactor would be rather
straightforward and at most would require the recycling of CO from the bioreactor outflow. In the current study,
the dependence of cellular growth on formate
is rather low, where only the biosynthesis of glycine and the
cellular C1-units requires this C1 feedstock. Confirming this, we
did not observe any significant decrease in the concentration of formate
in the medium when cultivating our strain for 30 h and up to an OD
∼ 2 (with a starting concentration of 10 mM, see ). We speculate, however, that once formate will become
a sole carbon source for growth, its consumption rate will become
significant. To conclude, we demonstrate the  production
of glycine in a eukaryotic organism. Our findings suggest that  can become an ideal host for the reductive
glycine pathway as it harbors a highly efficient NAD-dependent FDH,
requires overexpression of only endogenous enzymes, and supports a
rather constant growth rate across ∼3 orders of magnitude of
formate concentration. It remains for future studies to engineer the
downstream assimilation of glycine to biomass, presumably also  native enzymes, , serine hydroxymethyltransferase
and serine deaminase. Beyond yeast, this study suggests that the activity
of the reductive glycine pathway might be a “latent”
metabolic trait in many microorganisms that endogenously harbor all
pathway components, requiring only change in gene expression to support
formate assimilation. A recent study that indicates the endogenous
activity of the pathway supports this premise. PCR reactions were done
with PrimeSTAR GXL
polymerase (BD Clontech GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) or Phusion High-Fidelity
polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH, Dreieich, Germany), following
the manufacturer’s recommendations. All primers were synthesized
by Eurofins Genomics GmbH (Ebersberg, Germany). All media and media
supplements were ordered from Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH (Munich, Germany).
Glucose was ordered from Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG (Karlsruhe, Germany). Yeast Strains, Media, and Cultivation MATa ura3-1 trp-1 ade2-1 his3-11-15 leu2-3-112 can1-100 shm1::HIS3
shm2::LEU2 glyΔ0 AGX1::KanMX4 MATa his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0
ura3Δ0 The following  strains were used: YUW1 (), and BY4741 (). The BY4741 strain
was used for  assembly of Level 0 constructs, and the glycine auxotroph strain YUW1 was used
for  assembly of the final Level 1 multigene
plasmids and as genetic background for
all growth experiments described in the main text. We used a
“semirich” synthetic complete (SC) medium (2% w/v glucose,
0.67% w/v yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, and 0.14% w/v of
the appropriate amino acid drop-out mix) to select yeast strains harboring
the multigene construct after transformation. Synthetic minimal (SM)
medium (2% glucose, 0.67% yeast nitrogen base without amino acids
and without ammonium sulfate, 100 mM ammonium sulfate, and 0–1000
mM sodium formate) supplemented with tryptophan and adenine (each
0.0076% w/v) was used to test the YUW1 strain carrying plasmid pJGC1,
pJGC2, or pJGC3, for its ability to synthesize glycine from formate
and CO. Additional glycine and/or uracil (0.0076% w/v
each) were added to test growth of the YUW1 parental strain, not harboring
any plasmid. YPAD medium (2% w/v peptone, 1% w/v yeast extract, 2%
w/v glucose, and 0.004% w/v of adenine hemisulfate) was used for yeast
recovery during the transformation procedure and for propagation of
yeast strains requiring no selection, , plasmid
free YUW1 and BY4741. Yeast liquid cultures were cultivated
under shaking at 220 rpm
and 30 °C. Different CO concentrations (atmospheric
or 10%) were used as indicated along with each experiment. Agar plates
were prepared using liquid media supplemented with 2% w/v agar and
incubated at 30 °C at the indicated CO concentration. Plasmid and Genomic DNA Extraction from Yeast For PCR
amplification of yeast genes, genomic DNA was extracted using the
SDS/lithium acetate method. In brief,
a small amount of a colony was transferred into an SDS/LiAc solution
(1% w/v SDS, 200 mM LiAc), incubated for 15 min at 70 °C, and
pelleted by centrifugation (21 000, 2 min).
The pellet was subsequently washed with 70% ethanol, dried and resuspended
in 10 μL TE buffer. Plasmids from yeast colonies were extracted
with the ChargeSwitch Plasmid Yeast Mini Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific
GmbH). Growth Conditions and Determination of Growth Rate Growth experiments were performed using a TECAN SPARK 10 M plate
reader (Tecan Deutschland GmbH, Crailsheim, Germany) at 30 °C
and different CO concentrations (atmospheric or 10%, as
indicated in the main text). A cycle with 12 individual 60 s shaking
steps was programmed with the steps alternating between linear and
orbital shaking (2 mm amplitude). To determine the growth rate of
yeast cultures, their optical density (OD) at 600 nm was measured
immediately after each shaking cycle throughout the complete growth
experiment. Growth rate and doubling time were calculated using a
custom MATLAB script. Raw data from the plate reader were calibrated
to cuvette values according to OD = OD × 3.3. Growth curves were plotted in MATLAB and represent averages
of triplicate measurements; in all cases, variability between triplicate
measurements was less than 5%. For plasmid transformation, yeast
cells were transformed using the lithium acetate/single-stranded carrier
(LiAc/SS) method as described in ref (). We used 100 ng of each DNA fragment or plasmid
to be transformed. For strain YUW1, the cells were heat-shocked at
42 °C for 30 min, recovered in YPDA medium for 4 h at 30 °C,
and then plated on appropriate selective SC medium. BY4741 cells were
heat-shocked for 40 min at 42 °C and directly plated on appropriate
selective SC media without recovery step. In order to create the different
multigene expression plasmids for the enzymes involved in the reductive
glycine pathway, we used the AssemblX cloning toolkit, which offers
a modular way to create multigene plasmids using a level-based strategy. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00464/suppl_file/sb8b00464_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00464/suppl_file/sb8b00464_si_001.pdf To generate Level 0 constructs (see ), all necessary promoters
and terminators were PCR-amplified from the AssemblX promoter library,
while all CDS that participate in the pathway (GCV1–3, LPD1,
and MIS1) were amplified directly from the BY4741 yeast genome. All
primers used were designed with the AssemblX webtool or the J5 software and contained additional 5′ sequences
allowing for homology-directed assemblies. For the list of primers
see . For  assembly in yeast BY4741, purified PCR fragments
(100 ng per fragment) were mixed with appropriate Level 0 backbone
plasmid (linearized with III) according to the
assembly protocol—generated by the webtools mentioned above—and
transformed into yeast. Transformants were selected on solid
SC medium without uracil and
analyzed by colony PCR. Plasmids from potential positive colonies
were extracted from yeast with the ChargeSwitch Plasmid Yeast Mini
Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH), retransformed into , isolated, and sent for sequencing. For construction of the
final multigene Level 1 plasmids, the Level
0 modules created above were released from their backbones by restriction
digestion, according to the AssemblX protocol. During this process,
proprietary homology regions, present in the Level 0 backbones, are
released along with the previously assembled Level 0 module. These
regions overlap between neighboring Level 0 modules and thus allow
ordered assembly by  recombination. Following
gel purification all Level 0 modules belonging to one intended multigene
construct were mixed together with the linearized Level 1 backbone
pL1A-lc and transformed directly into yeast YUW1 to allow  assembly. Selection for successfully assembled
plasmids was done on solid
SC medium without uracil. Verification of correctly assembled plasmids
was done as described above, whereby only the junctions between individual
assembly parts were sequenced. Cells were grown in 3 mL SM media supplemented
with adenine, tryptophane and labeled or unlabeled formate (250 mM)
in the presence of 10% labeled or unlabeled CO. After
reaching stationary phase, ∼10 cells were harvested
by centrifugation for 1 min at 11 500. The
biomass was hydrolyzed by incubation with 1 mL 6 N hydrochloric acid
for 24 h at 95 °C. The acid was then evaporated by continued
heating at 95 °C and nitrogen streaming. Hydrolyzed amino acids
were separated using ultraperformance liquid chromatography (Acquity
UPLC, Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany) with a C18-reversed-phase column
(Waters GmbH). Mass spectra were acquired using an Exactive mass spectrometer
(Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH). Data analysis was performed using
Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH). Prior to analysis,
amino-acid standards (Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH) were analyzed under
the same conditions to determine typical retention times. Determination
of Formate Concentration in Media The
glycine auxotroph strain carrying the pJGC3 plasmid was inoculated,
in duplicates, at an OD of 0.03 in synthetic minimal
medium with 10 mM formate. A sample of the growth medium was taken
from each duplicate every ∼2 h during a 34-h fermentation (reaching
on OD of ∼2). Each sample was centrifuged twice
and diluted 1:1000. 500 μL of each diluted sample run in high-performance
anion- and cation-exchange chromatography with conductivity detection
facilitated by a Dionex ICS-3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific
GmbH, Dreieich, Germany) with the columns IonPac AS11 Analytical Column
2 × 250 mm (Dionex) and IonPac AG11 Guard Column 2 × 50
mm (Dionex)..