Synthetic
biology has recently
contributed to multiple advances in point-of-use nucleic acid diagnostic
(PoUD) technologies. These technologies
leverage isothermal strategies to amplify target nucleic acids, with
new advances in detection of these targets using strand-displacement, or CRISPR-based methods that
produce fluorescent readouts, or RNA toehold switches that control
translation of enzymes that produce colored compounds. Overall these technologies can be used for sensitive detection
of pathogen-derived nucleic acids in complex matrices in field-deployable
formats that significantly improve upon current laboratory-intensive
PCR-based approaches. To date, most synthetic biology diagnostic
efforts have focused
on detecting pathogens that impact human health. However, there is
great potential to leverage these technologies for detecting plant
pathogens. In the United States alone, plant pathogens account for
an estimated $33 billion annual loss in agricultural productivity. Worldwide, losses in crop yields due to plant
pathogens can be more severe and contribute to food scarcity and famine. Among plant pathogens, wide host range viral
species such as cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) and potato virus Y (PVY)
are particularly devastating, as they infect hundreds of plant species,
including agriculturally important species such as beans, maize, and
potatoes. PoUDs are an important component
of strategies to combat the impacts of these pathogens, as timely
identification can lead to the rapid deployment of methods for mitigation
and containment. However, current plant pathogen PoUD strategies use
a range of approaches, including antibody-based detection, which lacks
sensitivity, or isothermal amplification,
which by itself does not generate convenient visual outputs, that
are amenable to field use. To address these shortcomings, we
sought to develop a PoUD system
called PLANT-Dx (Point-of-use LAboratory for Nucleic acids in a Tube)
that combines the sensitivity of isothermal strategies to amplify
target plant pathogen nucleic acids, with
the designability of synthetic gene regulatory systems and the robustness of cell-free gene expression
reactions to produce colorimetric outputs
that are visible to the naked-eye (a). The overall approach of our PLANT-Dx
system is to convert plant pathogen nucleic acids into constructs
encoding designed synthetic RNA regulators that when produced activate
an RNA genetic switch controlling the expression of an enzyme that
catalyzes a color change. The RNA genetic switch thus serves a role
as a signal processing layer that filters the noisy output of isothermal
amplification products, only triggering
the production of color for correctly amplified on-target viral sequences. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00526/suppl_file/sb8b00526_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00526/suppl_file/sb8b00526_si_001.pdf PLANT-Dx works by first using recombinase polymerase amplification
(RPA) () to amplify a target region of a plant pathogen genome to produce
a double-stranded DNA construct that encodes the synthesis of a synthetic
RNA regulator called a Small Transcription Activating RNA (STAR) (). These
DNA templates are then used to direct the transcription of STARs within
a cell-free gene expression reaction, which when produced, activates the transcription of a STAR-regulated
construct encoding the enzyme catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (CDO) (a). Only when the pathogen is present is the RPA product made,
leading to expression of CDO, which in turn converts the colorless
catechol compound into a visible yellow product. Here we show that
this design can detect CMV in infected plant lysate with a low picomolar
sensitivity, and can be configured to detect nucleic acids from different
viral genomes without crosstalk. In addition, we show that this design
requires only simple mixing and body heat to induce a color change,
which we anticipate will facilitate deployment to field settings. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00526/suppl_file/sb8b00526_si_001.pdf Basic
operation of PLANT-Dx. (a) Schematic overview. Viral RNA
is amplified by recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) into DNA
templates that contain a T7 polymerase promoter (purple), a portion
of a small transcription activating RNA (STAR) sequence (blue), and
a portion of the viral RNA sequence (red). Cell-free expression of
these templates produces viral sequence-derived STAR which triggers
the production of catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (CDO), which in turn converts
catechol into hydroxymuconic semialdehyde, a yellow colored compound
that is visible by the eye near a 385 nm absorbance value of 0.8 (dashed
line, ). (b) Demonstrated
ability to detect cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) sequences from in vitro
transcription (IVT) RNA products (orange)  control
(gray) samples, by 120 min across three different days. (c) Demonstrated
ability to detect potato virus Y (PVY) based IVT RNA (orange)  control (gray) samples by 120 min across three different
days. (d) An orthogonality matrix of cell-free reactions challenging
RPA products from different IVT sources against different STAR-Target-CDO
constructs showing positive results (yellow) only for cognate combinations
at 150 min. (e) Serial dilution of CMV IVT RNA was used to determine
a limit of detection in between 44 pM and 4.4 pM after 150 min of
reaction. (−) Template indicates a control in which no CMV
IVT RNA was input into the RPA reaction. -value
comparison was made using a Student’s  test
between the data from the 44 pM and (−) Template conditions.
Data in (b), (c) represent mean values and error bars represent s.d.
of  = 3 technical replicates. Data in (e) represent
mean values (bars) of  = 3 biological replicates,
each with  = 3 technical replicates ( = 9 total), plotted as individual points. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00526/suppl_file/sb8b00526_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00526/suppl_file/sb8b00526_si_001.pdf To develop PLANT-Dx, we first sought to create pathogen detecting
molecular sensors based upon the Small Transcription Activating RNA
(STAR) regulatory system. This transcription
activation system is based upon conditional formation of a terminator hairpin located within a target
RNA upstream of a gene to be regulated: alone, the terminator hairpin
forms and interrupts transcription of the downstream gene, while in
the presence of a specific acting STAR the
hairpin cannot form and transcription proceeds (). Previous work showed that the STAR linear binding
region can be changed to produce highly functional and orthogonal
variants. Here we sought to utilize this
by replacing the linear binding region with sequences derived from
genomic pathogen RNA to create new viral sensors. To do this, we utilized
the secondary structure prediction algorithm NUPACK to identify regions
within the genomes of CMV and PVY, that are predicted computationally
to be unstructured for target RNA design (). Once viral STARs were designed,
reporter DNA constructs were then created in which these target sequences
were placed downstream of a constitutive  promoter and upstream of the CDO reporter gene coding sequence.
We next designed RPA primer sets to amplify and transform a pathogen’s
genomic material into a DNA construct capable of synthesizing a functional
STAR. Specifically, a T7 promoter and antiterminator STAR sequence
were added to the 5′ end of a reverse RPA primer, which when
combined with a forward primer, amplified an approximately 80 nucleotide
(nt) viral sequence to produce a double-stranded DNA encoding the
designed STAR which contained the target viral sequence. In this way,
we anticipated that combining the CDO-encoding reporter construct
and RPA amplified DNA into a cell-free gene expression reaction would lead to the production of a detectable colorimetric output
signal. We began by investigating the ability of PLANT-Dx to
detect the
presence of  transcribed (IVT) RNA designed
to mimic specific target regions of CMV. We observed rapid color
accumulation in samples containing 1 nM of purified transcription
product  the no-RNA negative control (b). To test for modularity,
we further developed sensors and primer sets for the detection of PVY,
and confirmed function with the same assay (c). The specificity of our system was also
tested by interrogating the crosstalk between the product of various
RPA reactions and noncognate molecular sensors. Specifically, we tested
color production from cell-free reactions containing the reporter
DNA construct for CMV with the PVY IVT-derived RPA product, as well
as the converse, and found color production only between cognate pairs
of input RPA and reporter constructs (d). We next interrogated the inherent limit
of detection of our system through titration of input IVT products
(e) and found
it to be between 44pM and 4.4pM of input IVT RNA material. This demonstrated
our ability to detect the presence of target nucleic acid sequences
down to the picomolar range. Surprisingly, this sensitivity is lower
than that previously reported for RPA and
is most likely due to loss in amplification efficiency from the addition
of the long overhangs present within our primer sets. We next
set out to determine whether this methodology was able
to differentiate between plant lysate obtained from healthy plants  lysate from plants infected with CMV virus. To test
this, we input 1 μL of CMV-infected plant lysate, or
an equivalent volume of a noninfected plant lysate control, into the
PLANT-Dx reaction system. Here, we observed rapid color change only
from reactions with infected lysate when compared to healthy lysate
(a). Interestingly,
the leak in the system was reduced when challenged with plant extract
in comparison to previous results using IVT product. This is most
likely due to a slightly inhibitory effect plant lysate may have on
the efficiency of the RPA reaction and presents a positive benefit
of reducing off target signal production. Despite the great benefits
derived from colorimetric enzymes, their usage dictates that any leak
in the system will eventually result in the complete conversion of
substrate into a visible signal. Therefore, it is important to determine
a time point cutoff in which to analyze data for the presence or absence
of the color signal to minimize false positives associated with expression
leak. In this work using PLANT-Dx for detection of CMV, we suggest
utilizing 150 min (a). To demonstrate that this assay can be monitored by eye,
reactions were carried out and filmed within a 31 °C incubator
(b). With the
naked eye, we detected accumulation of a yellow color only within
reactions that were incubated with infected lysate, while no such
production was observed in reactions with uninfected lysate. A notable drawback of current gold standard diagnostics
is the
need for peripheral equipment for either amplification or visualization
of outputs. Even simple heating elements for controlled incubations
are a major hindrance during deployment within the field and can be
cost-prohibitive. We sought to exploit the flexible temperature requirements
of both RPA and cell-free gene expression reactions by attempting
to run our diagnostic reactions for CMV infected lysate using only
body heat. This resulted in clear yellow color only in the presence
of infected lysate, with no major difference observed between these
reactions and those previously incubated within a thermocycler and
observed with a plate reader (c). Implementing
a PLANT-Dx diagnostic. (a) PLANT-Dx reactions were
used to detect CMV from infected  derived
lysate (orange)  uninfected plant-derived lysate
(gray), across three different days. Data displayed as in b,c. (b) Time lapse
photos of cell-free reactions containing RPA products from CMV infected
lysate (+) or uninfected lysate (−). (c) Demonstration that
PLANT-Dx can operate using only body heat as a heat source. RPA and
cell-free reactions were run by taping tubes on the inner arm for
40 and 150 min, respectively. A yellow color was observed for the
CMV-infected lysate sample (+) and not the uninfected lysate control
(−). Data in (a) represent mean values, and error bars represent
s.d. of  = 3 technical replicates. Here we have demonstrated
a novel scheme for combining isothermal
amplification and custom synthetic biology viral sensors for the detection
of the important plant pathogen CMV from infected plant lysate. Building
off of previously elucidated STAR design rules, we have shown that our molecular sensors can be efficiently
designed, built, and implemented for use in this important plant diagnostic
context. The use of STARs in PLANT-Dx complements previous uses of
toehold translational switches for similar purposes in human viral
diagnostics, and could lead to more powerful
combinations of the two technologies in the future. In addition, we
have shown that these reactions can be readily run without the need
for extraneous heating or visualization equipment. In particular,
the rapid mechanical disruption of infected leaf tissue into a reaction-ready
lysate buffer eliminates the need for any nucleic acid isolation.
While in these experiments the lysate was snap-frozen, they could
equally be used for immediate analysis in the field. The ability of
our methodology to selectively detect genomic sequences from CMV
and PVY highlight the ability of the growing methodologies and
design principles within RNA synthetic biology to contribute to real world applications. Further modifications
to sample preparation will undoubtedly be needed to simplify the user
interface still further while improving the sensitivity of detection
of lower replicating and genetically more diverse virus species. We
hope that these developments can be incorporated within other synthetic
biology-based diagnostic platforms to
enable PoUDs to be developed and delivered to regions of the world
that need them most..