Human artificial chromosomes
(HACs) are nonessential mini-chromosomes that replicate and segregate
correctly in human cells. HACs made using
synthetic centromeric DNA have been extensively characterized and
improved over the past decade. They now represent an important tool to study epigenetic
regulation of centromere structure and function, to study full-length gene functions in mutant animal or human cells, to measure chromosome instability (CIN), and to identify new targets
for cancer therapy. Also, synthetic HACs do not interfere with embryogenesis
in mice, making them a promising tool for future gene therapeutic
studies. Synthetic HACs were originally
designed using a “bottom up” approach to contain only
predefined DNA arrays. Their design allows the HAC centromeres to be easily modified and
inactivated/removed by targeting with chimeric proteins specifically
directed to the synthetic DNA. However, they also present a
number of challenges that must be overcome to enable them to be exploited
fully. HACs form in a complex and as-yet incompletely characterized
process
after transfection of seeding DNA into human cells. During this relatively
lengthy period (typically ∼3 weeks), the HAC-seeding DNA undergoes
spontaneous multimerization and in at least some cases may pass through
a stage when it is transiently inserted into the arm of an endogenous
chromosome. The multimerization presumably
allows it to attain a threshold size required for stable chromosome
segregation. Only the alphoid HAC has previously been characterized in molecular detail. That
analysis found complex rearrangements in the organization of its seeding
DNA during this multimerization process, including inversions and
deletions. These rearrangements are unpredictable
and uncontrollable as they occur during the clonal expansion before
HAC-bearing cell lines are established and identified. This is the
time during which the HAC-seeding DNA is forming a functional centromere,
an absolute requirement for the DNA to be stably maintained in cells.
As a result, each HAC-bearing cell clone obtained after the selection
process contains a HAC that could potentially have a DNA organization
different from its sister clones. Although it is known that rearrangements
can happen, how and when they occur remains
unknown. Importantly, it is not known if these structural rearrangements
are an obligate part of the selection process that occurs during centromere
formation. To investigate further how and when rearrangements
happen, here
we developed a novel alphoid HAC, based on the structure
of the alphoid HAC. That first synthetic HAC was constructed
from centromeric DNA with a dimeric structure. One monomer of the alphoid HAC was derived from the
centromere of chromosome 17 type I α-satellite DNA containing
a CENP-B box. The other monomer was wholly synthetic alphoid DNA and
carried a Tet operator (TetO) in place of the CENP-B box. The CENP-B
box is found on all human chromosomes (except the Y) and is a 17 bp
sequence recognized by the protein CENP-B. This protein’s function is still under investigation, but
CENP-B binding is required for stable deposition of the centromeric
histone H3-variant CENP-A when HAC-seeding DNA is introduced into
cells. The presence of the TetO sequence on the synthetic HAC allows the
centromeric DNA to be targetable with chimeric Tet repressor (TetR)-fusion
proteins that can manipulate the chromatin environment of the centromere
and therefore modify the behavior of the HAC centromere. Here,
we have performed the first systematic study of rearrangements
that occur during HAC formation and determined how they alter the
epigenetic landscape in the HAC centromere and how they impact HAC
segregation in mitosis. The seeding DNA of the new alphoid HAC resembles that used to construct the alphoid HAC described earlier but was much larger,
as we hypothesized that this might minimize the need for rearrangements
and amplification during HAC formation. The alphoid HAC contains a CENP-B-containing centrochromatin array and a non-CENP-B-containing
domain. The presence of two different domains allows simultaneous
targeting of centromeric and flanking regions with different (TetR,
LacI, and Gal4) fusion proteins and also makes it possible to track
rearrangements within and between the arrays. Using this new alphoid HAC, we demonstrate that dramatic DNA rearrangements
can occur early during HAC formation and that once formed, they are
stably maintained across many cell generations. Thus, a time-limited
disruptive event of DNA shredding and shuffling, possibly involving
a process resembling chromothripsis, can occur early during
centromere establishment in human cells. Generation
of Synthetic α21-I and α21-II Arrays Using Tandem Ligation Array Amplification http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf The alphoid HAC is formed by two arrays, similarly
to a previously constructed alphoid HAC, but using a ∼2.5× larger (∼120
kb) HAC-seeding construct. The CENP-B-containing centrochromatin array
was designed to resemble the previously published alphoid HAC, but in this case, using 11-mer
(1886 bp) high order repeats (HORs) of alphoid type I DNA from the
centromere in human chromosome 21. Each monomer of this synthetic
HOR contains either a 17 bp CENP-B box, essential for CENP-A deposition, or a 39 bp tetracycline operator (TetO) targetable sequence, which
is the binding site for  tetracycline repressor (TetR). This dimer is the basic unit for
the so-called α21-I (TetO) array, which consists
of alternating CENP-B-containing and TetO (non-CENP-B)-containing
monomers (A, ). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf The other, non-CENP-B-containing, array is comprised
of repeated
segments of α-satellite type II DNA, lacking CENP-B boxes. In
endogenous chromosomes these sequences form the pericentromeric heterochromatin
flanking the centromere. To allow targeting of this non CENP-B-containing
array with different fusion proteins, LacO and Gal4-targetable sequences
were embedded in the array, as previously described. This allows its targeting by chimeric fusions to either  lactose repressor (LacI) and/or the
yeast Gal4 protein. We refer to this non-CENP-B-containing array as
the α21-II (LacOGal4) array (A and ). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf Our initial cloning efforts yielded a α21-I 11-mer (1886 bp) and a α21-II 12-mer (2068
bp) in a plasmid backbone (). Each basic unit of this 11-mer or 12-mer was then elongated by
tandem-ligation-amplification until fragments containing 8 copies
were obtained (B and ). In this tandem-ligation-amplification,
cycles of restriction enzyme digestion were performed and followed
by ligation as shown in . Upon
each cycle of ligation, the restriction site joining the two units
was lost, so the next digestion occurred without cutting the nascent
elongating array. In this case, cycles of SpeI/ScaI and NheI/ScaI
digestions were performed ().
After each round of restriction digestion and ligation, the nascent
DNA was cut with BamHI and NotI, in order to separate the inset from
the 2.9 kb vector, and subsequently analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis
(C). Ultimately,
the highest molecular weight band (16.6 kb for 8 copies, marked with
*) was excised and cloned into a BAC vector capable of more stably
maintaining longer repetitive sequences. The structure of the BAC
vector is shown in . http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf Starting
from a BAC clone carrying 8 copies of the 11-mer and 12-mer,
the tandem-ligation-amplification process was repeated until the insets
reached 32 copies (∼60 kb). To do that, cycles of SpeI/KasI
and NheI/KasI digestions were performed (). As before, the nascent array was cut with BamHI and NotI
after each reaction of restriction digestion and ligation to separate
the inset from the 7.1 kb BAC vector and analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis
(D). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf Ultimately, the two complete α21-I and α21-II arrays (∼60 kb each) were joined together
by tandem ligation into a pBAC vector containing a G148 resistance
gene (A,D and ). As a result, we obtained the HAC-seeding
construct pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII, carrying 32 copies of the α21-I 11-mer and 32 copies of the α21-II 12-mer, with a total length of ∼120 kb (D, red arrow). This input DNA
was then amplified in bacteria prior to transfection into human HT1080
fibrosarcoma cells for HAC formation. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf Generation of synthetic α21-I and α21-II arrays. (A) Scheme
of the pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII containing
BAC and YAC cassettes, G418 resistance cassette, and synthetic DNA:
α21-I formed by high ordered repeats (HOR) monomers
(green arrows) containing CENP-B boxes (blue) alternating with monomers
containing TetO (yellow); α21-II formed
by high ordered repeats (HOR) monomers (yellow arrows) containing
Gal4 binding sequence (green) alternating with LacO (red). (B) Schematic
of the assembly of the α21-I and α21-II arrays. (C,D) PFGE analysis of the nascent α21-I and α21-II arrays, cut with
BamHI/NotI after each cycles of tandem ligation array amplification
as described in  (C) and  (D). Expected sizes: α21-I11-mer 1 copy (1.9 kb), 8 copies (15.2 kb), 32 copies (60.8
kb); α21-II12-mer 1 copy (2 kb), 8 copies
(16 kb), 32 copies (64 kb). Plasmid vector is 2.9 kb, BAC vector is
7.1 kb. The asterisk (*) indicates the fragments that have been cloned
into BAC vector (8 copies, 16 kb); red arrow in D indicates the size
of the final pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII (∼120 kb) (m and M, markers). Isolation of Input pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII
DNA with Equal Amounts
of α21-I and α21-II Repeats To amplify the HAC-seeding construct, pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII
DNA was electroporated into  DH10B and the size of the array was determined by CHEF (contour-clamped
homogeneous electric field) gel electrophoresis. In all, 16 BACs isolated
from different bacterial clones were obtained from large scale bacterial
cultures and digested with NotI and BamHI to release the HAC-seeding
array from the BAC backbone (A, B). Gel electrophoresis revealed that 8 out of 16
colonies (labeled in red in A) maintained the original ∼120 kb length of
the synthetic BAC DNA (A, red arrow). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf To establish a HAC with an equal amount of CENP-B-containing and
non-CENP-B-containing chromatin, it was important to confirm that
the HAC-seeding pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII DNA carries an equal number of
α21-I and α21-II arrays.
To do so, we digested the input DNA with EcoRI, a restriction enzyme
that cuts both the arrays and the BAC vector (; only single-cut restriction enzymes are shown).
We predicted in silico how the EcoRI restriction pattern should look
() and whether each band originates
from the α21-I or the α21-II array. The α21-I array cut with EcoRI should
produce a fragment of 1880 bp, while the α21-II array should produce fragments of 677, 370, 342, 340, and 339 bp.
The vector yields a band of 7499 bp (). http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf The 8 colonies containing ∼120 kb BAC DNA were digested
with EcoRI and the corresponding digests run on an agarose gel (C). The results in C match the prediction
in . Analyzing the intensity
of the corresponding bands on the agarose gel in C using ImageJ, we scored the
ratio between α21-I and α21-II arrays. This confirmed that the BAC DNA contains equal amounts of
α21-I and α21-II repeats
(D). Thus,
BAC DNA from clone number 1 (number 1 of A and C; E, sample in duplicate)
was chosen as our HAC-seeding input DNA for HAC formation in human
cells. Formation of input pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII DNA. (A) CHEF
analysis
of 16 bacterial DNA after transformation with pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII
and NotI and BamHI digestion: red arrows indicate the size of the
final vector (∼120 kb); colonies labeled in red contain the
inset of the desired length. DNA used for transfection as a control
(in duplicate) (M marker). (B) Scheme of the pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII
input DNA showing restriction sites for NotI and BamHI used to release
the synthetic DNA. (C) PFGE analysis of selected bacterial colonies
(in red) digested with EcoRI: each fragment originates from a different
array (label on the left). DNA used for transfection as a control
(in duplicate); original DNA as uncut sample (M marker). (D) α21-I and α21-IIDNA ratio calculated
with ImageJ on the intensity of the bands shown in C for each bacterial
colony. Control and original DNA as in C. (E) CHEF analysis of bacterial
colony #1 DNA (in duplicate) digested with NotI and BamHI to release
the synthetic DNA (m and M, markers). Screening of HT1080 Colonies Following Transfection with HAC-Seeding
DNA HAC formation occurs following transfection of the HAC-seeding
DNA into a suitable cell line, and colonies originating from single
cells grow under selection. During the process, the input DNA is incorporated
into the cell nucleus where it can undergo different fates: it can
be integrated into a chromosome arm; it can form an autonomous HAC;
the cell population can contain a mixture of both (A); or, less frequently, the
cells can acquire drug resistance but lose the remainder of the input
DNA (not shown). In order to form a HAC,
the input DNA must multimerize to reach a threshold size for a stable
chromosome. This step occurs naturally
after transfection and it is uncontrollable, leading to different
levels of amplification of the input DNA within the cell. As a result,
after transfection each single colony contains either a HAC, an integration,
or a mixture of the two, with a different degree of amplification
of the HAC-seeding DNA. As previously published, we chose to
transfect
pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII into HT1080 cells. This fibrosarcoma cell line
has a chromatin state permissive for HAC formation due to having a
relatively low level of H3K9me3 as a result of decreased expression
of Suv39h1 methyltransferase. In cells
with higher Suv39h1 expression, CENP-A assembles on HAC-seeding DNA,
but is subsequently displaced by invading H3K9me3-containing heterochromatin. pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII from clone 1 (E) was transfected
into HT1080 cells and
single cell clones were grown for 3 weeks in media containing Geneticin.
We collected genomic DNA from 124 resistant colonies and measured
the BAC copy number by qPCR to obtain an approximate measurement of
the degree of amplification of HAC-seeding DNA. Primers specific for
the alphoid HAC were designed and a different HAC
with a known BAC copy number was used as standard. Thirty HT1080
colonies containing detectable amounts of HAC-seeding
BAC sequences (copy numbers >20), were then screened by fluorescent  hybridization (FISH) for the presence of HACs, integrations,
or mixtures of both (B). FISH to detect pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII was performed 4 weeks
after transfection (timeline in ) using TetO and LacO-specific oligos labeled with
fluorochromes (see  for details). B presents data of
the qPCR analysis combined with the results of the FISH screening.
Representative images from the FISH screening of selected HT1080 clones
are shown in C. HACs can be visualized as discrete spots by DAPI staining (C). Interestingly,
the size of each HAC estimated by FISH correlated the results of qPCR,
with the larger HACs corresponding to higher BAC copy numbers and
vice versa (B black arrows, C). For simplicity, we discarded HAC-containing clones
with more than 1 HAC. In all HACs, the α21-I array seems to localize
to the center of the HAC, where it is surrounded by the α21-II arrays (C). This organization corresponds to that seen for
previously published HACs, and presumably
reflects the HAC structure, with a CENP-B-containing centromere surrounded
by pericentromeric heterochromatin. Screening of HT1080 colonies
after transfection with pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII.
(A) Scheme showing the possible fates of the pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII
HAC seeding DNA after transfection in HT1080: in yellow and green
(as integration or HAC) is represented the synthetic DNA. Timeline
of the experiments performed from transfection into HT1080 cells.
(B) BAC copy number ( axis) analyzed by qPCR in
each HT1080 clone ( axis): only HT1080 clones containing
>20 BAC copies are represented in the graph. HT1080 clones are
represented
in green (HAC), red (integration), or mixture (both) according to
the results of the FISH screening, as shown in C. Black arrows indicate
the clones shown in C and analyzed further. (C) Representative pictures
of oligo-FISH staining of HT1080 clones: slides have been hybridized
with DNA probes (TetO-dig/rhodamine α-dig antibody, Gal4-biotin
and LacO-biotin/Fitc-streptavidin). DAPI stains DNA. Scale bar = 10
μm. (D) Southern blot of selected HT1080 clonal DNA (as labeled
on top of the panel) digested with BamHI and separated by CHEF; the
transferred membrane was hybridized with radioactively labeled TetO
(left) or LacO (right) specific probes. Red arrows indicate the expected
size of the band without rearrangements. Clones labeled in red have
been screened further (M and m, markers). (E) Cartoon of the pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII
input DNA showing restriction sites for NotI and BamHI. pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII Forms
HACs More Efficiently than Previous
HAC-Seeding Constructs In order to determine the fate of
the HAC-seeding DNA, a minimum of 25 metaphases were screened by FISH
for each clone. In the screening shown in B, 30% (9/30) of HT1080 colonies contained
only HACs, 43% (13/30) contained integrations, and 26.6% (8/30) contained
a mixture of both. This frequency of HAC-containing colonies for the
alphoid HAC is ∼3 times higher than in previous
studies. The relationship
between the size of the HAC-seeding DNA and the efficiency of HAC
formation is complex and may be influenced by the actual HAC-seeding
sequences employed. Synthetic sequences seem to yield a lower efficiency
of HAC formation than natural alphoid sequences. Examination of the
literature reveals that the efficiency of HAC formation varies greatly
depending on the type of alphoid centromeric DNA used for transfection
(, 32% HAC-forming colonies using DNA from chromosome
17 centromere, and only 4.3% of positive colonies using DNA from Y
chromosome). Ebersole and colleagues
obtained a 10% efficiency of HAC colony formation using a ∼120
kb 5mer-based synthetic array. In contrast
the transfection with a ∼120 kb alphoid HAC-seeding
DNA array yielded an efficiency of HAC formation of 4.3%. In contrast, we observed an 11.7% efficiency
of alphoid HAC formation using the much smaller ∼60
kb synthetic DNA. In the present study,
the efficiency of HAC formation by pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII (30%) was
comparable to the frequency of HAC formation reported in our previous
study when cells were stably cotransfected with the HAC seeding DNA
plus CENP-A directed to the synthetic centromere. It is possible that a combination of the structure and
the size of the alphoid HAC DNA may increase the
efficiency of CENP-A deposition on the centromeric DNA, although other
factors cannot be ruled out. Analysis of Rearrangements of the pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII
Arrays
in HAC-Containing HT1080 Colonies We wished to determine
whether the size amplification that occurred during early stages of
alphoid HAC formation was also accompanied by rearrangements
of the HAC-seeding DNA arrays. To perform a structural analysis of
the α21-I and α21-II arrays, we performed Southern blot analysis using TetO and LacO
specific probes (D). Cell clones were grown for 8 weeks, or approximately 50 doublings
of the HT1080 cells, prior to Southern blot analysis (timeline in ). Genomic DNA from
9 HAC-containing cell lines (and two HT1080 clones containing integrations
as control) was digested with BamHI, which has a unique site only
on the vector backbone (E). The DNA fragments were separated by CHEF gel electrophoresis
and the membranes hybridized with TetO and LacO-specific probes. If only simple multimerization of pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII occurred during
HAC formation, the Southern blots should display a single ∼120
kb band, corresponding to the size of digested input DNA. Importantly,
since the restriction enzyme cuts only at the edge of the α-satellite
arrays, this should be the case regardless of whether the Southern
blot analysis uses the TetO or LacO probe. Surprisingly, none of the
analyzed clones showed this single ∼120 kb band (D, red arrow). Instead, each
clone has a different number of DNA fragments of different sizes,
and these also vary for each clone for the two probes. Many bands
are smaller than the 120 kb input band, but some are considerably
larger. Thus, the arrays of the HAC-seeding pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII DNA
underwent a complex series of rearrangements during HAC formation,
as described for the alphoid HAC. On the basis of the results displayed in , we decided to further
characterize three
clones (E30, J34 and E16) that showed different levels of amplification
by qPCR (black arrows in B) and different numbers and sizes of rearrangements
by Southern blotting (labeled in red in D). pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII Undergoes Multiple Rearrangements
during
Early Stages of HAC Formation The rearrangement of HAC-seeding
DNA was previously described for the single-domain alphoid HAC. It was proposed that the HAC-seeding
DNA structure may continue to change and evolve for weeks or possibly
months after HAC transfection. This raises the possibility that the
populations analyzed in D might consist of mixtures of alphoid HACs
with different structures. To test this hypothesis, the three clones
E30, J34 and E16 were further subcloned to obtain homogeneous cell
populations (timeline in ; 9 weeks or approximately 55 population doublings
after transfection). Initially clone E21 was also subcloned but, unfortunately,
we could not grow any subclone with stable HAC segregation, so E21
was excluded from the subsequent analysis. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf Alphoid HAC subclones were isolated by limiting
dilution and screened by FISH for the presence and the number of the
HACs in each clonal cell line (12 subclones for E30, 35 subclones
for J34 and 25 subclones for E16; detailed timeline in ). Subclones with highly mis-segregating
HACs were discarded and subclones with a higher percentage of single
HACs per cell were studied further (6 subclones for E30, 8 subclones
for J34 and 10 subclones for E16; ). As an example of the screening,  shows representative images from FISH
screening of 6 subclones from clone E30.  shows the number of metaphases containing 0, 1, or 2 HACs
in subclones from clone E30, with percentages indicating the cells
with 1 HAC. To study rearrangements in subsequent cell generations,
genomic
DNA from the selected subclones originating from E30, J34 and E16
was digested with BamHI and separated by CHEF gel electrophoresis
(). Surprisingly,
Southern blot analysis revealed that all subclones were almost identical
in the number and sizes of rearrangements. Furthermore, they all recapitulated
the pattern of rearrangements seen in the original clone (A–C). As for
the original clones, hybridization with the TetO-specific probe consistently
yielded a different hybridization pattern from that seen with the
LacO-specific probe on the same sample. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf To strengthen our hypothesis
that the HAC-seeding DNA undergoes
a series of multiple rearrangements, we decided to investigate the
structure of the alphoid HAC using FISH on DNA fibers
(). We hybridized stretched DNA
from clone E30 (subclone 1B5), clone J34 (subclone 1.10) and clone
E16 (subclone 23) with TetO and LacOGal4 specific probes. Images reveal
that there is not a regular alternation of TetO and LacOGal4 spots
on DNA fibers, as we would expect if the alternating TetO/LacO structure
of the HAC-seeding DNA had been maintained. Instead, TetO and LacOGal4
spots on DNA fibers show various size and patterns, confirming that
rearrangements occur during HAC formation (). Taken together, these data show that the α21-I and α21-II arrays of HAC-seeding
DNA pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII
independently undergo unique fragmentation, recombination and amplification
events during the first 8 weeks of the alphoid HAC
formation. Subsequently, these rearrangements appear to be maintained
stably through cell generations, up to 14 weeks. This agrees with
the observation that the HAC structure seems to be stable through
multiple cycles of MMCT (microcell mediated chromosome transfer) in
different cell lines. Analysis of rearrangements
of the pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII arrays.
Timeline of the experiments performed from transfection into HT1080
clones and subclones. (A,B,C) Southern blot of subclones from clone
E30 (A), J34 (B) and E16 (C): DNA was digested with BamHI and separated
by CHEF. The transferred membrane was hybridized with radioactively
labeled TetO (left) or LacO (right) specific probes. Cartoons on the
right represent the outcome of rearrangements in the corresponding
clone: green arrows represent α21-I array, yellow
arrows represent α21-II array, boxes represent
the BAC vector (M and m, markers). Different HAC-Containing
Clones Show Different Degrees of Rearrangements Not all the
alphoid HAC clones analyzed underwent
the same degrees of rearrangements. For example, subclones from clone
E30 (A) display
a predominant band around 50 kb in all subclones, and only 2 of the
6 subclones clearly show fragments around 80–100 kb with both
probes (subclones 4B5 and 4D8). In contrast, the LacO probe shows
3–4 bands with various signal strengths. This could reflect
dimerization/multimerization of the 50 kb fragment observed in the
blot. Thus, compared with the other clones analyzed, E30 seems to
be less scrambled, with all fragments showing the same size (cartoon
in A). It therefore
appears that during E30 HAC formation pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII underwent
an early event in which both the α21-I and α21-II arrays were shortened to roughly 40% of their initial
lengths (easiest to imagine if a single deletion of the 120 kb construct
occurred spanning the junction between the two arrays), but then were
amplified while avoiding further rearrangements. In marked contrast,
clones J34 and E16 displayed a much larger number and variety of rearrangements,
with fragments ranging from ∼50 kb up to ∼300 kb (B, C and relative
diagrams on the right). One possible explanation for this structure
is that early during formation of those two HACs and following some
initial amplification of the arrays, the nascent HAC-seeding DNA experienced
multiple chromosome breaks and shuffling followed by religation, leading
to fragments of different sizes. Interestingly, the smaller
array size in clone E30 (A) correlates with its larger
number of BAC copies (presumably resulting from a larger number of
amplification cycles) quantitated by qPCR (B). In contrast, J34 and E16 with more complex
rearrangements, including those producing much larger fragments (B,C), have lower
BAC copy numbers (B). These observations suggest that the rearrangements may
have occurred very early, prior to completion of the multimerization
that allowed the HAC to pass the minimum size threshold required to
form a stable centromere/kinetochore. These data show that, as previously suggested, during alphoid HAC formation, the predicted
regular structure of the HAC-seeding DNA is disrupted by complex rearrangements
whose mechanism remains unknown. Visualization of α21-I and α21-II Arrays on Chromatin
Fibers We performed
indirect immunofluorescence (IF) staining on stretched DNA fibers
to confirm the presence of α21-I and α21-II arrays, and to also determine the distribution of
CENP-A and H3K9me3 on those fibers. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf For each set of subclones,
one was selected for further experiments, based on the percentage
of cells bearing a single HAC (E30 subclone 1B5, J34 subclone 1.10
and E16 subclone 23; as example for clone E30, see ). DNA fibers were prepared from the selected subclones
and incubated with purified TetR-eYFP or LacI-eYFP fusion proteins
expressed in  to visualize
the corresponding array (TetR-eYFP and LacI-eYFP expressed , both dissociate from the chromatin during fiber
preparation) (A and ). Staining of both arrays
simultaneously was not possible, since the purified proteins were
both tagged with GFP. Attempts to specifically stain fibers with mCherry-TetR
isolated from  were not
successful. Fibers were also stained using CENP-A or H3K9me3-specific
antibodies (A). IF staining on fibers
revealed that the α21-I and α21-II arrays are both present along
these stretched DNA fibers. CENP-A and H3K9me3 are adjacent to both
arrays, with no apparent preference for one or the other array (representative
images for J34 subclone 1.10 are shown in A). The presence of CENP-A and H3K9me3 in
close proximity to both arrays can be explained if the rearrangements
during alphoid HAC formation lead to a “scrambled”
structure of the α21-I and α21-II arrays. Visualization of α21-I and α21-II arrays on chromatin fibers and mitotic stability
of the HAC. (A) Representative pictures of IF staining on fibers of
subclone J34 1.10: slides have been incubated with TetR-eYFP and LacI-eYFP
expressed in  and stained
with α-CENP-A mouse or α-H3K9me3 mouse/TRITC α-mouse
antibody. DAPI stains the DNA. Scale bar = 5 μm. (B) Number
of metaphases (%) containing 0, 1, or ≥2 (2 or 3) HACs for
subclones E30 1B5, J34 1.10 and E16 23, after spreading metaphases
and hybridizing with TetO and LacO/Gal4 specific probes; total of
2 biological repeats, 50 metaphases for each condition were analyzed.
± Gen indicates treatment for 30 days from day 0 with (+) or
without (−) Geneticin. Error bars denote SEM. Statistical test:
unpaired  test (* < 0.05, ** < 0.01). Geneticin Selection Enriches the Number of HACs in the Cell
Population To characterize how the mitotic stability of the
alphoid HAC is affected by its structure, we performed
a stability assay, counting the number of cells with different number
of HACs over a period of 30 days with (+) and without (−) Geneticin
(∼25 cell divisions). Metaphase chromosome spreads from E30
subclone 1B5, J34 subclone 1.10 and E16 subclone 23 were analyzed
by FISH and imaged at each time point using labeled oligos specific
for α21-I and α21-II, to count cells containing 0, 1, or ≥2 HACs. At time
point zero, each subclone had a characteristic number of cells with
0, 1, or ≥2 HACs (B). Interestingly, 7 days after thawing and while growing
in the presence of Geneticin (corresponding to time point zero), the
number of cells containing no HAC was higher than expected (20–40%
of the cell population, gray bars) for all three subclones. It is
possible that after the stress of freezing/thawing, cells were not
yet fully responding to the selection. Importantly, all of the
alphoid HACs are extremely
stable after 30 days growth in the absence of Geneticin, as shown
by the number of cells bearing 1 HAC (black bars; daily loss rate
of the HAC (R) = 4.76 (±0.6) × 10 for
E30 subclone 1B5; 8.69 (±6.67) × 10 for
J34 subclone 1.10; and 3.47 (±1.66) × 10 for E16 subclone 23; see ). These
measured loss rates were comparable to those measured for previous
HACs. Thus, alphoid HACs with
dramatically different rearrangements of their seeding DNA are very
similar in their ability to replicate and segregate correctly during
the great majority of cell divisions. Surprisingly, when cells
grow for 30 days (+) Geneticin, they seem
to acquire a selective advantage for increasing the HAC copy number,
as shown by the number of cells bearing ≥2 HACs (white bars).
The accumulation of HAC was particularly evident in J34 subclone 1.10
and E16 subclone 23, while E30 subclone 1B5 did not exhibit this increase
(B). Notably,
the enrichment of cells with 1 or ≥2 HACs after 30 days (+)
Geneticin was coupled for all subclones with a reduction in the number
of cells with 0 HACs. The enrichment in cells with ≥2
HACs could be explained
if heterochromatin spreading silences the Geneticin resistance gene.
In this case, Geneticin would select for cells in the population with
an increased HAC copy number. Despite the small sample size, it is
interesting to note that the alphoid HACs with the
more rearranged arrays (J34 1.10 and E16 23) were those where the
copy number increased under selection, possibly indicating that the
chromatin state is less stable. In contrast, the clone with the least
rearranged structure (E30 1B5) showed the highest chromatin stability.
Taken together these data suggest that the HAC DNA structure may have
an impact on HAC chromatin stability over time. CENP-A Accumulates
Preferentially on the α21-I Array with CENP-B
Boxes The IF staining on fibers in  shows CENP-A and
H3K9me3 apparently localized on both the α21-I and α21-II arrays. To better characterize
the chromatin state of the two arrays on the HAC-seeding DNA, we performed
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) for CENP-A and several indicative
histone modifications using a set of well-characterized monoclonal
antibodies, followed by quantitative
PCR (ChIP-qPCR) on genomic DNA from E30 subclone 1B5, J34 subclone
1.10 and E16 subclone 23 (scheme of the primers used for qPCR is presented
in D). ChIP data were highly reproducible for the three
subclones of the
alphoid HAC (A,B,C). Thus, the overall chromatin organization was
maintained despite differences in the level of rearrangements. CENP-A
accumulated on the α21-I array ∼2–3
times more than on the α21-II array in all
the three subclones. This is an average of ∼1.5 times more
than on the endogenous centromere of chromosome 17, used as a control
(A,B,C). This
contrasts with a previous study in which the alphoid HAC was apparently unable to maintain CENP-A only on the centromeric
array. It is possible that CENP-A deposition
on the α21-I array may be favored by the larger
size of the input pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII HAC-seeding DNA. CENP-A deposition
also correlated with higher levels of H3K4me2 and H3K36me2, as expected
for centrochromatin. The α21-I array also contained a relatively high level of H3K9me3 and a low
level of H3K9ac (A,B,C), revealing differences from the alphoid HAC,
which contained a single HAC-seeding array. Unexpectedly, the α21-II array had levels
of H3K9ac and H3K4me2 (markers for actively transcribed chromatin)
∼ twice those of the satellite II DNA used as a control. Consistent
with this observation, levels of H3K9me3 on the α21-II array were ∼2–4 times lower than on the α21-I array (A,B,C), revealing a generally open conformation of the chromatin.
This was surprising, as we had initially expected this array, which
lacks CENP-B boxes, to form heterochromatin. Our data suggest that
a regular array of alphoid type II DNA lacking CENP-B boxes is not
sufficient to establish pericentric heterochromatin. However, given
the intermixing of sequences on the HAC-seeding DNA, we cannot exclude
the possibility that the presence of strong heterochromatin might
have been counter-selected due to its potentially harmful effects
on expression of the Geneticin-resistance gene or to the juxtaposition
with large numbers of CENP-B boxes. Taken together these data
suggest that α21-I array recruits CENP-A and
establishes a functional centromere in
the alphoid HAC, despite sustaining high levels
of H3K9me3. CENP-A accumulates
preferentially on the α21-I array. (A,B,C) ChIP-qPCR
analysis of CENP-A and indicated histone
marks modifications in HT1080 subclones E30 1B5 (A), J34 1.10 (B),
and E16 23 (C). The α21-I array (TetO), α21-II array (LacOGal4), satellite D17Z1 (chr17), and degenerate
satellite II (sat2) repeats were assessed. Values have been normalized
against satellite D17Z1 (chr17). Total of 2 biological repeats,  ≈ 5 × 10 cells each. Error bars
denote SEM. Statistical test: Mann–Whitney test (* < 0.05). (D) Cartoon showing the localization of primers used
in qPCR on the HAC and on endogenous corresponding chromosomes. α21-I and α21-II Arrays Do Not Form Functionally Independent Chromatin
Domains To determine whether the molecular structure of the
HAC impacts
the function of the α21-I and α21-II arrays, we asked whether the two arrays are functionally
distinct. To do this, we transiently expressed KAP1 as a chimeric
fusion to either TetR-eYFP or LacI-GFP. KAP1 is a scaffolding protein
that recruits the CoREST complex, promoting a silent chromatin state
and increasing the level of H3K9me3. Previous
studies revealed that KAP1 recruitment into the centromere causes
a loss of CENP-A and inactivates the kinetochore. Thus, if the two arrays on the alphoid HAC are functionally independent, KAP1 recruitment should have an
effect of the HAC centromere only when targeted to the α21-I array. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf We performed quantitative fluorescent analysis
to measure the level of CENP-A and H3K9me3 on the alphoid HAC after targeting KAP1-eYFP fusions to the two arrays both separately
and simultaneously for 48 h, using the eYFP to localize the HAC arrays
in interphase cells (). Targeting
KAP1 to the α21-I array led to a significant
(∼2 fold) decrease in CENP-A levels on the HAC for all three
subclones analyzed (A). This is similar to what was reported for the alphoid HAC. The decrease in CENP-A
was accompanied by an increase in H3K9me3 levels when targeting KAP1
to the α21-I array (B). Different subclones showed different
levels of H3K9me3 enrichment, possibly due to intrinsic variation
in the H3K9me3 basal levels in each subclone (A,B,C). Targeting KAP1 to the α21-II array also
resulted in a decrease in HAC-associated CENP-A, although the effect
was milder than observed with tethering to the α21-I array (A).
Thus, even though most CENP-A was associated with the α21-I region, targeting proteins to the α21-II region still affected CENP-A levels. This confirms the proximity
of the arrays and is consistent with the pattern of histone modifications
observed in A. The increase in H3K9me3 levels seen after tethering KAP1 to α21-II array appeared to be more significant than tethering
KAP1 to α21-I. This could be explained by the
initial lower level of H3K9me3 on the α21-II array (A,B,C):
there might be more unmodified H3K9 that can be converted to H3K9me3
upon the effect of KAP1. Targeting KAP1 to both arrays simultaneously
did not completely
suppress kinetochore function as revealed by CENP-A levels, which
are partly maintained. In the double tethering, neither CENP-A nor
H3K9me3 levels differed greatly from the single tethering, rejecting
the hypothesis that the arrays are independent and they would cooperate
to establish a state of “super-repression” when both
targeted with KAP1 (A,B). In parallel with measuring the effects of KAP1
tethering on CENP-A
and H3K9me3 levels, we also scored the effects of this tethering on
centromere function (, HAC segregation in mitosis).
Despite differences in levels of correctly or mis-segregating HACs
in the initial cell populations, targeting KAP1 to one or both arrays
always led to a significant increase in the number of mis-segregating
HACs. Interestingly, segregation was significantly impaired even when
overall CENP-A levels were not greatly reduced by KAP1 (C). This is probably because
the percentage of mis-segregating cells is determined by scoring individual
cells in which the level of CENP-A falls below a critical threshold,
and it is not determined by the average CENP-A level in the cell population,
as already described. Together,
these observations lead to the conclusion that CENP-A,
H3K4me2 and H3K36me2, which are all necessary for kinetochore maintenance
and function, are enriched on the α21-I array
in the alphoid HAC. Nevertheless, the close proximity
and scrambled structure of the two arrays allows the chromatin modifier
KAP1 to act simultaneously on both arrays. α21-I and α21-II arrays are not functionally independent. (A,B) Quantification
of
HAC-associated CENP-A staining (A) and H3K9me3 staining (B) in individual
cells of each indicated HT1080 subclone 48 h after transfection with
the indicated fusion proteins; values plotted as A.F.U. (arbitrary
forming units). Solid bars indicate the medians, and error bars represent
the SD;  = two independent experiments for each
staining; ∼30 cells analyzed in each experiment. Asterisks
indicate a significant difference (* < 0.05,
** < 0.01, *** < 0.001,
**** < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test). (C)
Number of interphase nuclei (%) showing correct segregation (1 HAC)
or mis-segregation (0 or 2 HACs) of each indicated HT1080 subclone
48 h after transfection with the indicated fusion proteins; the presence
of the HAC was detected by GFP signal.  = 500 cells
analyzed per condition (**** < 0.001; Fisher’s
exact test). We
have generated several alphoid HACs by transfecting
HT1080 cells with pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII, a HAC-seeding DNA of ∼120
kb. This HAC-seeding DNA contains two distinct α-satellite DNA
arrays: one rich in binding sites for TetR and CENP-B and one lacking
CENP-B boxes but having binding sites for LacI and Gal4. We had expected
that the former might form centrochromatin and the latter heterochromatin,
but experimental results revealed another outcome. The new alphoid HAC shows two important differences
from previous generations of synthetic HACs (alphoid HAC and alphoid HAC). First, the
efficiency of alphoid HAC formation in HT1080 was
higher than that typically seen with other HACs. Indeed,
it was comparable to results obtained when cotransfecting the HAC-seeding
DNA plus CENP-A specifically targeted to the synthetic centromere. It therefore appears that this longer HAC-seeding
DNA may be more efficient at promoting stable CENP-A deposition. Second,
ChIP-qPCR analysis revealed that CENP-A accumulated preferentially
on the CENP-B-containing array of the alphoid HAC.
This was not observed with the previous alphoid HAC,
which was formed from a smaller HAC-seeding DNA. Surprisingly, H3K9me3 was also recruited to the CENP-B-containing
array on the alphoid HAC. Previous results have
revealed that CENP-B can have a dual role in recruiting centrochromatin
or heterochromatin markers depending on the context. We speculate that the alphoid HAC shows 3 types of chromatin. Some of the CENP-B-rich
arrays form classical centrochromatin containing CENP-A, H3K4me2 and H3K36me2, but others form H3K9me3-rich
heterochromatin, which previous studies have shown to be incompatible
with centrochromatin. Thus, CENP-A-containing arrays are likely interspersed
with H3K9me3-bearing arrays. Surprisingly, the non-CENP-B array did
not form the predicted heterochromatin, but instead appeared to form
relatively “open” euchromatin. It is possible that heterochromatin
failed to form as a result of selective pressure to avoid silencing
the Geneticin resistance gene. Following DNA rearrangements, TetO,
LacOGal4 regions and the Geneticin resistance gene can end up being
near one another, potentially selecting against rearrangements in
which heterochromatin forms and spreads inactivating Geneticin resistance
gene. Another possibility is that the rearrangements bring relatively
high levels of CENP-B boxes close to the alphoid type II DNA, and
this somehow interferes with the ability of the latter to nucleate
heterochromatin. Studies of the alphoid HAC revealed that HAC-seeding
DNA can undergo dramatic reorganization during HAC establishment. However, the timing and the causes of this phenomenon
were unknown. Our Southern blot analysis of various clones of alphoid HAC-bearing HT1080 cells reveals that the HAC-seeding
DNA in each clone has undergone a unique pattern of rearrangements,
both in the size and in the number of fragments observed after restriction
digestion and probing for the arrays present in pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII.
This highly cell-specific pattern is acquired by each cell in the
first 8 weeks following transfection with the HAC-seeding DNA, apparently
before completion of the multimerization/amplification that allows
the transfected DNA to surpass the size threshold required for stable
segregation in mitosis. The specific
pattern of rearrangements is stably inherited by HAC-containing subclones,
as shown by Southern blot analysis performed 14 weeks after HAC seeding
DNA transfection and in agreement with previous reports of HAC stability
during MMCT (microcell mediated cell transfer). These
observations indicate that early during the process of centromere
formation, the HAC-seeding DNA encounters a limited series of events
that lead to deletions, additions and shuffling of its arrays, but
that subsequent to centromere formation the HAC genome is stabilized.
Importantly, the larger size of the seeding DNA did not prevent the
final structure of the HAC from being amplified or rearranged, as
hypothesized prior to this study. We propose three discrete
steps at which modifications on the HAC-seeding
DNA possibly occur: in the cytosol, shortly after entry of the HAC-seeding
DNA (first step), in the nucleus during replication (second step),
and as a consequence of micronucleus formation (third step) (A). Not every HAC-seeding
DNA will necessarily undergo all three steps, but we suggest that
they can all cooperate to form the rearranged mature HAC. It has been reported extensively in the literature that exogenous
DNA is naturally altered upon transfection into cells. Transfected
exogenous DNA can undergo mutations, deletions, formation of concatemers,
or be eventually lost prior to entering the nucleus. Most of these modifications happen early after transfection, before
the transfected DNA replicates. This
is the result of DNA-sensing pathways: for example, the DNA sensor cGAS binds cytosolic DNA and produces
the second messenger cGAMP, which binds STING and leads to activation
of an inflammatory response. Indeed, it was recently reported
that cGAS has an affinity for α-satellite DNA. Transfected DNA can also undergo double strand breaks (DSBs)
triggering a DNA damage repair response that can involve non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or homologous
recombination (HR). We suggest that transfected HAC-seeding
DNA activates these cytosolic
responses and that this results in an initial round of DNA alterations
(first step in our proposed model). This rearranged DNA then enters
the nucleus where it undergoes a process of amplification either due
to recombination or “slippage” during replication due
to its repetitive sequence, leading to the formation of concatemers
(second step). If, during these early stages the HAC-seeding DNA fails
to reach a length sufficient to establish a functional centromere
or accurate regulation of sister chromatid cohesion, then at the subsequent
mitosis the nascent HAC would fail to segregate properly, likely ending
up as a lagging chromosome in anaphase. Such lagging chromosomes typically
lead to chromosome bridges and micronucleus formation. Both outcomes have been associated
with chromothripsis, a disruptive event of shredding and shuffling
of the DNA, that is associated with cancer development. During chromothripsis, a region
of the genome is cut in tens to hundreds of pieces by an as-yet unknown
agent (although rupture of the nuclear envelope in micronuclei has
been reported to lead to cGAS accumulation), and the fragments are rejoined randomly by NHEJ, generating a
patchwork of DNA fragments. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00326/suppl_file/sb0c00326_si_001.pdf If
the alphoid HAC-seeding DNA undergoes chromothripsis,
large numbers of rearrangements could potentially occur in a very
short period of time (third step). If the rearranged HAC subsequently
attains the minimum size for stable mitotic segregation, this could
explain the origin of sister HAC-containing cell lines, each with
a unique set of rearrangements. In an effort to investigate early
stages of HAC formation, we decided to follow by microscopy the HAC-seeding
DNA shortly after transfection. Images obtained at 24, 48, and 96
h after transfection in two different cell lines (HT1080 and HT1080
constitutively expressing TetR-EYFP)
show that the forming alphoid HAC can be found in
small micronucleus-like structures termed nanonuclei that were previously
observed when the centromere of the alphoid HAC was
inactivated by altering its epigenetic status (B; more
images in ). Those nanonuclei
were postulated to be micronuclei containing a single HAC formed when
the HAC failed to segregate properly in mitosis. Nanonuclei are negative
for CENP-A staining: in the prior study because the centromere had
been inactivated and here because the centromere has not yet been
established (B; more images in ). The present
results are consistent with a previous report that CENP-A accumulates
on nascent HACs from 4 days after transfection. This experiment is consistent with our proposed model. This model suggests that the fate of the HAC seeding-DNA may depend
on the phase in the cell cycle when transfection happens, as this
could result in a longer or shorter exposure of the DNA molecule to
cytosol. Furthermore, NHEJ is more active during the G1 phase of the
cell cycle, when sister chromatids are not yet formed. The question of the relationship between HAC
DNA reorganization and the cell cycle timing of DNA transfection remains
an important one for future study. The results described here
have important implications for ongoing
efforts to build synthetic human chromosomes by de novo synthesis, as has been done with great success for budding
yeast. Unlike budding yeast, which has a point centromere, metazoans have regional centromeres that require
establishment of a proper epigenetic environment for their function
and stability. Our data suggest that this process of centromere formation is frequently
associated with DNA rearrangements. It would be extremely unfortunate
if human chromosomes synthesized at great cost and effort were to
become scrambled in an uncontrollable fashion upon their introduction
to human host cells during the process of centromere establishment. Importantly, once centromere function is established, the associated
DNA arrays appear to be much more stable. In fact, although some minor
mutations were detected in some clones when the ∼90 kb  gene was inserted into an established HAC vector (possibly
the result of step 1), there was no detected chromothripsis. Therefore, alternative strategies for building
synthetic chromosomes—, assembly of synthetic
human chromosomes by building upon available HACs with a multi-integrase
site adjacent to the TetO-array—may avoid these complex DNA
rearrangements. It will be important
in future studies to use the alphoid HAC system
to establish suitable conditions for conservation of
the organization of chromosome-sized DNA molecules introduced into
human cells during centromere establishment. Routes that can be explored
include the transfection of cell lines in specific stages of the cell
cycle when the DNA may be less prone to undergo rearrangements (, mitosis); the cotransfection CENP-A or with TetR-linked
coactivators of kinetochore establishment (,
CENP-A chaperones) or the inactivation of cGAS and other molecules
of the cytoplasmic DNA-sensing pathways. Future studies with HACs
will allow us to determine whether transfected HAC-seeding DNA does
undergo chromothripsis, and if so, how to minimize this. The HAC system
will also be useful for studies to optimize procedures to increase
the efficiency of centromere activation and establishment of properly
regulated cohesion on exogenous DNA. Only when these technical issues
have been resolved it will be possible to form predetermined artificial
and synthetic chromosomes in human cells. Early stages
of alphoid HAC formation. (A) Scheme
representing how HAC-seeding DNA rearranges to form the alphoid HAC. HAC-seeding DNA formed by α21-I (green) and α21-II (yellow) arrays is
transfected in HT1080 cells; under the effect of proteins of the DNA-sensing
pathways (elements in red and blue), the nascent HAC gets initially
rearranges and it increases in size due to “slippage”
during replication (dashed arrow indicates nascent HAC entering the
nucleus). During mitosis, the nascent HAC lags and it gets therefore
incorporated into a micronucleus, resulting in additional massive
rearrangements which lead to the final structure of the alphoid HAC. (B) Indirect immunofluorescence of HT1080 cells
constitutively expressing TetR-EYFP at indicated time points after
transfection with HAC-seeding DNA. After fixation, cells were stained
for CENP-A; DAPI stains the nuclei. Enlargements show nanonuclei containing
HACs (green bright spots). Scale bar = 10 μm. Construction
of BAC Carrying α21-I and
α21-II Arrays by Tandem Ligation Amplification Construction of α21-II alphoid 12-mer and insertion into pBluescript vector.
α21-II alphoid 12-mer has been designed
based on alphoid
type II DNA of chromosome #21, and it has been synthesized by GENEART.
The SpeI and NheI sites are located respectively at left and right
ends of the α21-II 12-mer to be inserted
into pBluescript vector. The vector and the 12-mer were joined using
the homologous recombination-based method (GENEART Seamless Cloning
and Assembly Kit, ThermoFisher Scientific). The resulting plasmid
carries one copy of α21-II 12-mer accompanying
unique NheI and unique SpeI site at the ends. Extension of the α21-II 12-mer insert in the plasmid vector by repeating the tandem ligation.
To extend the length of the alphoid insert, the tandem ligation was
repeated until the plasmid harbored 8 copies of the 12-mer using SpeI,
NheI, and ScaI restriction enzymes (NEB). Therefore, the band of the highest molecular weight (16.6 kb for
8 copies) was excised after PFGE and cloned into the BAC vector. The
α21-I 11-mer was designed based on the sequence
of type I alphoid 11-mer of chromosome #21 centromere. Extension of the α21-II 12-mer insert in
the BAC vector. Starting from the BAC clone carrying
8 copies of the α21-II 12-mer, the tandem
ligation was repeated until the 12-mer insert reached 32 copies using
SpeI, NheI, and KasI restriction enzymes (NEB). Finally, 32 copies
of α21-I 11-mer has been cut out from the BAC
vector and ligated into the same vector of α21-II 12-mer to obtain the final product, pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII. The BAC clone pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII, carrying 32 copies of the α21-II 12-mer following 32 copies of the α21-I 11-mer was constructed in three steps describing below. After each cloning step, the forming arrays
were digested
with HI and NotI restriction enzymes (NEB) and
analyzed on 1% agarose gel electrophoresis using 100 bp DNA Ladder,
Quick-Load 1 kb Extend DNA ladder or Low Range PFG Marker (NEB). Quantitative PCR (qPCR) to Detect BAC Copy Number Cells
from HAC-containing clones have been harvested and genomic DNA has
been collected using Maxwell DNA purification kit (Promega). qPCR
analysis have been performed using SYBR Green Master Mix (Roche) and
the following primers: N11F5: 5′-GGGATCACTAGCAATAAAAGGTAGAC-3′
and N11R6: 5′-TCCTTCTGTCTCGTTTTTATGGC-3′
for the BAC synthetic DNA; 11–10R: 5′-AGGGAATGTCTTCCCATAAAAACT-3′
and mCbox-4: 5′-GTCTACCTTTTATTTGAATTCCCG-3′
for the alphoid chr21 array as control. As a standard, DNA from a
previously characterized HAC-containing cell line (H21) with a known
number of BAC copies ( = 125) has been diluted with
serial dilutions and amplified with the same primers. Cell Culture,
Transfection, HAC Formation, and Subcloning Human HT1080
and HT1080 constitutively expressing TetR-EYFP cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with
10% FBS (Labtech) plus 100 U/mL penicillin G and 100 μg/mL of
streptomycin sulfate (Invitrogen). Cells were grown at 37 °C
in 5%CO in a humidified atmosphere. Transfection of pBAC11.32TW12.32GLII
DNA was performed using Viafect (Promega) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. For transfections of cells growing in 6-well plates,
transfection complexes containing 10 μL of Viafect reagent and
1 μg of plasmid DNA were prepared in 200 μL of OptiMEM
(Invitrogen). After 5 min of incubation at room temperature, 200 μL
of transfection complexes was added dropwise in 2 mL of media. After
6 h, the media was changed to the wells and transfected cells were
selected adding 400 μg/mL of Geneticin (Thermo Fisher) and grown
for 2–3 weeks until separate resistant colonies were present.
Resistant colonies were isolated manually and moved into 24-well plates.
Isolated clones were expanded in the presence of 400 μg/mL of
Geneticin. For targeting experiments with TerR-KAP1 and LacI-KAP1,
cells have been transfected using Xtremegene-9 (Roche) according to
manufacturer’s instructions. For transfections in 12-well plates,
transfection complexes containing 3 μL of Xtremegene-9 reagent
and 500 ng of plasmid DNA were prepared in 100 μL of OptiMEM
(Invitrogen). After 20 min of incubation at room temperature, 100
μL of transfection complexes was added dropwise in 1 mL of media.
For cotransfection, 500 ng of each plasmid has been transfected in
the same reaction. Southern Blot Hybridization Analysis Southern blot
hybridization was performed as described previously with minor changes. Genomic DNA was prepared in agarose
plugs (Low Melt Agarose, Biorad), 0.5 × 10 cells
per plug: plugs have been treated with Proteinase K (CHEF genomic
DNA plug kit, Biorad) and restriction-digested by HI (NEB) overnight in the buffer recommended by the manufacturer.
The digested DNA was CHEF (CHEF Mapper, Bio-Rad) separated (autoprogram,
5–250 kb range, 16 h transfer), transferred to membrane (Amersham
Hybond-N+), and blot-hybridized with an 82 bp probe for TetO and a
74 bp probe for LacO and Gal4 containing P-32 CTP. Radioactive labeled
DNA sequences for the probes were synthesized by PCR using the primers
and synthetic DNA fragment as a template (tetO_south_21_M: 5′-TTTGTGGAAGTGGACATTTACTAGCAGCAGAGCTCTCCCTATCAGTGATAGAGACTAGCCCATAAAATAGACAGAAGCATT-3′,
tetO_south_21_F1: 5′-TTTGTGGAAGTGGACATTTC-3′,
tetO_south_21_R1: 5′-AATGCTTCTGTCTATTTTTA-3′;
lacO_south3_M: 5′-TGTGGAAGTGGACATTTCGACCACATGTGGAATTGTGAGCGGATAACAATTTGTGGCCCATAAAATAGACAGA-3′,
lacO_south3_F1: 5′-TGTGGAAGT GGACATTTCGA-3′, lacO_south3_R1:
5′-TCTGTCTATTTTTATGGGCC-3′; gal4_south1_M:
5′-AATGGACATTTCGACGGAGGACAGTCCTCCGTCGACGGAGGACAGTCCTCCGCATAAAATCTA-3′,
gal4_south1_F1: 5′-AATGGACATTTCGACG-3′,
gal4_south1_R1: 5′-TAGATTTTATGCGGAG-3′). The membrane was incubated for 2 h at 65 °C for prehybridization
in Church’s buffer (0.5 M Na-phosphate buffer containing 7%
SDS and 100 μg/mL of unlabeled salmon sperm carrier DNA). The
labeled probe was heat denatured in a boiling water for 5 min, cooled,
added to the hybridization Church’s buffer, and allowed to
hybridize for 48 h at 65 °C. Blots were washed once in 2×
SSC (300 mM NaCl, 30 mM sodium citrate, pH 7.0)/0.05% SDS for 20 min
at 30 °C, once in 2× SSC/0.05% SDS for 10 min at 65 °C
and then three times in 2× SSC/0.05% SDS for 5 min at 65 °C.
Blots were exposed to X-ray film 2–48 h at −80 °C. Expression and Purification of Recombinant TetR/LacI-eYFP TetR and LacI were cloned as C-terminally His-tagged proteins in
a pET23a vector and proteins were purified following a previously
described procedure. Briefly, the vectors
were transformed in  BL21
Gold cells and colonies grown at 37 °C until OD1 in Super Broth containing ampicillin. The cultures were then induced
with 0.35 mM IPTG overnight at 18 °C and cell pellets were lysed
in a buffer containing 20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 35 mM imidazole
and 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. Proteins were affinity-purified using
a Ni-NTA column (GE Healthcare), washed with high salt buffer (20
mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 1000 mM NaCl, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl, 2 mM ATP, 35 mM imidazole, and 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) and eluted
with 20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 400 mM imidazole, and 2 mM
2-mercaptoethanol. The pure eluted fractions were pooled and dialyzed
overnight against storage buffer (20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl,
5% glycerol, and 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol). Sample quality was analyzed
by 15% SDS-PAGE stained with Coomassie Blue. The final protein concentrations
that were used for the IF staining on fibers were 1.2 and 1.7 mg/mL
for TetR-eYFP and LacI-eYFP, respectively. Fluorescent  Hybridization (FISH) and
DNA Fibers Preparation Metaphase chromosomes from HT1080
were obtained following a standard protocol: 3 h before harvesting,
cells were treated with Colcemid (Invitrogen) at a final concentration
of 0.1 μg/mL. Collected cells were resuspended in warm hypotonic
solution (75 mM KCl) for 20 min at 37 °C and fixed in methanol:acetic
acid (3:1). Slides were kept at −20 °C until they were
processed for FISH. To obtain stretched chromatin fibers, 2 ×
10 cells were centrifuged, and the pellets were washed
in 1× PBS. Ten μL drops have been placed on slides and
let dry. Once the slides were mounted on the Shandon Sequenza cover
plates (Thermo Scientific), DNA fibers were released applying a lysis
solution (700 mM NaOH in ethanol) and fixed in methanol. Slides have
been kept in PBS at 4 °C until stained. For oligo-FISH
staining, oligonucleotides recognizing the TetO sequence (5′-ACTAGCAGCAGAGCTCTCCCTATCAGTGATAGAGACTAG-3′)
labeled with Digoxigenin, and oligonucleotides recognizing both LacO
(5′-CATGTGGAATTGTGAGCGGATAACAATTTGTGG-3′)
and Gal4 (5′-TCGACGGAGGACAGTCCTCCG-3′)
sequences labeled with Biotin were purchased (Sigma). Oligonucleotides
were mixed at 100 ng/μL and resuspended in hybridization buffer
(50% formamide, 10% dextran sulfate, 2× SSC (300 mM NaCl, 30
mM sodium citrate, pH 7.0)) and 50 μg/mL of salmon sperm DNA
(Sigma). FISH was carried out following standard procedures. Slides
were denatured in 70% formamide/2× SSC at 68 °C for 45 s
(70 °C for 1 min for fibers) and hybridized in a humid chamber
at 37 °C for 2 h. Slides were then washed in 20%formamide/2×
SSC for 5 min and in 2× SSC/0.1% Tween-20 for 5 min at 37 °C.
Oligonucleotide probes were detected with rhodamine-conjugated antidigoxigenin
(Roche) and fluorescein-conjugated streptavidin (Vector Laboratories)
incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Slides were mounted with Vectashield
(Vector Laboratories) containing 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) for chromosome counterstaining. IF staining on fibers, slides
have been blocked with 1% BSA/1× PBS/0.1% Triton X-100 and then
incubated with TetR-GFP or LacI-GFP proteins purified from  in blocking buffer overnight at 4 °C,
together with α-CENP-A and α-H3K9me3 antibodies as described
in immunofluorescence (IF) protocol. Slides have been washed, incubated
with secondary antibodies and sealed as immunofluorescence (IF) staining
standard protocol. For the IF staining on fibers, we aimed to count
20–30 fibers for each staining. HAC-containing subclones
have been thawed and maintained in culture with 400 μg/mL of
Geneticin (Thermo Fisher) for 7 days. At day 0, metaphase chromosomes
have been spread on slides and labeled for FISH as described. At day
0, cell cultures have been split into two batches: one batch has been
kept in culture with 400 μg/mL of Geneticin (Thermo Fisher)
for 30 days, while the other has been kept in culture with simple
DMEM/10% FBS/1% PenStrepto. At day 30, metaphase chromosomes from
each batch have been spread on slides and labeled for FISH as described.
Metaphases at day 0 and day 30 have been scored for the presence of
0, 1, 2, or >2 HACs. The daily loss rate of the HAC (R) was calculated
using the formula  =  × (1 – ), where  is
the number of metaphase chromosome spreads showing a HAC in the cells
cultured under selection and  is the number of HAC-containing metaphase chromosome spreads
after  days of culture in the absence of selection. Indirect Immunofluorescence (IF) Staining and Microscopy Analysis Indirect immunofluorescence (IF) staining of cells fixed in 3.7%
formaldehyde/1× PBS was performed at 37 °C for 10 min following
standard procedures. The following antibodies were used: mouse anti-CENP-A
(clone A1, 1:500) and rabbit anti-H3K9me3
(abcam 8898; 1:300). Microscope images were acquired on a DeltaVision
Core system (Applied Precision) using an Olympus IX-71 inverted microscope
stand with an Olympus UPlanSApo 100× oil immersion objective
(numerical aperture (NA) 1.4) and an LED light source. Camera (Photometrics
Cool Snap HQ), shutter, and stage were controlled through SoftWorx
(Applied Precision). Z-series were collected with a spacing of 0.2
μm, and image stacks were subsequently deconvolved in SoftWorx.
CENP-A and H3K9me3 signal quantification at the HAC was performed
using ImageJ. HAC was visualized in the green channel thanks to the
tethering of the corresponding fluorescent protein. For CENP-A signal
quantification, a custom-made macro in ImageJ (National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD) was used. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation and Quantitative PCR (ChIP-qPCR) Exponentially growing cells were harvested with TrypLE Express
(Gibco) and resuspended in D-PBS (Gibco) up to a concentration of
1 × 10 cells/mL. They were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde
solution (Sigma) for 5 min at room temperature, followed by quenching
with 2.5 M glycine for 5 min at room temperature. Cells at a concentration
of 5 × 10 cells/mL were lysed in lysis buffer (10
mM Tris pH 8.0; 10 mM NaCl; 0.5% NP-40) containing protease inhibitors
(1 μg/mL of CLAP; 0.5 μg/mL of Aprotinin; 1 mM PMSF) for
10 min on ice. Cells pellets have been snap-frozen in liquid N and
stored in −80 °C until processed. Nuclei were resuspended
in lysis buffer with protease inhibitors (50 mM Tris pH 8.0; 2 mM
EDTA; 0.2% SDS; 134 mM NaCl; 0.88% Triton X-100; 0.088% Na-deoxycholate)
and incubated with 400 U/mL MNase for 30 min at 20 °C. Chromatin
was sheared by sonication in a Bioruptor sonicator (Diagenode) for
9 cycles (30s ON/30s OFF) at high setting and 4 °C in dilution
buffer 1 enriched with. The collected supernatants after sonication
were diluted with 300 μL of dilution buffer 1, 500 μL
of dilution buffer 2 (50 mM Tris pH 8.0; 167 mM NaCl; 1.1% Triton
X-100; 0.11% Na-deoxycholate), and 500 μL of RIPA buffer containing
150 μL of NaCl (RIPA-150) and protease inhibitors. Antimouse
IgG Dynabeads (Invitrogen) were conjugated with the relevant antibodies
for 6 h with RIPA-150/0.5% BSA at 4 °C and washed twice with
RIPA-150/0.5% BSA. 500 μL of collected sheared chromatin was
incubated with the beads at 4 °C overnight. Beads were afterward
washed twice with RIPA-150 and RIPA buffer containing 500 mM NaCl
(RIPA-500) and a final wash with TE pH 8.0. Antibody/chromatin complexes
were de-cross-linked with 10% Chelex-100 resin (BioRad) in water at
93 °C and incubated with RNase A and Proteinase K. DNA was subsequently
recovered using magnetic rack. DNA from the chromatin immunoprecipitates
(ChIPed DNA) and input DNA was subject to real-time PCR analysis using
a SYBR Green Mastermix (Roche) on a LightCycler480 system (Roche).
For each primer pair, a standard curve was prepared from the input
material and included on every plate to calculate the percent of precipitated
DNA relative to the input material. ChIPed DNA was subjected to RT-PCR
using the following oligonucleotides: tetO-Fw (5′-CCACTCCCTATCAGTGATAGAGAA-3′),
tetO-Rv (5′-TCGACTTCTGTTTAGTTCTGTGCG-3′)
for the α21-I-tetO domain of the hybrid HAC, lacOgal4-Fw (5′-TATGGTGTCGACGGAGGACA-3′),
and lacOgal4-Rv (5′-CCGCTCACAATTCCACATGTG-3′)
for the α21-II-lacOgal4 domain of the hybrid HAC, chr17-Fw (5′-TTGTGGTTTGTGGTGGAAAA-3′)
and chr17-Rv (5′-CTCAAAGCGCTCCAAATCTC-3′)
for the alphoid chr17 array, sat2-Fw (5′-TCGCATAGAATCGAATGGAA-3′)
and sat2-Rv (5′-GCATTCGAGTCCGTGGA-3′) for
the pericentromeric alphoid chr1. IF during Early Stages
of Alphoid HAC Formation HT1080 and HT1080
constitutively expressing TetR-EYFP, both
growing on coverslips, were transfected
with pBAC11.32TW12.32GLIIusing Viafect (Promega) as already described.
Transfected cells were fixed at the stated time points following IF
procedures and stained using mouse anti-CENP-A (clone A1, 1:500). Microscope images were acquired on a DeltaVision
Core system (Applied Precision). For HT1080, cells were transfected
with LacI-GFP plasmid to localize the HAC DNA 18–24 h prior
fixation..