bacteria are environmental specialists
(e.g., soil, marine, desert) that synthesize rich repertoires of natural
products such as antibiotics. Much of this genetic information is
locked up and cryptically regulated within biosynthetic gene clusters;
regions of genomic DNA that harbor enzymes and other proteins (e.g.,
transporters, resistance markers). The key limitation in awakening
these clusters for natural product discovery is silent gene expression
and recalcitrant genetics. Traditional strategies to overcome this
include genetic modification of the host organism to bypass native
regulatory elements, and the “capture” of the cluster
and expression in a heterologous host. But this can take several weeks to months to complete with varying
levels of success: some cryptic clusters remain dormant due to obscure
native regulation. Fundamental tools that aid these efforts are of
major interest to the natural product community. Prokaryotic
cell-free coupled transcription–translation
systems are emerging as a new tool for studying natural product biosynthesis. Cell-free transcription–translation uses a crude cell-extract
or purified ribosomes and translation factors, the PURE system, in
a “one-pot” reaction. cell-extracts, referred to as either TX-TL or cell-free protein synthesis
(CFPS), are low-cost, straightforward to prepare,
and provide high recombinant protein yields, of up to 2300 μg/mL. Moreover, metabolism is active, providing ATP regeneration, while amino acid pathways are
dynamic, providing additional ATP (through -glutamate).
In addition, certain amino acids deplete and become limiting for protein
synthesis. In summary, TX-TL provides
distinct opportunities for natural product biosynthesis: precursors
for biosynthesis, direct control to feed precursors, short experimental
time scales (4–24 h), and stable yields. Moreover, we and others
have shown the potential for automation in cell-free synthesis. Specifically, we have screened up to 500 plasmid variants in 24
h. While  TX-TL and the PURE system are promising
for natural product biosynthesis, has limited potential for studying biosynthetic
gene clusters from , due to a number
of genetic and metabolic differences. For example, the codon content
between  (∼70% G+C) and  (51% G+C) is different, while the regulatory sequences
that control transcription, post-transcription, and overall gene expression
are distinct. Moreover, secondary metabolism in  is not necessarily well-suited, and often requires further metabolic
engineering. Notwithstanding,  synthesis of
heterologous proteins can result in poor expression and solubility. Therefore, we anticipate that a dedicated  TX-TL system for homologous protein synthesis, has several advantages
for studying natural product biosynthesis. As a first step, we originally
released a  DSM-40230 (ATCC
10712) TX-TL system, but this produced low protein yields (36 μg/mL)
with high batch-to-batch variability. We chose  ATCC 10712 since it is well-suited to synthetic biology.  ATCC 10712 is fast-growing (40 min doubling
time) and grows dispersedly in liquid culture; most  have slower doubling times and clump in mycelial aggregates.
Moreover,  has a range of synthetic
biology tools and is an attractive host for
industrial biotechnology. In parallel to our
studies, the Jewett group also established
a  CFPS system (yields ∼50
μg/mL), which was further optimized. A recent update to this system highlighted the need for adding individual
purified translation factors to elevate
protein synthesis up to ∼400 μg/mL. On this basis,
we rationalized that protein synthesis, in our original  TX-TL system, could be limited by the use
of an energy solution derived for an optimal  TX-TL protocol. For a review of the
biochemical role and origin of cell-free energy solutions, we refer
the reader to Dopp et al. In brief, TX-TL
requires a cell-extract, a primary and secondary energy source, amino
acids, cofactors, molecular crowding agents, and additives (e.g.,
Mg, spermidine, folinic acid, tRNA) to support protein
synthesis from a template DNA sequence. Some of these biochemicals
are present in the cell-extract but may be rate-limiting. The energy
source is composed of nucleotide triphosphates to drive initial mRNA
and protein synthesis (primary energy source) and commonly 3-phosphoglyceric
acid (3-PGA) or phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) as the secondary energy
source. 3-PGA or PEP provide ATP regeneration to leverage extended
protein synthesis. Potentially, primary metabolism could be activated
in TX-TL to provide reducing equivalents (e.g., NADH, FADH), extra
energy, and building blocks (e.g., amino acids, malonyl-CoA) for natural
product biosynthetic pathways, as shown in cell-extract metabolic
engineering. In this work, we focus on
upgrading our  system to elevate protein
synthesis. We also demonstrate its broader potential for cell-free
synthetic biology, namely, for characterizing DNA parts and activating
some model biosynthetic pathways. To achieve this, we made some simple
modifications to the system, allowing yields of up to 266 μg/mL
of expressed recombinant proteins. We also demonstrate combined transcription–translation
and biosynthesis of some example natural product pathways, namely,
melanin and haem biosynthesis. We report an easy-to-follow protocol
that simply requires three components: DNA, cell-extract, and a master
mix that we describe in detail. We believe this generic  TX-TL toolkit will be of broad interest to the natural product community,
complementing experimental wet-lab tools for genome mining studies. To provide an improved  TX-TL toolkit
for synthesis of high G+C (%) genes and pathways from  spp. and related genomes, a key priority was to optimize protein
production. Also, a straightforward protocol with minimal batch variation
was essential, for ease of repeatability. Since bacterial transcription
and translation is coupled, either these steps, physical parameters,
or components from the energy solution, limit overall TX-TL activity.
Therefore, to keep our protocol streamlined, we made the following
changes: promoter strength, energy solution, ATP regeneration, and
RNase inhibition. In doing so, we obtained a high-yield protocol with
minimal variation between different cell-extract batches (A). Overview of  TX-TL optimization. (A)
Outline of physical and biochemical parameters of  TX-TL and SMM buffer system. Optimization of (B) promoter strength
from Bai et al.; (C) primary energy source;
(D) temperature; (E) PVSA; and (F) G6P. Error bars are representative
of three technical measurements. Previously, we used the  promoter
to drive mRNA synthesis in  TX-TL. This
yielded up to 1.3 μM (36 μg/mL) of the model
superfolder green fluorescence protein (sfGFP) in our previous work. Promoter strength is a key limiting factor in
heterologous expression systems.  is a strong  constitutive promoter, originally derived from
the // promoter, with core-35 and -10 boxes of TTGACN and TAGART, respectively. The  promoter is active
in a range of  spp. through the endogenous
RNA polymerases and HrdB house-keeping Sigma factor. Bai et al. developed a synthetic promoter library based
around , using fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS) to quantity  protoplasts. This included the isolation of a synthetic promoter
44 (SP44), which is 1.87-fold stronger than . We used  TX-TL to test a panel of promoters developed by Bai et al., with
SP44 being the strongest (2.63 μM sfGFP) and 2.2-fold more active
than  (B). We also repeated this across four independent cell-extract
batches, but still observed strong batch variation. However, SP44
provided a stronger reporter plasmid to continue the optimization
process. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf Next, we focused
on developing a minimal
energy solution (MES) to identify any nonessential components. The
standard  TX-TL energy solution used previously, is composed of HEPES buffer, ions (e.g., Mg-glutamate,
K-glutamate), nucleotide triphosphates (NTPs - ATP, GTP, CTP, and
UTP), secondary energy source [typically 3-phosphoglyceric acid (3-PGA)
or phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP)], amino acids, molecular crowding agent,
and a number of additives. To establish
a MES for  TX-TL, we first eliminated
a number of nonessential components from the energy solution. This
included coenzyme A, tRNA (), NAD, cAMP, folinic
acid, and spermidine (). While
we did initially observe a positive response with cAMP, after several
repeats in batches, this effect was not repeatable. For the HEPES
buffer component, this was noninhibitory (10–100 mM) and provided
optimum activity between pH 8–9 (). For the secondary energy source, we found 3-PGA was essential;
the removal of 3-PGA decreased sfGFP synthesis by 98% (). We tried to replace 3-PGA with alternative
secondary energy sources but observed only minimal activity: maltose
(0.13 μM), sucrose (0.15 μM), and pyruvate (0.17 μM).
Other potential sources such as glucose (with phosphate), PEP, and
succinate were inactive (). 3-PGA
is the preferred secondary energy source in a range of nonmodel cell-extract
hosts, due to its chemical stability
and high energy potential, with an optimum concentration of 30 mM
(). For the primary energy source
(NTPs), there was some basal activity without additional NTPs, but
addition of 3 mM ATP/GTP and 1.5 mM CTP/UTP provided peak activity
(). Surprisingly, the removal
of amino acids only decreased sfGFP synthesis by 45%, with 0.5–1.5
mM amino acids providing peak activity (data not shown). For a Mg
screen, we found that MgCl, Mg-glutamate, or Mg-acetate
were all active (), while high
levels of K-glutamate (150–200 mM) stimulated increased sfGFP
synthesis (). This is possibly
due to additional ATP regeneration via entry of α-ketoglutarate
into the TCA cycle, as previously shown. Lastly, while we observed reasonable activity without PEG, 1% (w/v)
PEG 6K was optimum, providing a 44% rise in activity (). However, it is desirable to omit
PEG for downstream natural product analytical purposes (e.g., LC–MS).
Finally, on the basis of these observations, we optimized our basic  TX-TL MES system by individually fine-tuning
the concentration of its core components (3-PGA, NTPs), while leaving
DNA (40 nM), Mg-glutamate (4 mM), K-glutamate (150 mM), amino acids
(1.25 mM), and PEG 6K (1%) constant. 3-PGA was most optimum at 30
mM, while the NTP level (ratio of 2:1 ATP/GTP:CTP/UTP), showed biphasic
activity, peaking at 3 mM ATP/GTP, with full inhibition at 4 mM. Specific
data on Mg-glutamate and K-glutamate optimization with four different
cell-extract batches is presented in . As a combined result of this optimization process, sfGFP synthesis
was increased to 4 μM, representing a 52% increase. Additional
ATP Regeneration Pathways In a previous
study, Caschera et al. highlighted that other glycolytic enzymes function
in  TX-TL, using the disaccharide maltose
(or maltodextrin) combined with 3-PGA. This method extended protein
synthesis up to 10 h, through inorganic phosphate recycling. We investigated whether this part of the metabolism
is functional in  TX-TL. Therefore, we
tested the  MES system (with 3-PGA) with
maltose, glucose, glucose-6-phosphate (G6P), or fructose-1,6-phosphate
(F16P). Interestingly, maltose, glucose, Glc6P, and F16P all prolonged
the length of  TX-TL activity from 2
to 3 h. This was maximal with 5 mM Glc6P and 30 mM 3-PGA (C), at an optimum
temperature of between 24 and 28 °C (D). All together we observed a 59% increase
in sfGFP synthesis to 6.37 μM, but lower levels of NTP are required
(C)—equivalent
to 1 mM ATP/GTP and 0.5 mM CTP/UTP. We speculate this could be related
to ATP regulation of the glycolytic enzymes (e.g., hexokinase, fructokinase),
leading to rapid depletion of ATP and inhibition of protein synthesis.
However, this requires further investigation as there is limited literature
on specific glycolytic enzymes from . As a final addition to the system,
we tested the effect of the inexpensive RNase inhibitor, polyvinylsulfonic
acid (PVSA). Recently, PVSA, an RNA-mimetic, was shown to improve
mRNA stability in  TX-TL, but did not increase
protein synthesis. In  TX-TL, 1 mg/mL PVSA increased sfGFP synthesis up to 5.87 μM,
in the basic MES system (E). However, while we observed individual improvements
with either the PVSA RNase inhibitor or the blended G6/3-PGA secondary energy source, in combination, there was no significant
additive effect with PVSA and G6/3-PGA together.
This suggested that other rate-limiting factors are at play. In summary, we have made a specific energy solution for  TX-TL with an overall 6-fold improvement in the system. This is
attributed to the combined use of 3PGA and G6P as secondary energy
sources and a stronger promoter system. Furthermore, we find this
can be combined into a single  master
mix (SMM) solution, further streamlining the reaction process. With
this simple modification, the TX-TL reaction requires three single
components that minimize batch variation: SMM solution, plasmid DNA,
and the cell-extract. Next, we sought to demonstrate the use of this
simplified system for the testing of plasmid tools and regulatory
elements for  synthetic biology. Cell-Free Characterization of  Genetic
Tools for Synthetic Biology It is highly desirable to characterize
standard DNA parts using rapid and iterative design–build–test–learn
cycles, the central paradigm of synthetic biology. For  and related strains, either conjugation or protoplast transformation
is typically used to transfer self-replicating and integrative plasmids
for the testing of DNA parts for  synthetic
biology. DNA parts
are small modular regulatory elements (e.g., promoter, insulator,
tags, RBS, ORF, terminator) that facilitate downstream combinatorial
DNA assembly workflows (e.g., Golden Gate) for refactoring gene expression
pathways. While there are different approaches to quantitate gene
expression, Bai et al. recently applied a lysozyme method, to study single-cell
gene expression quantitation of  ATCC
10712 protoplasts using fluorescence-activated cell sorting. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf We next tested the promoter and RBS elements from Bai et al. in  TX-TL, as well
as two other important regulatory elements: alternative start codons and terminators. First, we built these DNA parts to be compatible with our previous
DNA assembly method, EcoFlex. For this
we had to modify the promoter consensus (prefix renamed, , SP44a instead of SP44) to remove an internal BsmBI site to permit
MoClo assembly. In addition, to provide comparative  data, we built a new destination vector (cured of BsmBI and BsaI
sites) from pAV- from Phelan et al. and renamed this StrepFlex (pSF1). pAV- is an integrative shuttle vector developed as a synthetic
biology plasmid tool for . First, for the promoter library (, SP15a, SP19a, SP23a, SP25a, SP30a, SP40a, SP44a, and ), we assembled this with the RiboJ insulator, R15 capsid RBS, mScarlet-I,
and the Bba_B0015 terminator. For the RBS library,  was used as the promoter. For the promoter variants, activity ranged
from 5% () to 100% (). In contrast to earlier results (B), the range of activities for the BsmBI
cured promoter variants were between 30 and 50% less active across
the library. For the activity of the RBS variants, this ranged from
0.7% (SR9) to 117% (SR39) activity relative to the R15 capsid RBS
(B). We also
tested two-dimensional promoter and RBS space with sfGFP (C). Lastly, to provide  data, we characterized the mScarlet-I promoter and
RBS plasmids (from A,B) in  ATCC 10712 () following the approach by Phelan et
al. Interestingly, there was some significant
outliers in the RBS library. SR39 (along with the  PET-RBS) was the strongest RBS in contrast to SR40, which was unexpectedly
weaker both  and . In addition, SR4, an expected weak RBS, was strong in both  and  measurements (A,B, ). This may reflect differences in the
upstream 5′-untranslated (5′-UTR) region and the use
of a different fluorescence reporter (mScarlet-I), in comparison to
Bai et al. However, overall the promoter
and RBS strengths characterized were broadly consistent with the original
publication. Another important regulator of
gene expression is the start codon.
In most bacteria, ATG is the preferred codon for translation initiation
through fMet-tRNA. Previously, Myronovskyi .
used a β-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter to show that the TTG codon
was stronger than ATG for translation initiation by almost 2-fold
in both  J1074 and  Tu6071. Using sfGFP and
mScarlet-I as reporters, our findings suggest that, for  at least, ATG is equivalent in strength to TTG,
followed by CTG and last GTG as the weakest (C). This also likely changes with coding
sequences and 5′-UTR. In comparison, for  the order of strength goes as follows: ATG > GTG > TTG >
CTG. We expect this differs due to high
GC codon
bias in . Despite the use of different
experimental conditions, our results confirm that TTG is a strong
alternative start codon and that GTG is weak. Nevertheless, the role
of GTG in regulation is unclear and intriguing due its high frequency
in  genomes. To the best of our knowledge, no studies have so far reported
the
use of terminators for controlling pathway expression in . Using the same experimental format as we previously used in EcoFlex, we tested a selection of Rho-independent terminators
from the iGEM catalogue (Bba_B0012, Bba_B0015) and from Chen et al. in  TX-TL (D). The latter terminators
were designed to prevent repetition in DNA elements and protect against
homologous recombination as previously highlighted. In summary, the activities we observed, strongly follow our previous
observations in  cell-free. For now, our TX-TL system demonstrates proof-of-concept
data for prototyping DNA parts in . Rho-independent
terminators may in future provide tools for refactoring metabolic
pathways in engineered  strains. Part characterization
of  regulatory
elements: (A) Promoter-R15 capsid RBS-mScarlet-I; (B) -RBS-mScarlet-I; (C) Promoter-RBS-sfGFP combinations; (D) variable
start codons (with sfGFP and mScarlet-I); and (E) variable Rho-independent
terminators from Chen et al. For terminator
plasmid design, see Moore et al. 40 nM
plasmid DNA was incubated in the optimized reaction conditions at
28 °C as a technical triplicate repeat and repeated on two separate
days. Unless otherwise stated, the SP44 promoter, PET RBS and Bba_B0015
were used in constructs, assembled into either pTU1-A () or pSF-1 ( and  shuttle vector). Error bars are representative of three technical
measurements. TX-TL
synthesis of high G+C (%) genes http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf Previously, we
found our  TX-TL system was most active
with 40 nM of plasmid DNA, using the -sfGFP
reporter, to saturate protein synthesis. In comparison to  TX-TL, protein synthesis
is saturated at around 5–10 nM of reporter DNA, which varies
with different promoters and sigma factors. We questioned whether DNA degradation led to this discrepancy since
most  degrade methylated plasmid
DNA with endonucleases. To compare methylated
and unmethylated plasmid DNA for methylation-specific endonucleases,
we tested unmethylated and methylated SP44-sfGFP reporter plasmid
in  TX-TL. Interestingly, there was no
major change in sfGFP synthesis between unmethylated and methylated
plasmid DNA, across different DNA concentrations (). We also tested relative plasmid DNA stability
in  cell-extracts, with the standard
MES energy solution, and incubated at different time-lengths, followed
by re-extraction of the plasmid DNA (using the Qiagen plasmid DNA
purification kit). The extracted plasmid DNA was then separated and
visualized on a 1% (w/v) agarose gel. This indicated that methylated
plasmid DNA is stable, during the time (0–4 h) when TX-TL is
active (). Further to this, we
tested linear DNA for exonuclease activity. To protect the coding
sequences, we PCR amplified about 150–250 bases upstream and
downstream of the coding parts, using the standard SP44-sfGFP reporter
plasmid. However, in the TX-TL reaction, linear DNA was 95% less active
than circular DNA, at 40 nM of DNA (). This suggests the  cell-extract
has exonuclease activity, while endonuclease activity is minimal. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf Since circular DNA degradation was not a limiting factor, we tested
different fluorescent proteins (A) to determine if the optimum plasmid DNA concentration
for protein synthesis changes. First, we tested mVenus-I and mScarlet-I,
combined with the strong SP44 promoter, and compared them to the SP44-sfGFP
reporter. The maximum yields achieved for these three proteins were
6.48 μM sfGFP (174 μg/mL), 9.50 μM mScarlet-I (266
μg/mL), and 7.72 μM mVenus-I (224 μg/mL). Interestingly,
this was tested in the extract batches presented in , where both SP44-mScarlet-I and SP44-mVenus saturated
protein synthesis with a lower DNA template (10 nM) than SP44-sfGFP
(50 nM) (B).
This was surprising since the coding sequence of mVenus is 96% identical
to sfGFP, with the exception of 30 mutations and an additional GTG
(valine) at the second codon for mVenus-I. However, while the optimal
sfGFP plasmid DNA concentration was 50 nM in this experiment, consistent
with our previous work, it was not consistent
in all extract batches (). This
contrasting result likely relates to either a difference in mRNA stability
or translation initiation rate between the batches. Since little is
known about how . control protein
synthesis, this topic alone merits a separate in-depth investigation. Second, we tested the robustness
of the system for other proteins
from high G+C (%) genes (C). We expressed the oxytetracycline enzymes (OxyA,
-B, -C, -D, -J, -K, -N, and -T) from  that were previously only detectable by Western blotting in our
original publication, as well as three
nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS). The latter included the TxtA
and TxtB NRPS enzymes from thaxtomin A biosynthesis in  and an uncharacterized NRPS (NH08_RS0107360) from . Except for TxtA, most enzymes were discernible
by either SDS-PAGE (C), while for OxyA (47 kDa) and TxtB (162 kDa), low levels
(<0.5 μM) were detected by Western blotting using an anti-Flag
tag (data not shown). We also incorporated a C-terminal tetracysteine
tag with the oxytetracycline enzymes and mScarlet-I, using the fluorogenic
biarsenical dye fluorescein arsenical hairpin binder-ethanedithiol
(FlAsH-EDT), to measure real-time nascent protein synthesis
(D). Most oxytetracycline
enzymes showed a significant increase in FlAsH-EDT fluorescence
( < 0.05), peaking at 120 min, with only OxyN
producing the weakest response ( = 0.056). However,
this was still clearly detectable by PAGE or Western. For mScarlet-I,
the time-lag between the fluorescence signals for FlAsH-EDT2 (immature
protein) and mScarlet-I (mature protein) allowed us to estimate a
maturation time of 40 min for mScarlet-I (E). This is in close agreement to a literature
value of 36 min, calculated . In summary, our  TX-TL system
is robust for expression of high G+C (%) genes, incorporates multiple
tools (e.g., tags, plasmid systems) and is comparable to other bacterial
TX-TL systems. Robust
and high-yield synthesis of high G+C (%) genes. (A) Synthesis
of codon-optimized fluorescence proteins. (B) Denaturing PAGE of oxytetracycline
biosynthetic proteins, fluorescence proteins, and a representative
NRPS (NH08_RS0107360 from ). (C) Saturation
of protein synthesis for sfGFP, mVenus, and mScarlet-I with increasing
DNA concentrations. (D) Real-time detection of protein synthesis with
C-terminal FlAsH-EDT tag system. (E) Estimation of mScarlet-I
maturation time with real-time measurement of immature and mature
protein synthesis. Error bars are representative of three technical
measurements. Transcription, translation, and biosynthesis http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf The next
step was to reconstitute a biosynthetic pathway in  TX-TL system. Initially, to show the synthesis of a single enzyme
and its activity, we selected the GUS reporter enzyme. We synthesized
the enzyme in the TX-TL reaction from 40 nM SP44-, left for 4 h at 30 °C. The GUS enzyme showed a clear band
on SDS-PAGE at the expected size of 68 kDa (). To test for GUS activity, an equal volume of the TX-TL
extract, as well as a negative control reaction, was mixed with X-GlcA
substrate in increasing concentrations (10, 25, and 50 mg/mL). Only
the extract from the SP44- reaction developed
a deep blue pigment within minutes, indicating strong GUS activity
(A). Next, we selected two metabolic pathways to provide a further test
for the TX-TL system. We selected two operons from  encoding the melanin and early stage haem biosynthetic pathways
to provide a discernible output for testing (fluorescence and/or colorimetric).
Also, both operons were selected from , to improve expression in TX-TL since the codon usage is adapted
to this host. Streptomyces castaneoglobisporus http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf Melanin is a natural pigment that absorbs ultraviolet
(UV) light
to protect cells from DNA damage. Recently, Matoba et al. studied
the mechanism of tyrosinase and the role of the “caddie”
protein from  HUT6202. Tyrosinase, TyrC, catalyzes the rate-limiting
step in melanin biosynthesis. It oxidizes the phenol group (in -tyrosine) into the -quinone intermediate,
which enters an autocatalytic cascade into the melanin pathway. TyrC
is dicopper-dependent, with each Cu(II) atom coordinated by three
His residues, facilitated by MelC1, a small (12.8 kDa) metallochaperone.
The  tyrosinase operon encodes both
MelC1 and TyrC. After TX-TL with SP44--, denaturing PAGE shows clear synthesis of TyrC at approximately
34 kDa (expected 31.4 kDa) although MelC1 was indistinguishable (). In terms of activity, we observed
brown pigment formation after ∼2 h, only with the addition
of 1 mM CuCl (B). This indicates L-DOPA formation, which enters an
autocatalytic cascade, leading to different melanin pigments. This
suggests TyrC is active, despite the apparent absence of MelC1. Without
the addition of CuCl or tyrosinase plasmid, the cell-extracts
remained clear. Previously, Matoba et al. showed that insertion of
Cu(II) into TyrC by MelC1 involves a transient interaction, and that
MelC1 is unstable and forms aggregates difficult to detect with PAGE. Also, apo-TyrC is inactive with Cu(II) alone,
which suggests that our TX-TL system supports the synthesis of both
TyrC and MelC1. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf Lastly, we tested a three-gene biosynthetic
operon (-/) that catalyzes
the early stages of
haem biosynthesis. This pathway was selected
since it contains a known fluorescence reporter enzyme CysG, a methyltransferase naturally fused
as HemD/CysG. We added a pTU1-A-SP44--/- (pTU1-A-SP44-) plasmid
into the TX-TL reaction, as well as a negative control plasmid (pTU1-A),
both with and without 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA), which is the
substrate for the pathway. In the presence of pTU1-A and 1 mM ALA,
there was some minor background fluorescence (C), which we expected since haem biosynthesis
is essential. In contrast, with pTU1-A-SP44- and
1 mM ALA, strong red fluorescence was generated, 20-fold higher than
background levels in the control reaction (pTU1-A and 1 mM ALA). For
protein synthesis, while we could detect HemB (35 kDa) and HemC (38
kDa), the fusion protein HemD/CysG was less clear, with
other major bands at the expected mass, 58.3 kDa (). To verify pathway function, we ran a semicontinuous
reaction to facilitate purification by
separating the haem intermediates from the cell-extract proteins (inset
image in C).
Interestingly, LC–MS analysis detected the air-oxidized product
of the HemD enzyme (uroporphyrinogen III, 837 /), observed as a 6-electron oxidized uroporphyrin III (red
fluorescent) intermediate at 831 /, typical for these air-sensitive intermediates (). Since uroporphyrinogen III is colorless
and nonfluorescent, we tried to minimize oxygen levels in the TX-TL
reaction using a layer of mineral oil in small-scale batch reactions.
Surprisingly, the pigment and fluorescence still accumulated, suggesting
that dissolved oxygen levels remain stable in the cell-extract. Interestingly,
we also found the TX-TL reactions were still active for sfGFP and
mScarlet-I synthesis (data not shown). This anaerobic activity potentially
suggests that oxygen is not rate-limiting at the current level of
protein synthesis activity and is sufficient for folding of the fluorescence
proteins. Further investigation is needed to determine whether oxidative
phosphorylation is active in  TX-TL and
whether this presents a bottleneck to overall ATP regeneration. In
summary, these results show that our  TX-TL system can support the synthesis of at least three enzymes
from plasmid DNA in a combined “one-pot” translation,
translation, and enzymatic pathway. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf cell-free transcription, translation
and biosynthesis. (A) Codon-optimized  MG1655
GUS enzyme. (B)  DSM-40230 tyrosinase
(TyrC) and copper metallochaperone (MelC1). (C)  DSM-40230 early stage haem biosynthetic pathway, HemB, HemD-CysG and HemC. Addition of individual substrates and approximate
time scales are indicated within the diagram. For details of batch
and semicontinuous reaction conditions, please refer to methods. For
a summary of the chemical intermediates, please see . Melanin is a mixed family of pigments spontaneously
produced from air oxidation of L-DOPA. Fluorescence error bars are
representative of three technical measurements. Our
study complements a recent surge in interest in the use of
cell-free systems for the study of biosynthetic pathways. Here
we wanted to expand the palette of plasmid tools for the further development
of  as a synthetic biology chassis by
developing an optimized streptomyces TX-TL toolkit. Our combined findings show at least a 6-fold improvement
in protein synthesis over our original  TX-TL system, using the wild-type  ATCC 10712 strain. It is likely genetic modifications that either
limit RNA degradation or increase translation rates will improve this
current system. Indeed, Xu et al. recently showed translation factors
are a clear rate-limiting step for other  cell-free systems. Finally, we demonstrate
that the semicontinuous system permits reasonable milligram scale-up
of biosynthetic metabolites and a clean route to purification and
analysis. In conclusion, our results realize the early stage potential
of  cell-free for the study of synthetic
biology for natural products. It provides a native prototyping environment
for developing synthetic biology tools (e.g., promoters/RBS) and also
for exploring biosynthetic pathways from these organisms. http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf All plasmids were either prepared
using EcoFlex cloning or by routine materials and methods, as previously
described. For the PCR of high GC genes
and operons, Q5 polymerase (NEB, UK) was used, using standard cycling
or touchdown (72–59 °C annealing) and the addition of
5% (v/v) DMSO. For tricky amplicons, the protocol was modified with
an annealing time of 30 s and elongation temperature reduced to 68
°C. The following bacterial strains were used:  DSM-40230 and  DH10β. Unmethylated
plasmid DNA was prepared from an  mutant (C2925) obtained from NEB. Plasmids and oligonucleotides
are listed in . ATCC 10712
was grown in GYM (prepared in distilled water). The cell-extracts
were prepared as described previously, with the exception that β-mercaptoethanol was removed from
the wash buffers and replaced with 2 mM dithiothreitol. Energy Solution
and Reaction Conditions http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/acssynbio.0c00581/suppl_file/sb0c00581_si_001.pdf The reaction
mixture contained 8 mg/mL cell-extract, 25 mM HEPES, 1 mM ATP, 1 mM
GTP, 0.5 mM UTP, 0.5 mM CTP, 30 mM 3-PGA, 5 mM glucose-6-phosphate,
1.5 mM amino acids (1.25 mM -leucine), 4 mM Mg-glutamate,
150 mM K-glutamate, 1% (w/v) PEG6K and 5 mg/mL PVSA. All reactions
were incubated at 28 °C, with 40 nM pTU1-A-SP44-sfGFP and the
MES or SMM buffer system, unless otherwise stated. At least three
technical repeats were prepared (for fluorescence measurements) and
repeated with at least two independent cell-extract batches (from
A6-A9) prepared on separate days. (See  for chemicals in the SMM buffer.) A 40 μL cell-free reaction (30
μL SMM + 10 μL plasmid DNA) was incubated in a 2 mL tube
at 25–30 °C (no shaking) for 6 h. To precipitate proteins,
1 mL of ice-cold 100% (v/v) acetone was added. Samples were placed
at −20 °C for 30 min, before centrifugation at 18 000, 4 °C, for 10 min. The supernatant was removed, and
the pellet was washed with 1 mL of ice-cold 70% (v/v) acetone. Centrifugation
and supernatant removal steps were then repeated. The pellet was air-dried,
before resuspending in 30 μL of ddHO and 10 μL
of 4X NuPAGE lithium dodecyl sulfate (LDS) sample buffer (ThermoFisher)
and boiled at 100 °C for 5 min. To ensure the pellet was solubilized,
samples were aspirated with a pipet five times, and if necessary (a
visible pellet remaining), left for an additional 5 min at 100 °C.
An amount of 10–100 μg of total protein was then separated
with a 4–12% (v/v) gradient Bis-Tris gel (ThermoFisher) run
in an MES buffer system. Proteins were stained with InstantBlue (Generon)
and destained with ddHO, and the images were recorded
with the ChemiDoc XRS imaging system (Biorad). TX-TL Fluorescence Measurements Ten microliters of
cell-free reactions was prepared in a 384-well black clear, F-bottom,
low-binding plate (Greiner). Reactions were measured as a triplicate
technical repeat and at least repeated with cell-extracts prepared
from two separate days. They were measured in a 384-well plate. The
plate was sealed with aluminum film, SILVERseal (Greiner), and briefly
centrifuged at 2000 for 10 s. Real-time plate measurements
were recorded in a CLARIOStar plate reader (BMG Labtech, Germany)
at 30 °C with 10 s of shaking at 500 rpm prior to measurements,
using either standard filters (Omega) or monochromator settings (CLARIOStar).
Purified sfGFP, mVenus-I and mScarlet-I standards were purified, as
described previously, to estimate protein
concentration during real-time fluorescence measurements. TX-TL reactions were prepared
as two components (A and B) in a semicontinuous reaction as follows:
Component A: 100 μL of standard TX-TL reaction, in the absence
of PEG, was injected into a Thermo Scientific Pierce 3.5K MWCO 96-well
microdialysis device. Component B: 1.5 mL of SMM solution with 1 mg/mL
carbenicillin was placed in a 2.5 mL tube. The microdialysis cassette
was placed inside the 2.5 mL tube and incubated at 30 °C for
24 h with shaking (1000 rpm). Samples were acidified with 1% (v/v)
HCl, centrifuged at 18 000 for 25 min at
room temperature. The supernatant was loaded onto a Sep-Pak C-18 (50
mg sorbent) solid-phase extraction cartridge (Waters), washed with
10 mL of 10% (v/v) ethanol and eluted with 2 mL of 50% (v/v) ethanol.
All solutions were acidified with 1% (v/v) HCl. Eluted samples were
dried under vacuum at room temperature, using an Eppendorf Concentrator
Plus. Samples were dissolved in 150 μL of 1% (v/v) HCl and centrifuged
again at 18 000 for 25 min at room temperature.
One microliter of supernatant was then analyzed by LC–MS, performed
with an Agilent 1290 Infinity system with an online diode array detector
in combination with a Bruker 6500 quadruple time-of-flight (Q-ToF)
mass spectrometer. An Agilent Extend-C18 2.1 mm × 50 mm (1.8
μm particle size) column was used at a temperature of 40 °C
with a buffer flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. LC was performed with a gradient
of buffer A [0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water] and buffer B [0.1% (v/v)
formic acid in acetonitrile]. Separation was achieved using 2% buffer
B for 0.6 min, followed by a linear gradient to 100% buffer B from
0.6–4.6 min, which was held at 100% buffer B from 4.6–5.6
min followed by a return to 2% buffer B from 5.6–6.6 min, along
with 1 min post-run. Spectra were recorded between a mass range of
50–1700 / at a rate of
10 spectra per second in positive polarity..